Hormone Clue to Breast Cancer Risk
RESEARCHERS at the Strang-Cornell Breast Center in New York have found that the varying ways estrogen is processed in different women's breast tissue may be an indication of their relative risk of developing breast cancer.
The preliminary finding, published in today's issue of The Journal of the National Cancer Institute, may one day lead to a test for breast cancer risk that could be applied to all women.
Currently, only a quarter of the 182,000 breast cancers that are diagnosed each year arise in women with known risk factors, like a strong family history of the disease or the presence of benign proliferative breast disease.


CHRONICLE
He may no longer be President but GEORGE BUSH is now a knight, thanks to QUEEN ELIZABETH II, who made him a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath yesterday.
It is the highest honor that Britain gives foreigners.
President Bush and his wife, Barbara, who are in London on a private visit, also had lunch with the Queen and Prince Philip at Buckingham Palace, the Associated Press reported.


Wet a Whistle: Officials Agree To End Strike
Negotiators for the National Hockey League and its game officials announced an agreement in principle tonight to end the 16-day strike of referees and linesmen.
If the league's Board of Governors and the 58-member union approve the pact, the officials are expected to return to work Thursday.
Both sides are expected to ratify the agreement.
Terms were not immediately announced.


Essef Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coeur d'Alene Mines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Unauthorized Use of Pumpkins Causes a Dispute; East Hampton Tells Jerry Della Femina to Follow Its Design Rules, and He Protests
It was just another tranquil autumn in the Hamptons.
With the vacation houses shuttered and the chic boutiques empty, the East End of Long Island had lapsed into its annual off-season torpor.
And then, Jerry Della Femina put out his pumpkins.


Talbots Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 30


Simula Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
ORLANDO MAGIC -- Signed Lorenzo Williams, forward.
Placed Keith Tower, forward-center, on the injured list.


Analogic Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


57 Dealers Are Seized After Sting Across U.S.
Using a new tactic in an old game, undercover agents offered residency permits as bait to drug traffickers in a sting operation that led to the arrest of 57 cocaine and heroin dealers in raids across the nation at dawn yesterday.
Law-enforcement officials said more than 600 agents participated in the arrests, primarily in New York City but also in New Jersey, Florida, Missouri and California.
Over the course of a two-year operation, the agents coaxed drug dealers to a hotel near Albany and obtained their fingerprints, photographs and addresses by promising to provide the suspected criminals with legitimate alien registration cards, commonly known as green cards, in exchange for cash and drugs.


New Shorter O.E.D.: Slimmer Than Parent, But Not Exactly Petite
As babies go, The New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary is a hefty infant, a born babbler whose half a million words are defined in two volumes, and is the soul of brevity in comparison with its parent, the 20-volume Oxford English Dictionary.
The O.E.D., of course, is the wordiest lexicon of its mother tongue.
The new New Shorter is more laconic, perhaps, but its 7.5 million words of text tackle vocabulary that runs from hep to hierarchical.
At 14 pounds, it might be considered portable only by the most ardent philologist who could not put it down, while lesser mortals might only with difficulty pick it up.


Marvin H. Bernstein; Executive, 66
Marvin H. Bernstein, a businessman and philanthropist in New York for many years, died on Sunday at the Miami Heart Institute.
He was 66 and lived in Miami.
The cause was bladder cancer, said Richard D. Siegal of New York, a friend and business partner.


Review/Television; On AIDS and the Nation's Blood Supply
In October, "Dateline NBC" carried a report on the risk of getting AIDS from a blood transfusion.
It was a fairly typical news magazine piece that seemed bent on raising anxiety about a danger that it conceded had been brought under control.
The difference between that story and "AIDS, Blood and Politics," tonight's offering from "Frontline," is the difference between a superficial treatment and serious reporting.
"Dateline NBC" did not dig into the real story, which, as tonight's narrator says, is one "of missed opportunities, vested interests and lax regulations."
The "Frontline" investigation goes back to 1981, when a mysterious disease, then known as gay cancer, appeared among homosexuals.
Not only would the virus spread rapidly through sexual contact but it would also contaminate the nation's blood supply.
Many homosexual men had been giving blood in an effort to help find a vaccine against another disease, hepatitis B, that seemed to attack homosexuals.
Some of the blood carried the new disease, soon to be known as AIDS, and entered the ordinary supplies of blood banks and found its way into the veins of people who needed transfusions.


Small, but 'Dynamic' City Triumphs
More than its unsuccessful rivals in Baltimore, Memphis or St.
Louis, Jacksonville needed yesterday's surprise anointment as the 30th team in the National Football League to make it feel like a major league city.
After all, the city in northern Florida is the second-smallest N.F.L. television market (ahead of only Green Bay, Wis.); is host to only two big college football games -- the Gator Bowl on New Year's Day and the annual matchup between the universities of Florida and Georgia -- and lost its only two professional franchises, football teams in the United States Football League and World Football League.


Churches Are Struck in Separate Robberies
In apparently unrelated robberies, gunmen held up workers at two churches yesterday, making off with $10,000 from a large parish in the Bronx and $4,000 from a church in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, the police said.
In the Parkchester section of the Bronx, two workers had just stepped outside St.
Helena's Roman Catholic Church at 10:30 A.M. when two men -- one armed with a revolver, the other with a knife -- demanded the money.
The robbers, described as men in their 30's, fled in a car driven by a woman that had been parked in front of the church on Olmstead Avenue.


Early Georgia Tech Spurt Routs N. Carolina A.&amp;T.
Georgia Tech 93; North Carolina A.&amp;T. 77
Freshman Eddie Elisma came off the bench and scored all 7 of his points in a 9-0 Georgia Tech run that closed the first half and the 17th-ranked Yellow Jackets rolled to a 93-77 victory over North Carolina A.&amp;T. last night at Atlanta.


Colo. State Softball Wins One for Women
As Jennifer Roberts hardly needs to be reminded, there is women's softball at Colorado State, and, for that matter, there is a Federal civil rights law requiring equitable accommodations for male and female athletes at colleges and universities receiving any form of Federal funds.
And there is also, of course, a Supreme Court of the United States to make sure those laws stick.
She knows that because that is her name at the very front of the landmark case, Roberts v.
Colorado State, which on Monday made history as the very first college athletics sex discrimination case to come before the Supreme Court.


Sunil K. Roy; Indian Diplomat, 73
Sunil K. Roy, a retired Indian diplomat and former Consul General in New York, died Monday in New Delhi.
He was 73.
The cause was prostate cancer, said a friend, David Challinor of Washington.


Harnischfeger Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


CAPX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Eating Well
Health Zone, a two-month-old restaurant in downtown Washington, almost has it right.
The food is healthy but still has some fat in it.
"I don't want to be too radical," said Jordan Fainberg, 30, the managing partner.
"We haven't used tofu yet."


G.O.P. Accused of Disrupting Minority Voting in New York
The New York State Democratic chairman yesterday released affidavits from Democratic poll watchers who asserted that Republican poll watchers created disturbances at New York City polling sites to slow down voting in black and Hispanic neighborhoods during the mayoral election.
The chairman, Al Gordon, said the incidents were evidence that the Republican State Committee had orchestrated "a systematic program of intimidation tactics as part of a cynical attempt to deny certain New Yorkers their right to vote."


Classical Music in Review
'Rusalka'  Metropolitan Opera
Dvorak worried most of his life over what operatic manner would suit him best, and he never altogether solved the problem.
In the course of delivering stretches of gorgeous music, "Rusalka" wavers among various stylistic options.
Certain moments soar into a Wagnerian mode, others follow a Smetana-derived national-opera pattern or even a hint of Mozartiana.
A "Rusalka" cast therefore faces challenges, not all of which were overcome by the gifted group of singers who entered the Met's production on Friday night.
Gwynne Geyer sang the title role, Ben Heppner the Prince, and Lauren Flanigan the Foreign Princess.
Each has a strong and distinctive voice, but the characters seemed static and episodically sketched.
The lovely but dramatically inert spaces of the Schneider-Siemssen sets did not come to their aid, and John Fiore drew inflexible, overloud playing from the orchestra.


San Diego Drops Luginbill as Coach
San Diego State yesterday dismissed its football coach, AL LUGINBILL, who couldn't lead the Aztecs to a bowl game for the second straight season despite the presence of the star running back MARSHALL FAULK and other talented players.


Corrections
A front-page caption yesterday with a picture of Hillary Rodham Clinton decorating a Christmas tree on the Ellipse in Washington described the tree incorrectly.
It was not harvested in California; it is permanently planted on the Ellipse.
A tree from California is on display at the Capitol.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about spending in the New York City mayoral campaign made an imprecise comparison between the expenditures of Mayor David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani.
The Mayor reported having spent about $2.7 million on bookkeeping and other costs of complying with campaign finance rules, compared with $689,000 for the Giuliani camp.
But the sides spent roughly the same amount on expenses directly related to the campaign, including advertising, workers and other costs.


Book Notes
Kennedy Book Update
Now that the 30th anniversary of John F. Kennedy's assassination has come and gone, and with it the endless retrospectives, magazine and newspaper articles and television specials, it's worth asking: how did the several dozen J. F. K. books published to coincide with the occasion fare in the country's bookstores?
The answer is that some did better than others and many seemed to cancel each other out, as is often the case when so many similar books emerge at once.
It will take months before final figures are in, of course.
But so far, in a field that runs the gamut from coffee-table picture books to meticulously researched biographies to outre accounts of new conspiracy theories, the most successful has been Gerald Posner's "Case Closed" (Random House), which takes the radically unradical view that there was no conspiracy surrounding Kennedy's assassination.


John Smart, Publisher; And Philanthropist, 88
John Smart, a retired New York publisher, philanthropist and former chairman of Esquire Inc., died on Monday at Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
A resident of Greenwich, he was 88.
The cause was complications following a stroke, his family said.


Panel Meets With Bratton on Police Post
William J. Bratton, the Boston Police Commissioner, met yesterday with the committee making Rudolph W. Giuliani's search for a New York police commissioner, just four days after Mr.
Bratton had a two-hour interview with Mr.
Giuliani himself.
Mr.
Bratton's meeting with Mr.
Giuliani's aides came as his chief rival for the post, the incumbent Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, said he had not met with Mr.
Giuliani or his search team since Nov. 18, when he was interviewed by the committee for about 90 minutes.


Rockets Are Powered by a New Attitude This Season
The Houston Rockets are a loss waiting to happen, except they keep taking every basket against them personally.
If an opposing team scores 90, it is considered a binge.
Driving through their lane can be hazardous to your health, or your shot.
They are Hakeem Olajuwon and the 11 Charles Atlases.
Some teams end practice with free throws; the Rockets end practice at the Universal Gym.


Acton Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
Signs of Trade Compromise
The White House suggested that it saw new room for a compromise with France in a standoff over lowering world trade barriers.
Page D1.
Tokyo Acts to Calm Market
Seeking to calm the stock market, Japan promised measures to reinvigorate its battered economy.
Page D1.
Trying to Speed AIDS Drugs
The Clinton Administration said it would set up a working group to devise a new strategy to develop AIDS drugs.
Page A21.
Clifford Case Dropped
A New York judge dismissed fraud, conspiracy and bribery charges against Clark M. Clifford.
Page A18. 'Catholic Identity' in Schools
Brooklyn's Catholic bishop called for steps to reinforce the Catholic character and the financial stability of his diocese's school system.
Page B1.
Football in Jacksonville
The N.F.L.'s expansion franchise went to Jacksonville, making it Florida's third city with a team.
Page B13.


60-Minute Gourmet
ANYONE who has followed this column knows that I am an avid proponent of pork for quick cooking.
Not only is pork slightly less expensive than beef or veal, but it can also be relatively lean and healthful when trimmed of surface fat.
Certain cuts, like chops from the foreloin, are exceptionally tender and succulent.
This recipe uses boneless pork loin cutlets, well trimmed of fat.
Pound the chops before sauteeing to tenderize them and give them uniform thickness.


Random Access Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Big Bowls Have Their Eyes on Notre Dame
West Virginia's plan to decline a New Year's Day Cotton Bowl invitation and accept a bid from the more lucrative Sugar Bowl may yet encounter some resistance.
Troy Mathieu, executive director of the Sugar Bowl, said yesterday that his game would consider selecting once-beaten Notre Dame over the undefeated Mountaineers if the final regular-season polls next Sunday give his game a choice before the Cotton Bowl gets to select.
That possibility is remote because Florida would have to defeat Alabama in the Southeastern Conference championship game on Saturday by a margin wide enough -- and convincing enough to voters -- to overcome a three-place, 373-point deficit to Texas A&amp;M in the combined polls used in the bowl selection process.


Canadian Ban on Murder Case Stirs Battle With U.S. Journalists
A notorious Ontario murder case has provoked a confrontation between United States journalists and Canadian authorities, with Canadians seizing United States newspapers and at least one Buffalo broadcaster openly defying a Canadian court order to withhold details of the case.
On Sunday, Niagara Regional Police seized 187 copies of that day's Buffalo News from people crossing the border into Canada because it contained an article about the 1991 slaying of two teen-agers.
The case, with allegations of abduction, sexual assault and murder, has created a sensation in much of Canada, as well as in western New York State.


Wallace Computer Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Casey's General Stores Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


CHRONICLE
President Bush is not the only personage from his White House days to be honored.
From Euless, Tex., comes word that MARILYN TUCKER QUAYLE, has been chosen Christian Woman of the Year.
The organization that selected her, the Christian Woman of the Year Association, comprises 300 Evangelical women leaders.
Its executive committee includes Evelyn Roberts, the wife of Oral Roberts, Dede Robertson, the wife of Pat Robertson, Beverly LaHaye, president of Concerned Women for America, an anti-abortion organization.


Langham Awaits Decision on His Career
ANTONIO LANGHAM, one of college football's top defensive backs, is awaiting word from the National Collegiate Athletic Association on whether his Alabama career is over because he signed a contract with a sports agent after the 1993 Sugar Bowl.
Langham, a senior who is the Crimson Tide's career interception leader with 19, would miss the Southeastern Conference championship game against Florida on Saturday and Alabama's bowl game if the N.C.A.A. does not lift the ban.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
The fourth-grade class at Trinity School in Manhattan was being taught the fine points of writing a friendly letter: the correct placement of dates and salutations, proper grammar, spelling and such.
Each youngster was instructed to pick a friend or relative to write to.
My daughter chose Carrie, a 9-year-old friend who had recently moved to California.
After a number of weeks, Carrie's reply came.
"Dear Alana. I like my new school. Why did you write? My new fax number is as follows . . . "
So much for the art of correspondence in the 90's.
And the teaching of it.
BELINDA BROIDO ALTMANN
. . .
The scene: outside a travel agency at Broadway and 82d Street.
Cast of characters: two women looking at the window display of tempting cruises; Eugene Raskin, who overhears their conversation.
"Listen, Joyce," one of the women says.
"No matter how attractive the places appear, you have to remember they're out of town."
. . .
BLIND DATE  He took me to a place in Chelsea, which he promised would be great.
"Short on atmosphere, but the dining is first rate."
Short on atmosphere?!!
The only decoration was a yellowed reproduction,
Of Heimlich's method to remove esophageal obstructions.
And the unforgiving fluorescent lights hovering above,
Made it crystal clear to me that his was not a face to love.
I peeked at my watch, could it be right?
Boy, it would be a long night.
Then I got lucky as fate took control,
When with a knowing air he bit into a roll.
He got itchy all over, his face turned bright red.
"I'm allergic to raisins, why are they in the bread?
I need to go home, this reaction is bad.
Would you mind a rain check? I hope you're not mad!" ANDREA RABINOVITCH
. . .
Dear Diary:
The woman walks along Avenue of the Americas, followed a few feet behind by her unleashed dog.
The woman, carrying the leash, strolls past a pastry shop, but instead of following, the dog trots in, like a regular customer.
Noticing her pet's disappearance, the woman heads straight for the shop, where he is now stationed in front of the counter.
"Not today," she says, approaching the seated dog.
The dog looks at her but does not move.
"Not today," she repeats, a bit more insistent. The dog still does not budge.
"Not today," she says again, putting the leash on the animal's collar.
The woman gives a slight tug; the dog only stiffens.
The woman pulls harder still.
The dog lies down and rolls on his side.
'Not today!" she says firmly, heading for the door, pulling on the leash. The dog gets up and reluctantly follows, all the while glancing back at the selection of pastries.
As the pair reach the street, an employee who observed the scene runs after them with a cookie.
The woman thanks the clerk for his generous gesture and gives the dog the hard-earned treat.
Who says New Yorkers have no heart? Just ask the dog. L. R. CABACUNGAN
. . .
Dear Diary:
To be filed under "So If I'm Such a Feminist, Why Am I Feeling Wistful?"
I was walking to my office in Chelsea the other morning and found myself caught in an unusual verbal crossfire.
A group of workmen noted my existence with whistles and other such noises.
A more politically correct gentleman unloading a truck on the other side of the street called out in broad New York accent: "Hey guys, relax. It's just a woman."
Thanks. I guess. ROBIN BECKHARD JAMES
. . .
Dear Diary:
I took advantage of a free Friday afternoon to check out the new retailers causing such commotion on upper Madison Avenue.
After a jaunt through Barneys, I went to the new Ralph Lauren.
There I found myself face to face with someone whom I would swear was the man behind the label, Mr.
Lauren himself, shopping with what appeared to be his wife and another woman.
I continued browsing, at the same time keeping my ears open for any scintillating bits of conversation.
That's when I heard the man say to his spouse, while she was trying on a jacket, "Yes, but the question is, do you really need it?" J. RYAN FITZPATRICK
. . .
Dear Diary:
The beautiful well-dressed woman on Fifth Avenue who was rushing toward me, arms outstretched, didn't look familiar.
But she obviously knew me.
"Well, hello," she said. And gave me an R-rated movie kiss.
"You haven't called me in weeks," she said. "You can't be that busy."
Suddenly that good old New York City paranoia kicked in.
This is a scam.
She's a pickpocket.
Now that I'm distracted and befuddled, her nimble fingers have relieved me of my wallet.
Feigning sudden interest in the way my jacket fit, I discreetly checked my wallet.
Still there.
Then she groped inside her purse.
"I've been carrying this around since . . . "
An unfinished statement fraught with significance.
Ever since what?
I was afraid to ask.
Maybe I did know her after all.
Was my short-term memory getting that bad?
Smiling triumphantly, she removed a piece of paper from her purse, put on her glasses, then studied my face.
Her smile abruptly sagged, she gasped, and turned a serious shade of red.
"Oh, oh, good Lord," she said.
"I thought you were. . . . Oh I'm so terribly sorry. Please, please excuse me."
She hurried off down the avenue without looking back. JOHN BOHANNON


Personal Health
MENOPAUSE: Rarely has a subject emerged from the closet and so quickly assumed center stage.
With 40 million American women now in or past menopause and another 20 million due to reach that stage of life in the next decade, its management has become a major national health concern.
Women, including many who are nationally prominent, now discuss their own experiences with menopause openly with friends and family, co-workers and bosses and even the general public.
The subject is being discussed in popular books and periodicals, in the offices of the National Institutes of Health and on the floor of Congress as well as in gatherings of women of a certain age.


William Kivlan; Investor, 59
William Kivlan, an investor and investment consultant to the transportation industry, died on Monday at New York Hospital.
He was 59 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications after recent heart bypass surgery, his family said.


Corrections
A picture caption on Nov. 10 about the New York Hospital Care Network described the Amsterdam Nursing Home incorrectly.
Although it is a member of the network, it has not been taken over by New York Hospital.
It remains a separate corporate entity with an independent board.


David Fisch; Muralist, 43
David Fisch, a decorative-arts painter and muralist, died on Friday, at his home in Manhattan.
He was 43.
The cause was AIDS, said Nancy Blechman, a friend.


Corrections
A brief article on Nov. 18 by The Associated Press referred incorrectly to Nahal Oz, a border crossing where an Israeli soldier was stabbed to death.
It is in Israel proper, not in the Gaza Strip.


Grasso Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


N.F.L. Expansion Surprise: Jacksonville Jaguars
In a totally unexpected move, the National Football League awarded an expansion franchise today to Jacksonville, Fla., a city that only last summer dropped out of the bidding and as recently as a month ago was considered a long shot behind St.
Louis and Baltimore.
The new team, named the Jaguars, and Charlotte's Carolina Panthers, voted in five weeks ago, will begin play in 1995 as the N.F.L.'s 29th and 30th teams.


Living, and Dying, for Love and Family in East Harlem
Nilma Rivas's family, much of it clustered within a few blocks of her East Harlem apartment, represented her life, her work and a bulwark of comfort and support against the crowded and dangerous city they had moved to from her native Puerto Rico.
But most precious of all to her was her 5-year-old grandson.
Every day she walked the little boy, Geraldo, to school, picked him up to walk him home and shuttled him back and forth in the evenings between her apartment on East 122d Street and her daughter, Janice's, on East 111th Street.
"The boy was like a little companion," said Mrs.
Rivas's sister, Aida Brushman.
"She lived for him."


Kelley Oil (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Information Display Tech.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bob Woolf, Lawyer, Dies at 65; A Pioneer Negotiator for Athletes
Bob Woolf, the pioneering Boston-based sports lawyer who used what he called friendly persuasion to negotiate headline contracts for some of the nation's most famous athletes and entertainers, died on Monday night at a home he maintained in Hallandale, Fla.
He was 65.
"He was watching 'Monday Night Football' and he just didn't wake up," his daughter Stacey Woolf-Feinberg said yesterday.
"He was in the peak of health and had been playing tons of tennis." She said an autopsy would determine the cause of death.


Getting Back to Normal At the St. John's Gym
Almost two weeks ago, St.
John's fans left Alumni Hall stunned by Towson State's season-opening upset of the Redmen.
For the crowd at Alumni Hall last night, the highlight of the game between Columbia and St.
John's came when the two Redmen walk-on players took the court in the waning minutes of the 79-49 romp by St.
John's.
Neither Brad Small, a transfer from Syracuse, nor Billy Mitaritonna, both seniors and nonscholarship players, scored for the Redmen.
It didn't matter.
They got standing ovations anyway.


Sports of The Times; Never Trap Mountaineer In a Corner
BACK when I lived in the splintered nation of Appalachia, there was a common phrase that crossed all the artificial state lines.
It didn't matter whether you were visiting a cabin in eastern Kentucky or a small town in east Tennessee or a coal camp in West-By-God-Virginia.
"I'm for what's right," people would exclaim, with heavy emphasis on the "right."


Brooklyn Bishop Urges Change in Parish Schools
In a pastoral letter issued to the 1.5 million parishioners in the Brooklyn Diocese, Roman Catholic Bishop Thomas V. Daily promised yesterday to reinforce both the Catholic character and the financial stability of the diocese's parochial school system.
The primary mission of the parochial schools remains "the teaching of the Catholic religion," the bishop said, responding to concerns that Catholic education had been losing its sense of purpose as nuns disappeared from the classrooms and the numbers of non-Catholic students increased.


Edward Albee, Elder Statesman, Is in a State of Professional Reprise
Edward Albee is a thorn in the body theatric.
Through all the critical buffeting he has endured, he has survived with his ego and his equilibrium intact.
Unlike many of his talented contemporaries, he has never stopped writing, and a healthy sampling of his work, including a selection of premieres, is being presented in New York this season.
There is a yearlong festival of Albee plays at the Signature Theater Company, and "Three Tall Women," one of his most recent works, opens in January at the Vineyard Theater.
Unafraid to state an intemperate opinion and, at 65, still writing plays exactly as he wants to write them, he retains his ironic sense of detachment.
At the same time, by lecturing, teaching playwriting and serving as head of the United States chapter of the International Theater Institute, he has become a theatrical elder statesman.


Beard Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


City Prepares for AIDS Awareness


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Bruins Top Nordiques  Bryan Smolinski scored two goals and defenseman Ray Bourque added three assists last night as the Boston Bruins continued their mastery over the Nordiques with a 5-2 victory in Quebec.
Since the start of the 1986-87 season, the Bruins are 38-10-8 against Quebec, which entered the game with a five-game unbeaten streak.
The Nordiques do not have a home victory over Boston since Dec. 10, 1991, a span of eight games.
The Bruins, who limited Quebec to season-low 19 shots at Jon Casey, have eight victories and two ties in their last 12 games.
They built a 5-0 lead before Mats Sundin and Scott Young scored for Quebec in the final minute.
Smolinski, an all-American at Michigan State last year, scored in each of the first two periods to make it 2-0.


Harry T. Whitin, 76, A Textile Executive And Philatelist, Dies
Harry T. Whitin, a textile maker and philatelist, died on Nov. 24 at the Evergreen Woods Health Center in North Branford, Conn.
He was 76 and lived in Rye, N.Y.
The cause was prostate cancer, his family said.


Agassi to Play in Australian Open
ANDRE AGASSI, forced to withdraw from the 1993 Australian Open because of tonsillitis, is scheduled to make his debut in the Grand Slam event in January.


Virginia's Alexander Is Out for 6 Weeks
One day after their worst basketball loss in the 29-year history of University Hall, the ranked Virginia Cavaliers got more bad news.
They learned yesterday that point guard CORY ALEXANDERwill be out of action at least six weeks and miss at least 10 games.


How Good Books Make Good Friends
COMMENTING on the close relationships that were said to exist some years ago between the editors of The New York Review of Books and the writers whose works they critiqued, someone suggested the magazine be called The New York Review of Each Other's Books.
That's pretty much the way it is with wine books.
Everyone knows everyone else.
How much easier it must be in the venomous academic world.
Embittered scholars lash out at each other in print, confident that they will never lay eyes on their victims.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the increasing lengths of movies, plays, operas and books misidentified the publisher of Vikram Seth's 1,300-page novel, "A Suitable Boy." The publisher is HarperCollins, not Alfred A. Knopf.


Classical Music in Review
Thomas Hampson  Baritone Alice Tully Hall
Several currents intermingled in Thomas Hampson's recital on Sunday afternoon.
One was a passion for the poetry that composers have amplified and interpreted in their settings, giving the faint suggestion that the words are the more important element in a song.
Another was a regard for the directness of the folk impulse in music.
In the songs Mr.
Hampson chose, tensions between high and low art were alien: most drew their expressive power from the way simple, almost rustic melodies served the polished texts.


Robert A. Wands, 84, A News Photographer
Robert A. Wands, who received worldwide recognition for his photo coverage of events near the end of World War II, died on Friday at his home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 84.
Mr.
Wands took the famous photograph of Truman, Churchill and Stalin sitting together at the Potsdam conference in Germany.
Two days later he was aboard the battleship Missouri in Tokyo Bay, recording the scene as Gen.
Douglas MacArthur accepted the Japanese surrender.


The Nail Salon of the 90's: Massages for the Clothed
DEAR Diary,
While walking on Third Avenue spotted new store called Great American Backrub near 57th Street.
Looked in to see what was being sold.
Saw people getting their backs rubbed by men and women in red and blue jackets.
Appears that store is a massage parlor that actually offers massages.
What will they think of next?


Giants' Armstead Is Finding the Action
"I make plays," said Jesse Armstead. "I have always made plays."
Make plays.
It is shorthand for big talk.
It means recognizing great moments and owning them.
Make plays.
It is Jesse Armstead's language of choice and habit.


MAI Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Critic Returns to the Stove. Guess Who's at the Table?
PERHAPS it was latent masochism, or maybe just foolhardy hubris.
About a month ago I decided that after nine years spent in dining rooms as a restaurant critic for The New York Times, I was ready to return to the kitchen.
Why not celebrate by inviting five top New York City chefs to my home for dinner?
This time, in a twist on our previous roles, they would carry the notepads.
The idea seemed like fun at first.
But then I realized it had been nearly a decade since I cooked regularly.
In that time, during which I dined out almost every day, I never even turned on the oven in my apartment.
To say I was rusty is like saying all Mickey Mantle needs to do before rejoining the Yankee lineup is to run a few wind sprints.


CHRONICLE
The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum paid posthumous tribute yesterday to Oskar Schindler, the German industrialist and Nazi Party member who saved the lives of 1,300 Jews in the Holocaust.
At a ceremony in the museum, in Washington, the Medal of Remembrance was presented to his widow, EMILIE SCHINDLER, 84, who worked with her husband to rescue Jews from concentration camps and to shelter many in a bogus munitions factory.
Steven Spielberg has made the story into the film "Schindler's List," which opens Dec. 15.


The Chiefs' Success? It's as Simple as 1-2-3
Three tales in one on the Kansas City Chiefs.
Are they Super-Bowl bound?
Here is how they could pave a road to Atlanta on Jan. 30.
JOE MONTANA AND HIS TIGHT ENDS The pass-catching tight end has nearly become a lost art.
Some run-and-shoot teams in the last few seasons did not even carry a tight end on their rosters.
Other clubs have them but employ them strictly for blocking purposes, often in a double-set formation.


State Dept. to Deny Car Registration to Diplomatic Scofflaws
Scofflaws will no longer be able to hide behind diplomatic immunity, State Department and city officials said yesterday.
The State Department, which had turned down numerous requests by New York City, has agreed to crack down on diplomatic scofflaws in the city by denying renewal of diplomatic registration plates to those countries that refuse to pay parking tickets.


Food Notes
Amid Tea Mania, T Opens
The coffee craze has yet to peak and already a tea mania is gathering steam.
A tea emporium and restaurant named T opened last week in SoHo at 142 Mercer Street (at Prince Street), under the Guggenheim Museum in SoHo.
The retail operation is in a large brick-walled space filled with arched nooks and crannies.
Soon to come are a port and wine bar, a shop for herbal elixirs, a water bar, a juice bar, a cafeteria-style cafe and tables for afternoon tea.


Losing Nets Already Talking About the 1994 N.B.A. Lottery
The New Jersey Nets are beginning to sign off earlier and earlier.
Seven of their first eight losses were decided breathtakingly in the final 120 seconds, but consecutive defeats by 22 and 24 points have returned them to the Atlantic Division basement.
"Yep, right now, we're a lottery team again," said guard Kenny Anderson after the Clippers ran the Nets off the road Monday night, 118-94.
"After 14 games, yeah."


Another Livery-Cab Driver Killed in the Bronx


Books of The Times; The Department Store and the Culture It Created
Land of Desire
Merchants, Power and the Rise of a New American Culture
By William Leach
Illustrated. 510 pages. Pantheon. $30.
Like No Other Store . . .
The Bloomingdale's Legend and the Revolution in American Marketing
By Marvin Traub and Tom Teicholz
Illustrated. 428 pages. Times Books/ Random House. $25.


No Headline
"Mr. President, Washington is a vicious city, with all kinds of hidden agendas. It is a city full of rumors, allegations, and accusations, without much, if any, regard for truthfulness or factuality as to the accusations or allegations." -- STANLEY G. TATE, withdrawing as a nominee.  [ D6:3. ]


WTD Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Quality Dino Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Duty Free International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Rocket 'Record' Revs Up Knicks
Anthony Mason thinks the schedule makers of the National Basketball Association may have done the Houston Rockets a disservice in having them play their 15th game of the season at Madison Square Garden.
You see, 15 is the league record for victories to open a campaign, and the Rockets can tie the 45-year-old mark against the Knicks at the Garden on Thursday night.


Dress Barn Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Richard DeFabees; Actor, 46
Richard DeFabees, an actor who appeared in productions on Broadway and off, died on Nov. 18.
He was 46.
The cause was AIDS, said Norman Rothstein, a friend.


Rangers Win The Battle of Breakaways
There were so many breakaways and odd-man rushes in the Devils-Rangers game tonight that coaches Mike Keenan and Jacques Lemaire couldn't keep up.
Although the game was played on even terms, the Rangers skated to a 3-1 victory by utilizing their superior special teams in the game played in front of a divided capacity crowd that made up the first sellout this season at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Women and Anger: To Vent or Not to Vent Isn't the Question
TO women who were taught that it is unladylike to express anger, the presumably therapeutic yelling and cursing of the current let-it-all-hang-out generation is often shocking.
But now a major new study has strongly suggested that both the old style of keeping anger in and the newer tendency to release it explosively are equally poor ways of expressing this fundamental human emotion.
Both responses can catch women in a vicious cycle of low self-esteem and depression and can worsen anger because the issues that provoke it are never resolved, the study findings indicate.
Far more effective, the researchers found, is to calm anger through physical or mental activities and to discuss angry feelings, preferably with the person who touched them off.


New Bomb Trial Testimony May Help Tie Suspect to Site
Testimony for the prosecution in the World Trade Center bombing trial yesterday seemed to move toward placing one of the defendants on the scene of the explosion just days before the blast, but the court session came to a close before the identity of the defendant, or defendants, was disclosed.
At the end of the afternoon, the prosecution called the supervisor of the underground parking garage, Kenneth Grouzalis, to the stand.
Mr.
Grouzalis introduced into evidence two ticket stubs that had been used by people parking cars in the B-2 level of the trade center garage on Feb. 16 and Feb. 24, respectively 10 and two days before a bomb went off in that same area, killing six people and causing millions of dollars in damage.


Tartabull Has Operation Yanks Preferred
Danny Tartabull finally had arthroscopic surgery performed on his right shoulder yesterday and it was such a minor procedure that the Yankee power hitter was treated as an outpatient.
If only everything else about the surgery was so simple.
Because Tartabull chose to first have cosmetic facial surgery after the season and then spent the first three weeks of November vacationing in Europe, he had delayed his shoulder surgery more than a month, upsetting the Yankees.
With his shoulder still a question mark, any chance the Yankees had of trading him and his $5.1 million a year salary and assuming the expensive contract of a free agent like Rafael Palmeiro has seemingly dwindled.


Critic's Notebook; A 'Nutcracker' Filmed From Balanchine's Angle
Fans of the seven-headed Mouse King will be thrilled to see their favorite villain in yucky detail as he sallies forth in the film "George Balanchine's 'The Nutcracker.' " Like Tchaikovsky's two other ballets, "The Sleeping Beauty" and "Swan Lake," "The Nutcracker" incorporates a fable about the forces of light and darkness.
But in "The Nutcracker," this struggle is seen, delightfully, from a child's point of view and is symbolized in the Nutcracker's battle with the mouse monarch.
Details and close-ups would seem inimical to the sweep and grandeur of Balanchine's choreography, with its sophisticated use of pattern and structure.
Yet the newly released film, which is based on his 1954 production of "The Nutcracker," embodies a marriage of art forms that Balanchine once envisaged.


It's Official: The Winner Is Whitman
As the Board of State Canvassers met today to give the weight of law to the voters' choice of Christine Todd Whitman as New Jersey's next Governor, the Governor-elect was closeted with Federal and state investigators, trying to put to rest what has come to be known as the "Rollins incident."
Moving to get her transition planning back on track, Mrs.
Whitman also announced the appointment of an eight-member transition budget review committee -- a group that includes the co-authors of the controversial tax cut plan that was the heart of her economic platform during the campaign.


Benihana National Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 10


Lancer Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Grande Bande  Cathedral of  St. John the Divine
A musical life governed only by anniversaries is impoverished and spiritless.
Yet the 350th anniversary of the death of Monteverdi, of all the recent calendar-related bashes, deserved greater play.
In New York, the burden of remembering Monteverdi has been carried almost single-handedly by Frederick Renz's Grande Bande and Ensemble for Early Music.
One might have wished for other efforts, but it is doubtful that they would have matched the precision and passion obtained by Mr.
Renz.


Corrections
A report in the Patterns column on the Fashion page yesterday referred incorrectly to Gilles Bensimon.
He is the creative director of American Elle and a contributor to French Elle, which has no creative director.


Women's Olympic Track Coach Chosen
DEANNE VOCHATZER, the University of California at Davis women's track coach, said she was pleasantly surprised to be chosen head coach of the women's team for the 1996 Olympic Games.


Pistons Fall As Laimbeer Retirement Draws Closer
Cavaliers 92, Pistons 74
Bill Laimbeer watched from the bench, possibly wearing a National Basketball Association uniform for the last time.
Isiah Thomas and Joe Dumars weren't even at the arena, in Richfield, Ohio.
With their longtime nucleus missing, the Detroit Pistons lost their fourth straight game last night as Cleveland beat them, 92-74.


U.S.T.A. Names Snyder Director for Open
The United States Tennis Association named JAY SNYDER as the United States Open's new tournament director, replacing STEVE DeVOE, who resigned in November.
Since 1990, Snyder has supervised the training and certification of chair umpires and linesmen and lineswomen in the United States and has managed the 350 officials who work at the Open.


Bridge
A substantial group of players at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals in Seattle last week (i.e. Thanksgiving week) concentrated primarily on senior events, for those 55 and older.
The Senior Knockout Teams attracted 30 entries, including several players well known to fame.
The winners were Robert Ryder of Caldwell, N.J., William Esberg of Elberon, N.J., Gerald Bare of Pacific Palisades, Calif., and Alan Bell of Fullerton, Calif.
They were aided in the final by the diagramed deal, which was reported by Martin Hoffman of Lauderhill, Fla., a member of the losing team.


Kovalev Is Out on Penalty
Aleksei Kovalev was suspended for tonight's Rangers-Devils game at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, pending a hearing with the league Wednesday in New York.
Kovalev, the Rangers' first-line right wing, will meet with the league senior vice president, Brian Burke, to discuss an incident involving Washington's Dale Hunter in the Rangers' 3-1 victory over the Capitals on Sunday night at Madison Square Garden.
In the first period of that game, Kovalev used his skate to kick Hunter's leg out from under him, and Hunter twisted his knee as he fell.
The result was a tear in the anterior cruciate ligament in Hunter's left knee.
He will miss four to six weeks.


In This One, Players and Officials Were on Same Level
Lowering themselves to the level of the replacement officials, the Islanders and the Washington Capitals played a sloppy game tonight at Nassau Coliseum.
Only the Islanders could shrug and smile when it ended.
Travis Green scored three times and Derek King twice in a 6-4 Islander victory in what was probably the final game they will play with replacement referees and linesmen.


Daniel Majeske, 61, The Concertmaster For the Cleveland
Daniel H. Majeske, the concertmaster of the Cleveland Orchestra since 1969, died on Sunday at his home in Euclid, Ohio.
He was 61.
The cause was prostate cancer, said NancyBell Coe, the orchestra's manager.


Rest and Recuperation Leave Mitchell Chafing
Johnny Mitchell's Pro Bowl-caliber season took a detour when his left knee was twisted underneath a pile of players at Indianapolis two weeks ago.
He has missed the last two games and was reduced to watching them on television.
He is listed as questionable for this Sunday's game against the Colts at Giants Stadium.
Mitchell's frustration is building.
On Monday he said he didn't know when he would be able to return.
"It's all in the hands of Mother Nature and Father Time," Mitchell said.


EastGroup Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Pop Life
Happy Birthday, CBGB
CBGB, the humble East Village bar that became the cradle of punk-rock and the stuff of legends, is celebrating its 20th anniversary this month with a concert series that is to feature more than 100 bands, including Dinosaur Jr., Helmet, Jesus Lizard, Lemonheads, Luna, Meat Puppets, Pere Ubu, Smithereens, Sonic Youth and They Might Be Giants.
Such bands as Talking Heads, Television and the Patti Smith Group have held forth at this rock-music landmark, which is located where the Bowery meets Bleecker Street, at 315 Bowery.
The club's founder and owner, Hilly Kristal, credits its beginnings in an era of disco and cover bands, and its survival partly to the fact that "we aren't trendy." That might be considered an understatement to anyone who has been to the place, whose decor amounts to generations of graffiti.


Pamida Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Yankee Energy System Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Zuckerman Offers Plan For Coliseum
In what appeared to be an 11th-hour bid to keep his project on course, Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the developer of the New York Coliseum, has put forward yet another redevelopment plan for the Columbus Circle site.
The new design, which is about half the size of the current scheme for the property, near the southwest corner of Central Park, would preserve the office tower at 10 Columbus Circle and replace the coliseum itself with an office building and retail space.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Rensselaer
The most significant result in college hockey so far this season was Rensselaer's winning of the annual Dexter Classic at Orono, Me., last Saturday night.
The Engineers, the clear favorite of the Eastern College Athletic Conference in the coaches' preseason poll, won the tournament finale, 5-4, over Maine, the host team and the defending national champion.


The Prado Traces Goya's Life Through His Smaller Paintings
Even the Prado Museum here, with its unequaled collection of paintings by Francisco de Goya, might well feel intimidated by the prospect of trying to convey the life's work of this prolific and protean Spanish master in a single exhibition.
But it has found an ingenious way of doing so.
By passing over his best- known masterpieces and showing only his small-format paintings, the Prado has been able to trace his passage from youthful optimism to the dark melancholy of his final years in exile in France without missing a step.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  GAZA STRIP ERUPTS IN VIOLENCE  The Gaza Strip was jolted by its worst violence since the September agreement signed by Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, with one teen-ager killed and dozens of people wounded as Israeli soldiers fired on stone-throwing Palestinian youths.
A1  CLINTON ACTS TO ASSURE MUSLIMS  In an apparent attempt to calm the fury ignited by his meeting last week with Salman Rushdie, President Clinton insisted that he "meant no disrespect" to the Muslim world and emphasized that he had spent only "a couple of minutes" with the author at the White House.
A1  RUSSIA LAGS IN DESTROYING ARMS  Despite arms treaties, good will between Moscow and Washington and promises of hundreds of millions of dollars of American financial and technical aid, Russia has made slow progress, and in some cases no headway at all, in destroying some of its most deadly weapons.
A1


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  BETTER ECONOMIES, MORE TAXES
New strength in the economies of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut has helped spur tax collections, but the increases are so slight that they fall far short of providing the states and their localities a painless way of closing their budget gaps.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


A Matter of Vegetables and Timing
IN late fall and winter, when the selection of vegetables is not as good as in late summer, cooks need to use whatever is plentiful and cheap.
Here is one suggestion: use vegetables that cook in about the same amount of time.
Squash and broccoli work well if you add the squash to the steamer as soon as you finish cutting it up, and then go on to cut up and add the broccoli.
That way, both will be ready at the same time.
Despite a laundry list of ingredients for this couscous with vegetables and salsa, the meal will be ready in less than 30 minutes.
An arugula salad, with its marvelous bitter edge, is just the right foil for the winter vegetables.
Serve the dinner with good coarse bread.


Classical Music in Review
Alicia de Larrocha  Pianist Avery Fisher Hall
In music, patriotism has the power to enrich or to enfeeble.
Reverence for homegrown tunes and dance forms has in many places reduced composers to mere arrangers.
Spain at the end of the last century and for most of this one has been more fortunate.
In a peculiar chemical reaction, Spanish and Catalan influences collided with a European school of virtuosity emanating from Liszt and his emulators.
The result has been some of the most eruptive and extravagant music ever to visit the keyboard.


Sports of The Times; Let There Be Light This Time
TO anyone who remembers pro football's introduction to Jacksonville, the first draft choice of the National Football League's new expansion franchise will not be "the best athlete available." Sometime in the spring of 1995, Commissioner Paul Tagliabue will step to the lectern and announce:
"The Jacksonville Jaguars select Tommy Edison, electrician, Massachusetts Institute of Technology."


Pack Signs With Nuggets, Ending Holdout
The Denver Nuggets signed the restricted free agent ROBERT PACK yesterday, ending his contract holdout of nearly two months.
The team waived guard ADONIS JORDAN to make room for Pack.
The contract is reportedly worth a little more than $3 million over three years.
Pack, 24, led the Nuggets in assists last season, averaging 4.4, and also averaged 10.5 points per game. (AP)


Children's TV Bill Doesn't Violate Constitution; Electronic Solution
To the Editor:
Both sides in the debate on regulating TV programming (Op-Ed, Nov. 23) miss the point.
We need not choose between TV violence and Government censorship.


Laimbeer Calls End to Career
Bill Laimbeer announced yesterday that after a dozen seasons as the baddest of the Detroit Pistons' bad boys he was calling it quits.
"It was a very difficult decision, yet it was easy," he said at the Pistons' headquarters in Auburn Hills, Mich.


No Quick Naturalization For Any Cuban Defectors
The Olympic-caliber performers among the 40 Cuban athletes who have defected from a regional competition in Puerto Rico would appear to have a slim chance of becoming eligible to compete for the United States at the 1996 Summer Games in Atlanta.
Five years' residency is the standard requirement for obtaining United States citizenship, and the Atlanta Olympics are scheduled to open in two and a half years.
Unless they become naturalized citizens, the Cubans would not be eligible to compete for Team USA in Atlanta.


Elis Give Huskies Bit Of a Run For Money
Having crushed unheralded Towson State and nationally ranked Virginia by 40 and 41 points, respectively, in its first two games, Connecticut's only concern against intrastate rival Yale tonight appeared to be whether the Eli would be able to avoid a blowout.
After all, little was expected of Yale this season, even in the Ivy League, and this game matched teams from drastically different basketball worlds.
A rout appeared inevitable, but it never materialized as a gritty Yale team lost, 81-64, in the Huskies' home opener before a capacity crowd of 8,241 at the Gampel Pavilion.


Referees Will Return to Work Tonight
National Hockey League referees and linesmen will return to work tonight after a 17-day absence.
Their strike officially ended yesterday when the 58-member Officials Association ratified a four-year contract with the league, whose Board of Governors also approved the pact.
Don Meehan, the agent representing the union, said the contract was ratified overwhelmingly by the membership.


Calendar: Craft Sales For Holiday Giving
Crafts on Broadway  Ferris Booth Hall, Broadway at 115th Street; (212) 279-0707.
More than 300 artists will sell handmade crafts at a fair tomorrow through Sunday, Dec. 10 through 12 and Dec. 17 through 19.
Open Friday, 5 to 9 P.M., Saturday and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Ticket sales will aid WBAI-FM, a nonprofit station.
Admission, $6; a nine-day pass, $15.


3 Youths Seized in Slaying of Woman in Holdup
The police said yesterday that they had arrested a 15-year-old boy and two 14-year-old boys in last week's killing of an employee of a Chinese takeout restaurant in the Bronx who was shot when she refused to surrender $19 during a robbery attempt.
As residents of the area mulled over news of the shooting of Siew Kin Yeo last Wednesday, and rumors that her killers were young teen-agers, investigators began getting leads on suspects and came up with the names of three youths who were known to hang out in front of the restaurant, said Deputy Chief Edward Cappello, the commander of Bronx detectives.


The Police Corps, Nearly There
A decade ago Adam Walinsky, a New York lawyer who was one of Robert Kennedy's top Senate aides, proposed a national police corps that would engage young college graduates in the fight against urban violence.
His vision is now just a step from becoming reality.
Mr.
Walinsky's idea was to supplement traditional law enforcement by offering young people college scholarships in exchange for four years of service on a local police force after graduation.
His plan is part of the hodgepodge crime bill just passed by the Senate, and is surely one of the measure's more innovative components.
The corps would grow to a level of 50,000 recruits over the next four years at a cost of $2.5 billion.


Review/Television; Danger, Romance, Travel: Trains as Prop in the Movies
The American Movie Classics cable channel is offering, tonight at 9, another of its occasional documentaries with film clips arranged around some unifying theme, like great love scenes or New York City settings.
The upshot is usually about a yard wide and an inch deep, but the breezy essays constitute a crash course on movies and the images they have embedded in our memories.
Our subject this time, class, is the American railroad, chugging rather breathlessly through "All Aboard: Riding the Rails of American Film."
Ever since the very first image was projected on film in 1891, viewers are told, railroads and trains have been a staple of the movies.
The first film to discover that, if properly awed, audiences would pay to see it again and again was "The Great Train Robbery" in 1903.
Without the trains, of course, there would be no Wild West.
As someone notes, the history of this country is largely a history of its rails, documented in a slew of films reaching from John Ford's silent "The Iron Horse" in 1924 to "Union Pacific" in 1939.
It's recalled, pointedly, how in those Hollywood days the villains were the robber barons in suits while outlaws became the unlikely heroes.


Conservative on School Board Is Chosen as a Giuliani Deputy
In the first appointment to his administration, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday named as a deputy mayor Ninfa Segarra, one of the four Board of Education members who ousted Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez over his support for a curriculum that discussed homosexuality and AIDS.
Mr.
Giuliani praised Ms.
Segarra as a "role model and a hero" who had been "able to stand up for what she believes in," referring to her defiance of Borough President Fernando Ferrer of the Bronx, who appointed her to the board.
Both Mr.
Ferrer and Mayor David N. Dinkins tried to force Ms.
Segarra to resign after she aligned herself with the conservative majority of the board and became a political supporter of Mr.
Giuliani.


At a Power Station, Form Follows Function


Books of The Times; These 10 Picture Books Really Are for Children
"For success in training children the first condition is to become as a child oneself," wrote the Swedish author and feminist Ellen Key in 1909, "but this means no assumed childishness, no condescending baby-talk that the child immediately sees through and deeply abhors. What it does mean is to be as entirely and simply taken up with the child as the child himself is absorbed by his life." Here are 10 children's picture books that seem entirely and simply taken up with the child.
PAT THE PUPPY, by Edith Kunhardt. (A Golden Book/Western Publishing Company; boxed paperback, $6.95.) It was inevitable that technology would overtake the classic "Pat the Bunny." So instead of Daddy's sandpaper beard to feel, there is a chocolate brownie you can scratch and sniff.
"Um." Instead of baby's shoelaces to untie, there are the Velcro straps on Granny's sneakers to unfasten.
Not quite virtual reality, but we'll get there yet.


Friends of the Slorc
Even diplomats inclined to give maximum scope to sovereign governments have a hard time defending the widespread human rights abuses committed by Myanmar's State Law and Order Restoration Council, or Slorc.
Yet that is what Asian countries like Singapore and Thailand are now doing by seeking to water down a U.N. resolution aimed at discouraging flagrant violations of human rights.
Western countries like Britain, France and Sweden are quietly bowing to these Asian pressures.
The Clinton Administration, to its credit, refuses to go along.


Neutrogena Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


INSIDE
Cuomo Picks Hispanic Judge
Governor Cuomo plans to nominate a State Supreme Court justice to New York's top court who would be the first Hispanic there.
Page B1.
Pressing for Ulster Peace
To generate moves for Northern Irish peace, British and Irish leaders will meet in Dublin on Friday.
Page A10.


Kiddie Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


EQK Green Acres L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Children's TV Bill Doesn't Violate Constitution
To the Editor:
Floyd Abrams's Op-Ed article "Save Free Speech" (Nov. 23) inaccurately describes the constitutional implications of the legislation proposed by Senator Ernest Hollings.
The legislation is not, as Mr.
Abrams claims, violative of the First Amendment.


Member of F.C.C. Is Named Head of Public Broadcasting
A member of the Federal Communications Commission and Washington insider, Ervin S. Duggan, was named president of the Public Broadcasting Service today.
Mr.
Duggan arrives at a critical time for public television, as its role is increasingly being questioned.
His knowledge of how the capital works may be one reason he was picked.
He good-naturedly acknowledged at a news conference here today that he had never run anything as large as


A Wine Maker, a Bird, and the Publicity Game; In the 'Public Relations Capital of the World,' Being the News Can Take Some Doing
The white-naped crane was supposed to be the star of the show at the Bronx Zoo.
Cameras clicked.
Klieg lights glared.
Birds preened and strutted and fluttered.
All except the white-naped cranes, an endangered species not to be confused with the black- or the red-necked crane or the whooping crane or the construction crane towering above the nearest building site.


Garden Q.&amp;.A.
Christmas Cactus Woes
Q.
My Christmas cactus keeps having miscarriages.
Flower buds form, but they fall off before opening.
Why? -- Florence Shedroff, Bayside, Queens


Review; Pop and Jazz in Review
Robert Plant  The Paramount
As Led Zeppelin's lead singer from 1968 to 1980, Robert Plant created the sound and image of the hard-rock satyr, Narcissus moaning the blues.
He belted songs in a high-climbing tenor punctuated by breathy grunts, leaned into the microphone stand, shook his golden curls.


New Jersey Renews Discussions With 76ers
Four years after the Philadelphia 76ers broke off a flirtation with New Jersey in favor of a deal to join the Flyers in building a new Spectrum in Philadelphia, the courtship has been renewed.
Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey said his administration had resumed talks aimed at persuading the 76ers to cross the Delaware to a stadium that would be built next to the new aquarium on the Camden waterfront, just across the river from Philadelphia.


Meyer (Fred) Inc. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 6


Fingerprint on Parking Stub Is Focus of Testimony
The courtroom in the World Trade Center case was the scene of a lecture on crime analysis yesterday as a New York City police detective explained to the jury that a fingerprint found on a parking stub in the underground garage of the trade center belonged to the lead defendant in the trial, Mohammed A. Salameh.
The detective, Ronald Alongis, spoke in what appeared to be well-rehearsed, technical, undramatic terms, but his testimony provided an important, and apparently only recently discovered, link in the Government's case against the four men accused of setting off a huge bomb in the World Trade Center on Feb. 26.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Tuesday, about efforts by Vietnam veterans to reopen litigation involving the chemical defoliant Agent Orange, misidentified a defendant in the case.
It was Uniroyal Inc., not its former affiliate the Uniroyal Chemical Company.


Bridge
To test your skill in dummy play, cover the East-West cards on the diagramed deal and plan the play in six hearts after the opening lead of the diamond king.
The deal occurred at a regional tournament in East Brunswick, N.J., in August, and helped Dan and Natalie Hertz of White Plains and Dick and Genevieve Hewitt of Manhattan finish second in the Senior Swiss Teams.
Mrs.
Hertz found herself in six hearts, and proceeded to vindicate her partner's aggressive bidding.


Conditioning Is the Best Safeguard Against Injury
One might think that an orthopedic surgeon who has treated thousands of skiers for injuries, including countless world-class athletes, might choose to avoid the slopes himself.
But Dr.
J.
Richard Steadman, the 56-year-old pioneer of sports medicine at the Steadman Hawkins Clinic in Vail, Colo., likes to go skiing at least once a week.


Biomedical Waste Sys reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Pregnant Teen-Agers Are Outcasts No Longer
IN the "old days" of the 1960's, 50's and 40's, pregnant teen-agers were pariahs, banished from schools, ostracized by their peers or scurried out of town to give birth in secret.
Today, pregnant teen-agers are even beginning to be viewed by some of their peers as role models.
No longer are they shunned or ridiculed, but supported and embraced in their decisions to give birth, keep their babies, continue their educations and participate in school activities.
Some adults, however, including many who in their youth considered the treatment of pregnant girls detestable, are nevertheless shocked by these attitudes.


CHRONICLE
How do you explain AIDS to young children?
JEANNE MOUTOUSSAMY-ASHE'S way is through a book called "Daddy and Me," which was published yesterday by Knopf.
A photographer, she assembled touching pictures she had taken of her husband, Arthur Ashe, who died of AIDS on Feb. 3, and their daughter, CAMERA, who was 2 when his illness was diagnosed and is about to turn 7.


Anangel-American Shipholdings Ltd. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  U.S.
WEIGHS KOREA OPTIONS  As President Clinton weighs a decision on sanctions against North Korea, the Pentagon is considering strengthening American and South Korean defenses if tensions increase on the peninsula.
A1


MTS Systems Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


An Auxiliary Officer Is Killed in the Bronx
A Bronx man who tried to prevent a suspect from leaving the scene of a shooting was shot and killed by the suspect yesterday, the police said.
The victim, Milton Clarke, 47, ran a car repair business and was an auxiliary police officer, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


Public &amp; Private; Trading Card
When President Clinton was working the Congress, marshaling the votes he needed for Nafta, some saw him as a smart politician playing the horse-trading game and others as a cynical sharpie who would sell his soul to the Devil if the Devil would deliver an aye.
But some abortion rights advocates saw the shape of things to come.
Someday soon, they fear, Mr.
Clinton, pragmatist par excellence, will wheel and deal on a health care reform package, and one of the cards he will trade away will be the inclusion of abortion coverage.


Furniture With That Well-Scrubbed Look
THERE'S another new shop on a block where the tables, chests, cupboards and benches have that nicely rough-hewed, well-scrubbed look that seems to be de rigueur these days.
It's called Coming to America, and it's situated at 276 Lafayette Street (Prince Street).


The Opening of the 1994 Political Games, or Is It?
Photo: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo greeting guests last night at a fund-raising dinner for the State Democratic Committee at the Sheraton New York in midtown.
He raised an estimated $700,000 for a campaign he has yet to say he will wage.
Page B4. (G. Paul Burnett/The New York Times)


Fashionable Bears Offer to Lend a Paw
ON Dec. 8, about 125 teddy bears -- all dressed up with lots of places to go -- will be auctioned to benefit Housing Works, a nonprofit organization that helps homeless families and people with AIDS and H.I.V.
The bears are all named Homer, but bare they will not be.
For the auction, celebrities offered to dress them up.
David Letterman had his Homer don a New York Yankees T-shirt and baseball cap; the Homer by Michael Graves (it's a girl) is in a signed black T-shirt and wears a charm bracelet as a necklace.
I.
M.
Pei set Homer up with a T-square at a drafting table, at right.


Hold the Waffles, Please
President Clinton did a brave and decent thing in meeting last week with Salman Rushdie, which he muddled by seeming to apologize for it.
Mr.
Rushdie has been under an Islamic death threat since 1989, because a book he wrote was deemed blasphemous by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini of Iran.
A White House statement in February made the fundamental point, which cannot be repeated too often: "We do not believe that people should be killed for writing books."
The President's meeting with Mr.
Rushdie was denounced by some Islamic groups as an insult to their religion, which prompted Mr.
Clinton to waffle needlessly in off-the-cuff remarks Tuesday, saying that he "meant no disrespect" to Muslims in spending "a couple of minutes" with the novelist.
He lost a chance to make the important point that the Rushdie affair is less about religion than about political manipulation.
Indeed, Mr.
Rushdie is only one of many people threatened by violence in a power struggle within and outside Iran.


Ukraine: Nuclear Power With Untested Loyalties
For the paratroops of the 39th Air Assault Brigade, the hilltop compound here would have been the jump-off point for a Soviet invasion of Western Europe.
Now it belongs to Ukraine, which is trying to shape remnants of the Soviet Army into a force it can truly call its own.
Col.
Mykhailo Koval, the commander of the base, wears the blue beret of Ukrainian air mobile troops.
But the colonel concedes that this new army remains to be taught "that it is honorable to defend a Ukrainian motherland."


'Mr. DeBerg' Rallies Dolphins
Steve DeBerg isn't sure exactly how much of the Miami Dolphins' six-inch-thick playbook he has mastered.
"Right now, it's like I don't know what I don't know," the quarterback said today during a break from practice at the team's Nova University training camp.
"Things have been happening so fast around here."


8 Days . . . and 100,000 Antiques Later
LIKE so many fireflies on a warm summer evening, the beams from thousands of flashlights danced excitedly over the frozen fields of the Newark Antiques Show, about 150 miles north of London.
Dawn isn't even thinking about breaking at 5:30 on a cold October morning, but dealers from all over the world, along with knowledgeable collectors and amateurs, have joined the chase on the first day of England's largest antiques show, when the best stuff is there.
Twelve thousand vendors, who had been lined up all night, sleeping in their cars and vans and trucks, had five more hours to wait before they could officially set up their booths in the fields of the county fairground.


A Strange Connection in Schoolboy Death
The mood of the 2,200 students and assorted staff members at William Penn High School in North Philadelphia was somber today as classes met on the morning after 17-year-old Joseph Marable collapsed and died while trying out for the varsity basketball team.
"That could be the understatement of the year," said the principal, Bernard McGee, when asked if it had been a trying day.
"It's been very, very tough, both emotionally and physically."


Nets' Return From Road Stops Four-Game Slide
The pendulum finally swung all the way back for the Nets tonight as they turned a 17-point deficit into a 17-point advantage on the way to a 97-82 victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Nets (5-10) turned things around -- at least for tonight -- after going 0-4 on a Western road trip.


Children's TV Bill Doesn't Violate Constitution; Using the Off Switch
To the Editor:
By choosing the headlines, you've chosen the winner.
When you title Ernest Hollings's Nov. 23 Op-Ed piece "Save the Children" and Floyd Abrams's response "Save Free Speech," you cast the debate in terms that only Senator Hollings can embrace.
Given the choice between saving our children and preserving free speech, all of us will choose our children.


OFFSTAGE WITH: Marcel Marceau; Sounding a Legacy of Silence
"I think I'm the Picasso of mime," Marcel Marceau said between rehearsals for his new show, at the Espace Pierre Cardin off the Champs-Elysees.
"At 80, Picasso was young. If I keep my fitness, I have at least another 10 years. It's an encouragement for all men in their 50's, 60's and 70's. I don't think of age. I think of life-force and creation."
At 70, Mr.
Marceau still has much to do.
For the first time since his original mime company disbanded in 1964, a subsidy from France's Culture Ministry has enabled him to form a new troupe, this time made up of graduates of his own mime school.
These young artists are his legacy.
And they must succeed if his form of mime is to survive.
Through them, his name can live on.


Hold the Hype, Says Jets' Lott
Ronnie Lott doesn't want to be a party pooper, but he's telling his teammates to play it cool when it comes to their five-game winning streak and talk of their playoff chances.
"I hope guys don't believe the hype," said Lott, who knew a lot of success with the 49ers.
"You're only as good as yesterday's game. That's the way you look at it. I remember winning 8 and 10 games in a row, but I don't ever remember us sitting there and talking about win streaks and shutouts.


Nordiques' Nolan Seems Out for Season
The Quebec Nordiques' star forward OWEN NOLAN, scheduled to undergo surgery on his left shoulder tomorrow in Toronto, is expected to miss the rest of the season, his agent said yesterday.


CHRONICLE
Authors dedicate books to people they want to honor, composers dedicate songs, and poets dedicate sonnets.
So what do chefs create when they want to pay tribute to an individual?
Recipes, of course.
Some of New York's most celebrated chefs have devised new dishes in the name of JULIA CHILD, who is to be honored tonight at a benefit given by Friends of Thirteen, the fund-raising organization for the public television station WNET.
The event will be held at Tavern on the Green in Central Park.


Applied Materials Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


BFC Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Raymond Jacobs, 45; Ran an AIDS Program
Raymond Jacobs, a drama therapist and administrator of the AIDS professional program at the Young Adult Institute in Manhattan, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 45.
He died of causes related to AIDS nine years after he was found to be H.I.V.-positive, his family said.


Harry Johnson, 91, Doctor Who Urged A Positive Attitude
Dr.
Harry J. Johnson, a Manhattan physician who believed that sensible habits and a positive attitude led to a healthy life, died on Saturday at his Park Avenue apartment.
He was 91.
The cause was heart failure, said his son Michael.


Yanks Will Stay on WPIX
Off-and-on talks to keep Yankee games on free television took another turn yesterday when WPIX-TV/Channel 11 said that it would accept an MSG Network plan to share risks and rewards if MSG would put a value on WPIX's air time.
In late October, MSG suggested a deal to split profits or losses in a formula based on whether advertising revenues can exceed MSG's cost of buying the rights to the telecasts, about $300,000 a game, plus production costs.


Impatient Driver Shoots Motorist for Moving Too Slowly in Bronx
In a fast-paced town like New York where practically everyone moves at an accelerated pace, moving slowly can be a hazard.
Ask Eric Hendricks.
An impatient driver thought he was not driving fast enough and so he shot at him.
Mr.
Hendricks was stopped at a red light in the High Bridge section of the Bronx in a 1988 black Chevrolet sedan at 10 P.M.
Tuesday night when the driver of a BMW apparently thought that when the light turned green, Mr.
Hendricks should have accelerated faster.
So the driver began beep-beep-beeping his horn.


Spread of Hunger Denied
Responding to assertions that the health of the poor in Haiti was deteriorating rapidly, a Clinton Administration expert said today that neither the coup two years ago nor the economic embargo aimed at returning President Aristide to power had caused significant harm.
"Right now, as best as we can tell, and I don't know anybody who has better information than we do, there is no physical evidence of a significantly worsened humanitarian situation in Haiti," said the official, who is with the Agency for International Development.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FOURTH FINANCIAL CORP. , agreed to acquire most assets and liabilities of the Equity Bank for Savings of Oklahoma City for $93 million from LSB Industries.


In Paris, Exhibitions for Devotees of Design
TWO exhibitions in Paris may interest interior design and architecture fans.
One is an ambitious display of some 50 table settings illustrating exotic ports of call; the other is a striking retrospective of the work of Pierre Chareau (right), the architect and furniture designer whose Maison de Verre, built in the late 1920's, was an early high-tech building.


Cuomo Choice For Top Court Is Woman, 51
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he would nominate Carmen Beauchamp Ciparick, a state Supreme Court justice in Manhattan who grew up in Washington Heights, to be the first Hispanic judge on the state's highest court, the Court of Appeals.
If approved by the State Senate, Justice Ciparick, 51 years old, will replace Associate Judge Stewart H. Hancock Jr., a Republican from the Syracuse area, who is required to step down at the end of the year because he has reached the mandatory retirement age of 70.


Lawrence Insurance Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For a Horticulturist Holiday
WITH the winds picking up and the days dwindling down, it's an act of sunny optimism to ponder holiday gifts for gardeners.
What will most please the green thumbs on your list?
Probably a full-time helper, but that's not easily wrapped or sent.
Better to check the specialty shops or catalogues.
No matter if the landscape tilled is a windowsill, greenhouse, city backyard or country estate, garden gifts range from the whimsical to the practical.
Here's a potpourri of possibilities, all of which can be enjoyed now (in all cases, shipping is extra).
LINDA YANG
PASSIONFLOWER VINE Despite its exotic name and extraordinary blossom, the energetic passionflower vine (above) is extremely easy to grow on a windowsill in either full sun or part shade.
Fifteen varieties are propagated and sold by Logee's Greenhouses, 141 North Street, Danielson, Conn. 06239.
Year-round easy bloomers include Jeanette and the fragrant Alatocaerulea, both with amethyst flowers; Caerulea, whose bloom is white and blue, and Vitifolia, a red.
A four-and-a-half-inch potted plant of blooming size is $12. (203) 774-8038. (J. H. Carmichael Jr./Image Bank)
CERAMIC CACHEPOTS "A gardener knows all the dirt" is the motto on these fanciful white ceramic cachepots (right) from Portugal.
Colorful drawings of garden implements adorn both the small container (5 inches deep and 6 1/2 inches wide, $28) and the larger one (6 inches deep by 7 1/2 inches wide, $34).
At the New York Botanical Garden's Shop-in-the-Garden at the I.B.M.
Building, 590 Madison Avenue (at 57th Street), New York 10022. (212) 980-8544.
WATERING CAN Recycled metal has been used to fabricate this one-gallon watering can (above), available in 48 witty hand-painted designs, executed in vibrant tones (with protective coating, of course).
The sprinkler head, or rose, useful for watering seedlings, is removable for watering houseplants.
Choose from a cat, a sunflower, a Navajo rug pattern, pink flamingo, tiger-, zebra- or leopard-stripe, Wild-West cowboy or calla lily. $34.50.
At The Gardener's Touch, 1545 Second Avenue (at 80th Street), New York 10028. (212) 288-1418.
TRELLISED OBELISK A miniature trellised obelisk, about a foot high, rests snugly on top of its Versailles-inspired planter, which measures about five inches square.
The cast terra-cotta set (left) is an ideal base for training a dwarf ivy, a fragrant rosemary or any small climbing plant.
It is $80 from Lexington Gardens, 1011 Lexington Avenue, New York 10021. (212) 861-4390.
EARTHY URNS These ancient-looking urns (above) are subtly colored by buff and wheat sands from the Israeli desert, where they're made by hand.
They vary in size from one to three feet high (no two shapes and colors are exactly alike) and in price from $55 to $120.
From the Grassroots Garden, 131 Spring Street, New York 10012. (212) 226-2662.
GARDENER'S TOTE BAG This rugged, California-made suede and leather bag with nylon straps (below) has eight side pockets for the many tools that must be toted around.
Double-stitched and riveted for durability, it also has a large central space for transporting a plant or two.
The design, by Paul Langenbach, was inspired by the classic English gardener's tote bag.
It is $59 from Langenbach, P.O.
Box 453, Blairstown, N.J. 07825. (800) 362-1991. (Photographs by Naum Kazhdan/The New York Times)


Children's TV Bill Doesn't Violate Constitution
To the Editor:
Floyd Abrams's Op-Ed article "Save Free Speech" (Nov. 23) inaccurately describes the constitutional implications of the legislation proposed by Senator Ernest Hollings.
The legislation is not, as Mr.
Abrams claims, violative of the First Amendment.


Woman in the News; At Center of a Sweeping Struggle: Ninfa Segarra
The last time New York City had a Republican mayor, Ninfa Segarra was a student demonstrator, joining protests for more power and services for the city's Hispanic residents.
In one youthful gesture of defiance, she recalled yesterday, she lay down on a street on the Lower East Side to demand that the administration of Mayor John V. Lindsay build a new Gouverneur Hospital.
Now, Ms.
Segarra is joining the administration of the city's newest Republican mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani, who yesterday announced her appointment as deputy mayor.


Financial Federal Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


IGI Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bob Evans Farms Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


American Insured Mortgage Investors L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Price, Sheehan and Stockton Honored
NICK PRICE, PATTY SHEEHAN and DAVE STOCKTON were picked as Players of the Year yesterday by the Golf Writers Association of America.


State Police Investigator Is Held in False Evidence
A New York State Police investigator who was once part of an elite unit looking into evidence tampering was himself arrested yesterday on charges of faking a fingerprint in a 1991 carjacking case.
The investigator, Edward Pilus, 44, was the sixth trooper to be charged in a widening evidence-tampering scandal and the first from a barracks in the New York City metropolitan area.
He is a 16-year veteran of the force who was assigned to Troop F in Middletown.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Marvin H. Bernstein, a businesman and philanthropist in New York, misspelled the name of the center for Holocaust studies based in Los Angeles for which he was a fund-raiser and contributor.
It is the Simon Wiesenthal Center.


Burks Signs Three-Year Pact With Rockies
ELLIS BURKS chose security over the chance to play for a contender when he agreed to a $9 million, three-year contract with the Colorado Rockies.
"It was a tough decision because it was such an exciting year in Chicago," the 29-year-old outfielder said yesterday, a day after agreeing to the deal.
"I weighed a lot of things -- American League versus National League, right field as opposed to center. The guarantee here was important and being a key part in the building program here in Colorado."


Driver-Harris reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sheik in Bomb Case To Discuss Defense
After rebuffing his court-designated lawyer, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman will appear in Manhattan Federal Court on Monday to try to clarify the tangled question of who will assist his defense in his trial next year on bombing conspiracy charges, that lawyer said yesterday.
The 55-year-old blind and diabetic Egyptian cleric who speaks little English has said he would represent himself rather than accept a lawyer he did not want.
Last month, Judge Michael B. Mukasey ruled that the sheik's chosen lawyers, William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby, could not fairly represent Mr.
Abdel Rahman as well as two other defendants in the case and named a lawyer from a list of Government-paid public defenders to advise him.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Bishop Thomas V. Daily's plans for the Catholic schools in the Brooklyn diocese misattributed several statements in some editions.
It was John J. Convey, a professor of education at Catholic University, not Bishop Daily, who said that pastors had lamented that many Catholic students and their parents were not practicing their religion; that the growing number of non-Catholic students had raised questions about whether the schools would maintain their Catholic identity; and that many lay teachers felt less comfortable than nuns, brothers and priests in teaching religion.


Ellin H. Mitchell Dies; Private Art Dealer, 57
Ellin Hobbins Mitchell, a private dealer in medieval and Renaissance art and Old Master drawings, died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 57.
Mrs.
Mitchell, who had been suffering from brain lymphoma, was hit by a car early last month, said her husband, Jan, the New York businessman, art collector and former owner of Luchow's restaurant and the Longchamps restaurant chain.


Ad Spending Rise Forecast for 1994
Media spending next year will grow by 7 percent, or 2 percent after inflation, according to a study released yesterday by Myers Reports in Parsippany, N.J., an advertising, marketing and media consulting company.
The report said a strong national television market -- stimulated by home shopping, infomercials and other forms of electronic marketing -- would fuel that growth, with little change in spending in most other media.


John St. George, 73, Jesuit and Executive For Vatican Radio
The Rev.
John A. St.
George, a Jesuit who helped develop FM radio in New York City and more recently was an executive at the Jesuit-run Vatican Radio outside Rome, died on Friday in Evanston, Ill.
He was 73.
The Chicago Province of the Society of Jesus said that since undergoing cancer surgery last year, Father St.
George had been in Evanston at the Canisius House Jesuit Community, which he helped found in 1955.


FLIGHT ATTENDANTS SEEK TO REJOIN BID FOR UNITED
The flight attendants' union of United Airlines said yesterday that it wanted to rejoin the effort by the pilots' and machinists' unions to gain majority control of the carrier.
The flight attendants had left the buyout talks in late September after United opened a base for attendants in Taipei, Taiwan, to cut costs.
The union said the move would reduce jobs in the United States.


Hero or Villain, Magic Just Wants to Play Ball
Magic Johnson received a hero's front-page welcome to this northern Illinois city today.
He was also ripped by local AIDS activists.
Such is the psychological paradox that the basketball superstar's post-National Basketball Association life has become.
In one breath, someone calls out, "We love you, Magic." In another, he is challenged to explain what in the world he is doing here in the first place.


For Some, It's Never Too Early to Start Hanukkah Festivities


Events: Architecture Writ Large and Small
Architectural Retrospective  Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway (Washington Avenue); (718) 638-5000.
A show of models, sketches and renderings chronicling the career of the architect Arata Isozaki opens tomorrow and continues through Feb. 27.
The show marks the reopening of the west wing, a renovation designed by Mr.
Isozaki's firm and James Stuart Polshek &amp; Partners.


Museum of Natural History Welcomes Its New President
Soaring high above the welcoming reception yesterday for Ellen V. Futter, the new president of the American Museum of Natural History, was the tallest free-standing dinosaur exhibit in the world: a 50-foot-high mother Barosaurus, fiercely defending her young.
"It's very much a reminder of my role," said Ms.
Futter.
"I hope to be protector, responsible steward and organizational manager."
More than 700 political, cultural, educational, philanthropic and corporate guests gathered to celebrate her accession to the museum's presidency in the Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Hall of the museum at Central Park West and West 79th Street.


Hudson's Bay Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


General Parametrics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Fervent Hindu Party Is Severely Defeated In Indian State Vote
The leading militant Hindu political party in India has suffered a devastating setback in its attempt to harness anti-Muslim sentiment and take control of the Government, according to nearly complete returns from state elections held Sunday.
The election results were a reversal of a trend widely assumed to be inexorable only six months ago, when the Bharatiya Janata Party appeared to be surging ahead in its effort to unite the Hindus in northern India around emotional religious issues.
A Long Secular Tradition
By basing its appeal on the centrality of one particular Hindu god, Ram, the party seemed to have found a way to wrest political power from the long-ruling Congress Party of Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao in the next national elections, which could have come as early as January.


Pattern Processing Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Fiscal Deputy Mayor To Head Partnership
Barry F. Sullivan, Mayor David N. Dinkins's Deputy Mayor for Finance and Economic Development, will become president of the New York City Partnership and the New York Chamber of Commerce and Industry in January, he said yesterday.
Mr.
Sullivan, who has been the Mayor's main liaison with business leaders, has a close professional relationship with David Rockefeller, the retired Chase Manhattan Bank chairman and founder of the Partnership.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE parents were worried by the marked changes in their 13-year-old son's behavior and were convinced he had a brain tumor.
His personality had changed, they said.
His use of language had grown odd.
He had become uncharacteristically rebellious.
Dr.
Victor Strasburger, the chief of adolescent medicine at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque, talked with the parents and examined the boy.


Patterson Dental Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI NAMES A DEPUTY MAYOR In the first appointment to his administration, Mayor-elect Giuliani named as deputy mayor Ninfa Segarra, one of the four Board of Education members who had battled former Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez over his efforts to impose a curriculum that discussed homosexuality and AIDS.
A1.
Ninfa Segarra has gone from protester to political power.
B8.


Review/Theater: Life Sentences; Doltish and Dippy in a Minimum Security Love
Richard Nelson's "Life Sentences" examines the relationship between a dolt and a flibbertigibbet.
Burke, a middle-aged college English professor, and his lover, Mia, an unmarried mother in her mid-20's, seem in no way made for each another.
But as his title indicates, the playwright would like us to believe they can't live apart.
The evidence is underwhelming.
Until the closing moments of this minor contrivance, which opened last night at the Second Stage Theater, the poor souls don't even come face to face.
The first act is given over to Burke (Edward Herrmann, a lumbering brown bear in tweeds).
Speaking first from Pennsylvania Station, then from a variety of locations in and around his farmhouse in Dutchess County, N.Y., he tells us of his life with Mia, "my almost wife." "She's very funny," he explains.
"It took about two years of living together before I was sure she wasn't all the time putting me down."


Tatham Euro Sues A Former Client
Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago has filed a Federal lawsuit against a former client, Celestial Seasonings of Boulder, Colo., charging breach of contract.
The lawsuit seeks an estimated $500,000 in damages to compensate the agency for expenses it says it incurred in handling the herbal tea maker's account for less than two months.
Celestial unexpectedly dismissed Tatham at the end of October and shifted its account, estimated at $6 million, to Grey Advertising in New York.


Corrections
The main front-page article on Nov. 21 about the meeting of Asian-Pacific leaders in Seattle misstated the surname of the Foreign Minister of China at one point.
He is Qian Qichen; Qian is the surname.


Outlaw Filibusters
To the Editor:
The most recent filibuster by Republicans in Congress, re the Brady bill, only serves to point up the continuing immaturity of our lawmakers.
Filibusters are a negative approach to bill consideration, and are harmful and wasteful in preventing mature consideration of bills.
Filibusters should be outlawed.
Why cannot a bill, any bill, be presented, explained and then considered in a voting?
Is this too much to ask of our Congress?
DAVID W. ABEL  New York, Nov. 23, 1993


Review/Music; Performer, Promoter, High Priest Of Jazz
Sometime during the middle to late 1980's, Wynton Marsalis, who is performing at the Village Vanguard through Sunday, established himself as the next great historical figure in jazz.
Unlike his predecessors, he didn't do it by force of personal style, the way Charlie Parker or John Coltrane, for example, did it; instead, he became a cultural politician.
Through ceaseless proselytizing, commercial success and access to the news media, he helped make it possible for young musicians to shun the forum of pop culture and sustain a career in jazz, hardly a negligible achievement.
The 32-year-old Mr.
Marsalis has brought jazz a visiblity it hasn't had since Coltrane led his great quartet, and without him there's a good chance that jazz's current renaissance would not exist.


Abatix Environmental Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bunch Accepts Shrinking Role As Long as Giants Are Clicking
Over the last three or four games, maybe longer, Giants fullback Jarrod Bunch has noticed that his role has been slowly diminishing.
He is no longer a big part of the offense, as he was in the beginning of the season and certainly last season under former Coach Ray Handley.
And the truth is, it may stay that way the rest of the year.
When Bunch was asked about this, he did not go into a tirade.
He did not scream for more playing time.
He didn't complain.
Bunch made it perfectly clear that if the team were winning, that would be what was most important to him.
But now he is clearly disturbed by his shrinking role.


They're Not in Kansas Anymore
Temple 73, Kansas 59
Rick Brunson and Aaron McKie triggered a 22-6 surge and No. 7 Temple started its season by dealing No. 3 Kansas its first December home loss in a decade, 73-59, last night in Lawrence, Kan.
Kansas (4-1) fresh off winning the Preseason National Invitation Tournament, had won 60 of its previous 64 home games, but missed 14 of its first 17 shots and never solved Temple's rugged matchup zone defense.


In Awe Of Leetch, Or Perhaps It's Orr?
Brian Leetch leads the Rangers in points.
He leads the National Hockey League in power-play production.
There are times, like Tuesday night in New Jersey, when he is capable of taking over an entire hockey game, his skills superseding those of anyone else on the ice.
His greatest gift, though, seems to be his talent for self-criticism.
Saturday afternoon at Nassau Coliseum, after the Rangers lost to the Islanders, Leetch could not say enough bad things about himself.
Later that evening, at dinner with his teammate Mark Messier, he fought valiantly to convince Messier that is was he, not the Rangers' captain, who had played the worse game.


Finding Reliable Picture Developers
THESE days, choosing where to have holiday photographs developed can be as tough as deciding where to go on vacation.
Film processing has become a basic neighborhood service, with new photo-finishing labs as ubiquitous as greengrocers.
But the quality of their color prints can vary greatly, making comparison shopping essential.
As camera prices have dropped strikingly, film processing time has been cut in half and the quality of prints has been improved by technological innovations.
The processing of negatives, once handled by operators of varying motivation and training, is today done by computers, which read negatives with more precision.
Once negatives are produced, state-of-the-art printers can automatically make customized corrections to a photograph in a process called balancing.


Islanders' Kurvers Has Broken Thumb
Already having trouble getting goals from their defensemen, the Islanders learned yesterday that TOM KURVERS, second among defensemen in point production, will be sidelined 10 days with a broken left thumb.
Kurvers, who has 17 points, received the injury when he was slashed by DAVE POULIN in the Islanders' 6-4 victory against Washington on Tuesday.
Three other Islanders have been released from the injury roster and made the trip to Boston for tonight's game against the Bruins: BRAD DALGARNO (hip flexor), WAYNE McBEAN (sore left knee) and RICH PILON (partly dislocated left shoulder) have been cleared for duty.
CLAUDE LOISELLE, out for the season, will undergo reconstructive knee surgery on Dec. 14.


Pakistan Isn't Building Any Nuclear Weapons
To the Editor:
An Associated Press report datelined Karachi, published on Nov. 21, stated that the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Benazir Bhutto, "vowed today that Pakistan would not give up its nuclear weapons program despite pressure from Washington."


Greenwich Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Group to Consider New Technologies
The Cabletelevision Advertising Bureau in New York said yesterday that it had formed a coalition of top advertiser, agency and cable executives to offer guidance as new television technologies develop.


U.S. and Russians Suffer Some Personnel Problems
The American and Russian hockey teams had similar problems when they faced off here tonight to start a seven-game exhibition tour.
United States Coach Tim Taylor was uncertain when center Derek Plante, who could be his best player, would return to the squad.
His National Hockey League team, the Buffalo Sabres, will not relinquish him and his importance to the Sabres has increased since Pat LaFontaine suffered a knee injury early this season.


Drop Seen in Family Child-Abuse Deaths
The number of children in New York City who died in 1992 from apparent abuse or neglect by a parent or custodian showed a drop from previous years, according to a report released yesterday by the city's Human Resources Administration.
In 1990, there were 117 such child fatalities, and in 1991 there were 102, the report said.
Last year, that number was 87.
The total for 1993 through last week is 84, according to raw data compiled by the agency.


Homedco Group Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Guest-List Fever Has Hollywood Shaking
Less than three months ago, President Clinton played a significant role in finding common ground among Israelis and Palestinians.
Just before Thanksgiving, Mr.
Clinton managed to bring together American Airlines flight attendants and the company's management.
Now Mr.
Clinton is facing a standoff in Beverly Hills that might well demand his personal intervention, too.


CHRONICLE
PRINCE EDWARD went to work yesterday, the first child of a British monarch to do so, according to The Daily Telegraph of London.
The 29-year-old son of Queen Elizabeth II is joint managing director of Ardent Productions, a television production company that he founded with backing from the Sultan of Brunei.
Asked to describe his functions, Prince Edward said recently, "Trying to run the team and trying to find ideas and in the long term, actually producing as well."


Officials Stop Trucks Loaded With The Times
Trucks carrying copies of The New York Times were turned back at the Canadian border near Buffalo early yesterday by Canadian officials trying to enforce a judge's ban on coverage of a murder case in Ontario.
The Times yesterday included an article about the controversy stemming from the ban, which prohibits publication in Canada of all but the most basic details of the case to insure a fair trial for the husband and wife charged in the 1991 killings of two teen-age girls.
One defendant, Karla Homolka, was convicted in July of manslaughter and sentenced to 12 years in prison.
The ban is in effect until after the trial of her husband, Paul Teale, which is expected to take place sometime next year.


Fervent Hindu Party Is Severely Defeated In Indian State Vote
The leading militant Hindu political party in India has suffered a devastating setback in its attempt to harness anti-Muslim sentiment and take control of the Government, according to nearly complete returns from state elections held Sunday.
The election results were a reversal of a trend widely assumed to be inexorable only six months ago, when the Bharatiya Janata Party appeared to be surging ahead in its effort to unite the Hindus in northern India around emotional religious issues.
A Long Secular Tradition
By basing its appeal on the centrality of one particular Hindu god, Ram, the party seemed to have found a way to wrest political power from the long-ruling Congress Party of Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao in the next national elections, which could have come as early as January.


Mistrial Request Denied in Warhol-Estate Case
After a morning of exceptionally heated testimony at the trial in Manhattan Surrogate Court over the value of Andy Warhol's estate, in which the management of the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts and its business dealings with Christie's, the Park Avenue auction house, came under tough and sometimes nasty questioning, the lawyers for the foundation asked for a mistrial.
The foundation, in the words of Beth D. Jacob, one of its lawyers, said it believed "the court is too personally involved." The request was denied.
The motion for a mistrial came after Surrogate Eve Preminger agreed to admit as evidence confidential conversations that had been conducted in her chambers regarding the use of Warhol's collection of 19,879 black-and-white photographs as the basis of a settlement between the foundation and Edward Hayes, the former lawyer for the Warhol estate.
Mr.
Hayes is suing the foundation for a larger fee.
He says that the estate is worth roughly $600 million; the foundation says it is worth only $220 million, a figure based on 1991 appraisals of the estate by Christie's.


Nancy L. Roelker, 78, Professor at Boston U.
Nancy Lyman Roelker, a retired professor of European history at Boston University, died Saturday at her home in East Greenwich, R.I.
She was 78.
Dr.
Roelker was best known for her work on 16th-century France.
Her books included "The Paris of Henry of Navarre, as Seen by Pierre de l'Etoile" (1958), and "Queen of Navarre, Jeanne d'Albret 1529-1572" (1968).
She also edited and translated French scholarly papers.


CUC International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Giving Millions to Ordinary People
A congregation of 700 Unitarian Universalists here gives away millions each year to more than 170 groups ranging from poultry workers in North Carolina to environmentalists in Alaska.
And though the congregation does not publicize its work, word gets around about a philanthropy that wants to promote the work of ordinary people in building a movement for social change.
This year the Veatch program, named for Caroline Veatch, a congregation member whose bequest in 1959 finances the philanthropy, received about 1,000 applications for grants and financed about one in six of them in its $8.6 million program last year.
The decisions of the program's board have earned the philanthropy a reputation as a "gutsy funder," said Marjorie Fine, executive director of the Veatch Program.


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column in The Living Section yesterday about ordering gifts for Hanukkah by telephone misstated the number for Kosher Cornucopia.
It is (800) 756-7437.


Judge Allows Prior Abuse To Be Alleged
A judge ruled today that prosecutors can present evidence of possible prior abuse of a 10-month-old baby when a nanny goes on trial on charges of killing the child.
Judge J. Emmett Murphy of Westchester County Court said he would allow testimony about one set of facial bruises that the prosecution contends is evidence of previous abuse by the nanny, Ann Franklin, 26, of Rye, but he would not allow testimony on an earlier set of facial bruises.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the proposed American-Russian space station misstated the amount, in the project's budget of $2.1 billion for the current fiscal year, that members of Congress have agreed to free immediately from a spending restriction.
It is $50 million, not $1 billion.


Analog Devices Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Wadkins Formally Named Ryder Captain
LANNY WADKINS will be the captain of the United States Ryder Cup team when the matches are next contested in 1995.
The PGA of America confirmed yesterday that Wadkins would succeed TOM WATSON, who led the American side to victory over Europe in September at the Belfry in England.


BioTechnica International reports earnings for Year to July 31


Clinton's Airline Action Served Public Interest
To the Editor:
"The Airline Settlement: Not a Solution" (editorial, Nov. 25) worries that "a President who intervenes too often will dull the incentive of labor and management to settle disputes on their own." Sure.
But a President who facilitates the ability of the parties to adopt a constructive solution, whether procedural (in this case, arbitration) or substantive, promotes not only the welfare of the disputants but also the public interest.


Met Awards to Thomas and Donahue
The Metropolitan Golf Association's two most prestigious awards went to JEFF THOMAS of Plainfield West in New Jersey and JOE DONAHUE of the Garden City Golf Club on Long Island.
Thomas was honored as the Player of the Year, and Donahue was presented the Distinguished Service Award last night at the association's annual meeting and dinner, held at the Westchester Country Club in Harrison, N.Y.


Kovalev to Get Decision Today
Aleksei Kovalev met with a National Hockey League official for approximately one hour yesterday in Manhattan and will be informed as to the length of his probable suspension sometime today.
The Rangers' president and general manager, Neil Smith, and a Russian interpreter, Irina Cytowicz, accompanied Kovalev to his meeting with the N.H.L. senior vice president, Brian Burke, who suspended the Russian forward from Tuesday night's Rangers-Devils game pending his ruling.
Kovalev is under review for an incident that occurred in New York's 3-1 victory over the Washington Capitals Sunday night at Madison Square Garden.
In that game, Kovalev tripped Washington's Dale Hunter from behind, sending him to the ice with a knee injury.


'Soft Geometry' In Kitchen Design
DINNER began at the shopping stage in Balducci's in Manhattan, where Johnny Grey, the English kitchen designer, kept neither his hands nor his commentary to himself.
He burnished the white eggplants with his thumb. ("They're not really fresh; they'd be shinier.") Crackled the papery coverings around the kumquats. ("Ever had one of these?") Plucked a sprig of rocket from the mesclun, fearless of clerks. ("It's peppery; you don't want a strong dressing.")


Aequitron Medical Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Esiason Is Fulfilling Great Expectations
At the start of the season Jets Coach Bruce Coslet said he would be happy if quarterback Boomer Esiason completed 60 percent of his passes and kept his yards per attempt average high.
After 11 games, and with the team on a five-game winning streak, Coslet must be ready to do back flips.
Esiason has completed 64 percent of his passes, which is second in the American Football Conference behind John Elway of Denver (64.2 percent), and his 8.01 yards per attempt is the best in the A.F.C. and second in the National Football League to Steve Young of San Francisco (8.8 yards per completion).
After three dreary seasons in Cincinnati, where people were ready to pronounce last rite on his career, Esiason, 31, has sprung to life in the Jets progression passing system.
It is the same offense that Joe Montana is still running with the Chiefs at age 37.
In 1985, Esiason had his best season in terms of completion percentage (58.2 percent) and threw 27 touchdowns and 12 interceptions.
His best season in terms of yards per attempt was in 1988, when the Bengals went to the Super Bowl.
He had 9.2 yards per attempt, threw 28 touchdown passes and 14 interceptions.


Two Former Navy Athletes Killed by Fellow Graduate
Alton Grizzard, the acclaimed Navy quarterback who set team career records for total offense from 1987 to 1990, and Kerry O'Neill, a 1993 Naval Academy graduate who set records in women's track, were shot to death by a fellow Academy graduate at a California naval base early yesterday in what the police described as a possible love triangle.
The gunman, George Smith, a 24-year-old Navy ensign from Huntington Beach, Calif., killed himself after shooting Grizzard and O'Neill, the police in Coronado, Calif., said.
Smith was trained to work aboard nuclear-powered submarines, according to a Navy spokesman, Lieut.
Comdr.
Frank Thorp.


No Headline
"We may think that this disease is only a part of the lives of people in larger cities, but it's not. It has touched all of us. We all have stories." -- DIANE M. KOEPPEL-HORN of the Wichita Art Museum, on the impact of AIDS.  [ B10:4. ]


A Pinball Wizard Who Collected The Best of an Era
BY day, Gordon A. Hasse Jr. is an advertising copywriter in New York.
At other times he pursues his hobby, collecting pinball art and artifacts.
"It's been a lifelong interest," said Mr.
Hasse, who got his first pinball machine in 1957 as a Christmas present when he was 12.
He now owns about 100, most of which are kept in warehouses in upstate New York.
More than 50 of Mr.
Hasse's pieces from what he considers pinball's golden age will be in a show, "Remember Pinball," at the Park Avenue Atrium (at 46th Street) from Dec. 7 to Feb. 28.
The exhibition was produced by Alex Shear, the founding partner of Nostalgia Brokers, a New York consulting firm that organizes shows on Americana for corporations.
Mr.
Hasse is also a partner in the firm.


Women Tennis Pros Are Not 'Being Used' to Promote Smoking
To the Editor:
In his column on Nov. 21, Bob Herbert insulted the intelligence of American women by implying that they are not capable of understanding the possible hazards associated with tobacco.


Cuomo Helps Raise Funds, But for Him? No Word Yet
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo last night kicked off the 1994 version of New York's most enduring political parlor game -- "Will He Run?" -- by raising an estimated $700,000 for a campaign he has yet to say he will wage.
Mr.
Cuomo, who has said he will announce by the end of the year whether he will run for a fourth four-year term, did not disclose his intentions at a $1,000-a-person fund-raising dinner for the state Democratic Committee at a Manhattan hotel.


A Hotel Becomes a Home
In a very famous musical called "My Fair Lady," a very famous flower seller named Eliza Doolittle sang of a room that was both shelter ("far away from the cold night air") and solace ("with one enormous chair").
To have a room like that, she caroled, would be "loverly." Most people, whatever their condition, want such a refuge, and none more than those for whom home is a street corner and bed a steam grating.
That room is now being realized on Manhattan's West 43d Street, in the Times Square Hotel, which was splendid in 1923 when it opened and derelict by 1991.
That was when a group of nonprofit entrepreneurs called Common Ground stepped in.
Using $28 million from the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development, along with every tax credit and corporate contribution they could muster, Common Ground has turned the hotel's 735 squalid rooms into 650 small apartments.
All have private baths and most have kitchens.


Review/Dance; Troupe From Toronto Offers Premieres and Comparisons
Toronto Dance Theater ought to come to New York more often.
It brings choreographic fresh air.
The Canadian troupe, which made favorable impressions on two previous visits, appears to be steadily gaining stature.
On Tuesday night it offered four New York premieres at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, in Chelsea.
The result was an unusually satisfying evening of modern dance.
One work was by David Earle, who founded Toronto Dance Theater in 1968 in association with Peter Randazzo and Patricia Beatty and who remains its artistic director.
The other three were by the group's associate artistic director, Christopher House, one of Canada's most gifted young choreographers.
All four pieces received committed performances by a company that can invest finely honed technique with emotional fervor.


New Math Test Shows Deficiency In Reasoning Skills, Officials Say
Releasing results of a new citywide mathematics examination that is part of a broad shift in teaching philosophy, New York City school officials said yesterday that city students' tenuous performance on the test underlined the need to bolster instruction in working with numerical patterns and sequences and with abstract reasoning.
The officials praised the test itself, calling it a much better indicator of student mastery of mathematics concepts than the multiple-choice tests given to all city students every spring and that have driven classroom teaching in the city for decades.


Knicks Hope to Be Barrier as Rockets Seek to Tie Record
After spending all week talking about Houston, hearing about Houston and preparing for Houston, the Knicks will finally play the unbeaten Rockets tonight at Madison Square Garden.
If they beat the Knicks, the Rockets will tie a National Basketball Association record by starting the season 15-0.
To say the Knicks are eager to end Houston's streak would be an understatement.


Kendall in Shake-Up of Top Officers
The supercomputer maker Kendall Square Research stripped its chief executive of his title yesterday and demoted two other top executives as the company sought to contain a financial crisis and salvage its credibility with the investment community.
Kendall Square also restated its financial results for the last year and a half, disclosing a significantly higher loss for 1992 than was previously reported.
The company also indicated that it did not know whether the slim profit initially reported for the first half of 1993 would remain, once all the adjustments had been made.


Offshore Pipelines reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Armenia Once Again Needs World Support
To the Editor:
Five years ago, on Dec. 7, 1988, Armenia was devastated by an earthquake that left 25,000 dead and a half-million homeless and destroyed 30 percent of Armenia's industrial capacity.
Its recovery was made possible by an unprecedented outpouring of aid and support from the American Government, its citizens and other members of the world community.


A New Temple For Egyptian Art
WHEN the Brooklyn Museum first opened its doors in 1897, it was a long and lonely Beaux-Arts shoe box.
Judging from vintage photographs, it must have looked extremely odd: it lacked the prominent entrance usual to the Beaux-Arts style, and it stood out starkly against its low-lying, surprisingly rural background. (A chicken farm was next to it.)
But that narrow shoe box was only the first installment in a master plan designed by the New York architects McKim, Mead &amp; White.
As the museum expanded east over the next three decades, the West Wing, as the original building came to be called, became just part of a much larger structure in which it played an ever-decreasing role.
By the mid-1970's, when the museum completed its last expansion, the original five-story shoe box had become merely the shabby tail of a very large dog.


CBS Prevails, but NBC Gains, in 'Sweep Month'
The scoreboard for television ratings in November, a hotly competitive "sweep month," shows CBS with the winning numbers but NBC with most of the style points.
CBS, ABC and NBC were closely bunched in the sweep competition, separated by less than one rating point.
Ratings for a network determine what its affiliated stations can charge advertisers for air time.


Review/Film; Housewife on the Trail Of a Husband's Schemes
"Deception" is a fabulously farfetched story about the string of surprises that leads Bessie Faro (Andie MacDowell) all over the world.
The first of these surprises is her husband's bridgework, which arrives in the mail, along with the news that he has been in a plane crash.
He has supposedly been burned beyond recognition.
Anyone familiar with detective fiction will know what that means, but Bessie has to do a lot of globe-trotting to figure it out.
Bessie, a harried but sweettempered Los Angeles wife and mother, has had no experience as a private eye.
But she is caught up in intrigue involving baseball cards marked with a secret code. (The film has a strong but meaningless baseball motif.) These clues lead to an international assortment of safe-deposit boxes held under assumed names.
And those lead to surreptitious trafficking in either grain, ballpoint-pen ink or poison gas, depending on how closely you care to follow the plot.


Town Where Racial Remark Was Made Gets McCall Visit
New York State's Comptroller, H. Carl McCall, came to the Town Hall here today and talked about the minutiae of his office: paying the state's bills, auditing the budgets of its communities and overseeing the state's pension fund.
Nobody at the meeting talked about what was probably foremost on everybody's mind, the issue that drew a flock of reporters to this small rural town -- the use of a racial epithet against Mr.
McCall by a Deerpark Councilman, Joseph Kover.


Japan Aide Ousted; He'd Criticized Arms Role
In a setback for the Japanese Government, the Defense Minister was forced to resign tonight after declaring that Japan's constitutional limitations on the use of military force are out of date and urging passage of an amendment to permit full participation in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The resignation of Keisuke Nakanishi, the 52-year-old director general of Japan's Self-Defense Agency, underscores the intensity of the disagreements within the Government over Japan's expanding international role, especially at a time when the country is seeking a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council.


Bruins Again Embarrass the Islanders
Order was restored tonight to the National Hockey League, but the Islanders didn't benefit.
Their strike ended, the official officials dusted off their zebra regalia at Boston Garden and kept close tabs on the action as the usual brand of decorum ruled the Islander-Bruin rivalry.
No matter who is monitoring the rule book or whose ice is home, the Islanders can't seem to rattle the Bruins.
Tonight's 7-3 loss extended their futile streak against Boston to seven games and brought back memories of the last time they met, a 5-2 loss last month at Nassau Coliseum.


5 Die in Gunman's Rampage in 2 California Cities
A man with a shotgun and pistol opened fire without warning today in a state unemployment office here, killing three people and wounding four others.
He then shot dead a police officer who was pursuing him in traffic, before being killed by the police in a fusillade outside a second unemployment office.
About 50 people, including women and children, were in the unemployment office in this city 60 miles northwest of Los Angeles about 11:40 this morning when the gunman walked in with his weapons concealed in a brown bag, said David Keith, a spokesman for the Oxnard Police Department.


An Increasing Sense of Vulnerability; Mourning a Murder Victim, Chinese Express Frustration With Crimes at Restaurants
Defying efforts to restrain him, Dong Rui Wen threw himself at his wife's coffin.
Nearby, the victim's brother, Alan Yeo, wailed and beat himself in anger and frustration.
"Why?" he asked repeatedly in English. "Why?"


Jets' Lewis Named A.F.C.'s Defensive Player of the Month
This week Colts Coach Ted Marchibroda characterized the Jet defense as a unit that plays well together, but doesn't have individual stars.
Perhaps Marchibroda isn't familiar with linebacker Mo Lewis, an emerging star who racked up enough impressive tackles and plays in November to be named the American Football Conference's defensive player of the month.
By the end of Sunday's game between the Jets and the Colts at Giants Stadium, Marchibroda will be thoroughly familiar with Lewis, especially if the third-year player has the kind of game he had against New England.
Against the Patriots last Sunday, Lewis made 19 tackles (11 solo and 8 assists) and stopped New England quarterback Scott Zolak for no gain on a fourth-and-1 play in the fourth quarter.


U.S. Seeking to Loosen Missile-Defense Curbs
The Clinton Administration has proposed updating the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty to accommodate a new anti-missile system designed to protect against third-world threats, Clinton Administration officials disclosed today.
To underscore the significance the Administration attaches to the change, a White House official flew to Geneva early this week to propose the modification to Russian arms negotiators.


On My Mind; The Wharton Case
The first he knew that his reputation was to be besmirched and his career in government ended was when he read the one-paragraph notice of pending oblivion.
It was one of those unsourced pieces of nastiness that have moved from the gutter press to infest some big-time journals -- the knife in the dark, handed over by an unseen assailant to an unnamed journalist to inflict the wound, fast, deep and cruel.


Where the Money Isn't
The plan to streamline Federal bank regulation announced last week by Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen makes sense.
There is no reason to have four overlapping agencies overseeing the industry.
But this fine-tuning may be beside the point.
Commercial banks are heading for trouble, and it will take far more dramatic Government action to save them.
Although the industry has made an impressive recovery from the problems of the late 1980's -- banks will post record earnings for the eighth consecutive quarter -- the numbers do not look so good when carefully analyzed.


Lilco Seeking A Rate Freeze In '95 and '96
The Long Island Lighting Company said today that it would seek to freeze its rates for 1995 and 1996, a sharp departure from the increases that were anticipated as part of its agreement with the state to close the Shoreham Nuclear Power Station.
Since that 10-year settlement was reached in 1989, the base electric rate here has gone up about 4 to 5 percent each year to allow Lilco to repay the $5.6 billion debt incurred in building the plant.
Long Islanders have some of the highest electric bills in the nation, and utility costs have become one of the area's most pressing economic concerns.


Critics' Choices; Film: 2 Well-Cut Gems
As Hollywood's Christmas behemoths begin arriving on movie screens, bear in mind some smaller pleasures.
Two lively, quick-witted films to remember:
"The Snapper," Stephen Frears's sly, boisterous comedy about an unwanted pregnancy in a crowded Irish household.
The mood is raw, the look realistic and the comic timing exactly right.
Based on Roddy Doyle's novel, with a title that refers to the blessed event expected by the unwed 20-year-old Sharon (Tina Kellegher), this film has great fun watching Sharon's father cope with the unthinkable.
Colm Meaney gives a devilishly funny performance as a man forced by nature to broaden his once-narrow horizons.


Riser Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 23


Critics' Choices; Dance: On a Shoestring
Dixon Place has become an institution in the seven years since it was founded to present the new and novel in downtown experimentalist music, performance art and dance.
But the atmosphere of the space, one of the last holdouts of the 1980's living-room clubs, is as homey as ever.
There audiences may sprawl on sofas or perch on impossibly rickety parlor chairs to watch fledgling performers develop and stars try out new work in a cleared-away space that must be the tiniest stage in the city.
A good deal of the atmosphere is attributable to the giddily irrepressible presence of Ellie Covan, a founder of the theater and a savvy and sensitive promoter of downtown art, in whose actual living room the shows take place seven times weekly.
Ms.
Covan will be on hand with many of her performers to raise money for the financially hard-pressed Dixon Place in benefits at 2 P.M. on Sunday at the Sugar Reef Restaurant (93 Second Avenue between Fifth and Sixth Streets in the East Village) and at 7 P.M. on Monday at the Ridiculous Theatrical Company (1 Sheridan Square in Greenwich Village).


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday, about a management shake-up at the Kendall Square Research Corporation, misstated the price of the company's stock.
Shares of Kendall Square closed at $6.875 on Wednesday, not $7.875.


Russia's Election
Ten days before Russians choose a new parliament, many voters are undecided or uninterested as blocs headed by two rival reformers lead the pack.
Article, page A3.


A NEW U.S. STANCE ON ATOMIC WASTES
The Secretary of Energy said today that her department had a "moral obligation" to help electric utilities store spent fuel from nuclear reactors, even though the department could not keep its promise to take the fuel off their hands beginning in 1998.
In a sharp turnaround from the Bush Administration, which denied it had any responsibility for the waste, she said her department might cover the utilities' cost for storage.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; To maintain its hot image, a 'brat pack' agency hires an executive with (gasp!) gray hair.
KIRSHENBAUM &amp; BOND is known as one of the most successful of the New York "brat pack" shops started in the 1980's.
It is known for the hip friskiness of its creative work for clients like Snapple Beverage and Coach leather goods.
It is also known for retail advertising for clients like Kenneth Cole and Charivari that doubles as cheeky social commentary.
What Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond is most definitely not known for is hiring top executives with gray hair and resumes that recount tours of duty in the Marine Corps, or at Procter &amp; Gamble or in senior account management roles at large agencies.


Books-A-Million Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


No More Scot-Free Scofflaws
At long last, Washington has agreed to recognize the sovereign right of New York City to ticket and collect fines on illegally parked cars with diplomatic license plates.
In what amounted to a joint communique, the U.S.
State Department and the city's Department of Transportation announced that henceforth they would refuse to renew the diplomatic automobile registrations of those nations (most notably Russia, Israel, Egypt, Bulgaria and Nigeria) that for years have parked with what might best be called diplomatic impunity at crosswalks, expired meters and fire hydrants.
In other words, our streets, our rules; offenders who don't pay up lose their plates.
Admittedly, the agreement is far from perfect.
Automobiles registered to ambassadors (as compared with consulate cars) will remain diplomatically immune from tickets at parking meters and in some no-parking zones.
And the overall number of diplomatic plates issued here, some 6,000 in all, still seems far too high, given the easy access to cabs and public transportation.
But when a Times reporter, Ronald Sullivan, pointed this out to an official at the Russian mission, the rather undiplomatic response was, "No subways, no buses, no way."


CHRONICLE
"It was an evening without glamour or spectacle; it was truly from the heart," said ZLATKO DIZDAREVIC, an editor of Oslobodjene, the only daily newspaper still published in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, as he reflected on a benefit on Tuesday evening in New York to help writers in his war-torn city.
The event, a reading by 16 writers, took place at Symphony Space on the Upper West Side.
The participants included JOSEPH BRODSKY, DEREK WALCOTT, TONY KUSHNER, ARTHUR MILLER, WENDY WASSERSTEIN, SUSAN SONTAG and LEON WIESELTIER, most of whom read works by other writers.


Buffton Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Renewed Urgency on AIDS
In the heat of the Presidential campaign last year, candidate Bill Clinton asserted: "When it comes to AIDS, there should be a Manhattan Project." That was a powerful image, referring to the crash program during World War II in which the nation's top scientists developed the atomic bomb in a frantic race to beat Germany to the punch.
So it was only fair that a heckler, interrupting President Clinton's speech on World AIDS Day on Wednesday, demanded to know: "Where's the Manhattan Project on AIDS that you promised?" The heckler overstated it when he accused Mr.
Clinton of "lots of talk, no action." The issue is more complicated than that.


Eagle Hardware &amp; Garden Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Margeotes Agency Changes Its Name
Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss of New York said yesterday that it was changing its name, effective immediately, to Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weiss.
The change is being made to acknowledge Paul Donaher, the strategic planning director, who is also a partner.


No Headline
"I did not come here to lose. We will fight for every house in the city. We will fight for every street. We will fight for every borough. And we will win." -- WILLIAM J. BRATTON, chosen to head the New York City police.  [ A1:6. ]


Brief Memory Aids Marriott Issue
Based on the enthusiastic reception Marriott got in the corporate bond market yesterday, money managers have apparently forgotten the jolt the company gave its bond holders just a little more than a year ago.
But that kind of amnesia seems common when interest rates are low and investors of all stripes are scrambling for the highest yields.


Ornda Healthcorp in 2d Merger in Two Weeks
In the latest in a surge of hospital mergers as the health care industry girds for sweeping national change, Ornda Healthcorp announced its second acquisition in two weeks yesterday.
The deal will create a 46-hospital chain that measured by the number of hospitals would create the nation's third-largest investor-owned chain of community hospitals.


Train Kills 2 Girls
A Long Island Rail Road commuter train struck and killed two teenage girls yesterday near the Stony Brook station in Suffolk County, the police said.
The two girls, who appeared to have thrown themselves in front of the train in a joint suicide, were found on the track shortly after 6 P.M. when the engineer of another train spotted them and stopped his train, said Officer Kathleen Ryan of the Suffolk County Police.


Herman E. Cooper, 88, Lawyer in Manhattan
Herman E. Cooper, a Manhattan lawyer for more than 40 years, died yesterday at his Manhattan apartment.
He was 88.
The cause was kidney failure, said his son, Thomas J. Cooper.


MPSI Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on Nov. 14 about revisions in M.B.A. programs referred incompletely to changes at the Haas School of Business at the University of California at Berkeley.
An international business course replaced an accounting course at the undergraduate level, not the graduate level.


Head of Medellin Cocaine Cartel Is Killed by Troops in Colombia
Pablo Escobar, who rose from the slums of Colombia to become one of the world's most murderous and successful cocaine traffickers, was killed in a hail of gunfire yesterday in a rooftop shootout with security forces in his hometown of Medellin, officials in Bogota reported.
Caught in a hideout in the heart of the city that served as the base of a drug empire that once reached across the Western Hemisphere and Europe, the 44-year-old fugitive with an $8.7 million price on his head was surrounded by 500 police officers and soldiers and shot to death, officials said.
A bodyguard was also reported slain.


SSE Telecom reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Arthur Lodge; Broadcaster, 75
Arthur Lodge, a longtime executive in television and radio news broadcasting, died on Sunday in Marietta, Ga.
He was 75.
The cause was a heart attack, said his daughter, Margaret Bailey, with whom he lived.


Corrections
A picture caption on Nov. 23 about a meeting in Cuba between President Fidel Castro and the President of China misstated the Chinese leader's surname at one point.
He is Jiang Zemin; Jiang is the surname.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  COLOMBIA DRUG BOSS IS SLAIN  Pablo Escobar Gaviria, one of the world's most murderous and successful cocaine traffickers, was killed in shootout with Colombian security forces, officials said.
A1  Colombia won a symbolic battle in a war that appears to be lost.
A12  NEW HOPE FOR TRADE ACCORD  Negotiators for the United States and the European Community made important progress on many issues, especially agriculture.
A1


Pall Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


For Children


Carl Karcher Enterprises Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


Stocks Higher in Uninspired Trading
Stocks closed slightly higher in a lackluster session yesterday in which early momentum faded following investor caution ahead of today's November employment data.
After opening strongly on the leftover energy from the gains of the previous day and from overseas markets, which also rallied for the second consecutive day, the market settled into a narrow trading range.


Art in Review
Sylvia Wald
Hirschl &amp; Adler Galleries  21 East 70th Street  Manhattan  Through Jan. 8
This exhibition of Sylvia Wald's Abstract Expressionist prints primarily from the 1950's and 60's is a pleasure to see, and a reminder of the contribution that Ms.
Wald made to the art of that period.
She had her first solo exhibition of painting and sculpture at the A.C.A.
Gallery in Manhattan in 1939, and, partly at the encouragement of that gallery's staff, she took up silk-screening, or screen printing.
She joined the Silk Screen Group in 1941, and studied the fundamentals of the technique with the artist Harry Gottlieb.


Rykoff-Sexton Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Velcro Industries (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Film; The Turning Point for a Plain Jane
In "A Dangerous Woman," Debra Winger sinks deeply into the drab role of Martha Horgan, a sheltered innocent living in a small California town.
Characters like Martha have a way of attracting the storyteller's interest at a very precise point in their lives.
It is the moment just before the character's peaceful existence is ruptured by some seismic force, a force like sex or death or a symbolic coming of age.
"A Dangerous Woman" is soap opera enough to churn up all three.
With Ms.
Winger's eerily convincing performance as its centerpiece, the film creates a world of sexual chicanery that would do any television series proud.
Martha is taken care of by her Aunt Frances (Barbara Hershey), a rich, beautiful widow involved in an extramarital affair with a state assemblyman (John Terry).
That liaison starts off the film with a suitable bang, as the assemblyman's wife (Laurie Metcalf) drunkenly drives her car into the widow's front porch as a means of registering her irritation.


The Spoken Word
"A POETS LAUREATE ANNIVERSARY READING," Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
Joseph Brodsky, Rita Dove, Czeslaw Milosz, Octavio Paz and Derek Walcott read from their work.
Tomorrow at 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 274-0343.
"VOICES LOST," Kaplan Penthouse, 10th floor, Rose Building, 165 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center.
A reading of poems, novels and plays written by people who have since died of AIDS.
A benefit for Other Voices.
Tonight at 8.
Admission: $15.
Information: (212) 666-3909.
PHILIP LEVINE, Universalist Church, 76th Street and Central Park West.
The poet reads from his work.
Tonight at 8 P.M.
Admission: $8.
Information: (212) 875-4122.
JACQUELINE CAREY, Beatrix Books and Pix, 33-18 Broadway, Astoria, Queens.
The author of "Good Gossip" reads and signs her book.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 204-5775.
"A READING WITH LYNNE SHARON SCHWARTZ," New York Open Center, 83 Spring Street, SoHo.
The author reads from her novel "The Fatigue Artist." Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Admission: $10.
Information: (212) 219-2527.
"POETRY SLAM," Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
Vipin, a poet, reads from his work, and Yvette Davella, Gia, Daniella Gioseffi, Carl Hancock Rux, Mike Ladd and Mac read their work in a poetry competition.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $10.
Information: (212) 505-8183.
TALKS AT THE WHITNEY, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"Vija Celmins," tomorrow at 2 P.M.; "In a Classical Vein," tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.; "Mike Kelley," Sunday at 2 P.M.
The lectures, all by Vivian Bobka, are free with museum admission: $6; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3611.
TALKS AND WALKING TOURS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, near Delancey Street.
"How We Lived: Life in a New York City Tenement," a lecture, Sunday at 11 A.M.
"Immigrant Story," a drama about the lives of immigrants at the turn of the century, Sunday at noon; admission: $10; $8 for the elderly; $5 for students.
"Tales From Many Lands," a storytelling show, Sunday at 1 P.M.; admission: $5; $3 for children.
"The Streets Where We Lived," a tour of the Lower East Side, Sunday at 2 P.M.
"House of Heritage," a slide show recounting the history of 97 Orchard Street, Sunday at 3 P.M.
Lecture and slide show: $4; $3 for children.
Walking tours: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 431-0233.


Dinkins Panel Has Grim View Of Fiscal Gaps
Sketching a grim portrait of New York City's fiscal condition, a panel appointed by Mayor David N. Dinkins reported yesterday that the city's long-term budget problems were more severe than previously estimated.
The committee also outlined what it called a "menu" of Draconian and politically unpalatable measures -- including layoffs of city workers, fees for residential garbage collection, postponing of planned hiring of police officers, increases in the sales tax and in property taxes for single-family homeowners, and putting tolls on more East River bridges -- from which city officials could choose to achieve long-term budget balance.


Review/Theater; A Tale of Africa's Past That Haunts the Present
As "Njinga the Queen King" begins, a character describes time as circular; past generations are never far away from the present.
That African concept makes for a music-theater work, written and directed by Ione with music by Pauline Oliveros, that bounces restlessly through the last 400 years, pausing only for some spectacular dancing and drumming.
It opened on Wednesday night at the Majestic Theater as part of the Next Wave Festival of the Brooklyn Academy of Music; it continues there through tomorrow.
Njinga was a king's daughter who seized the throne of Ndongo (now Angola) in 1623 and ruled for 40 years, wearing her father's attire and attended by male concubines dressed as women.
She maintained her kingdom's integrity in the colonial era through both military and diplomatic skill, pitting the area's two colonial powers, the Portuguese and the Dutch, against each other.


Sounds Around Town
Kings, Shepherds, Angels
"Bending Toward the Light . . . a Jazz Nativity," Stephen Wise Free Synagogue, 30 West 68th Street, Manhattan, (212) 371-9341.
After seven Christmas seasons at St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church, this jazz celebration of the Nativity, written and produced by Anne Phillips and the saxophonist Bob Kindred, is moving this year to the Stephen Wise Free Synagogue.
As in the past, all the roles -- the Three Kings, the Shepherds and the Guardian Angels -- will be played in full costume by such celebrated jazz artists as Dave Brubeck, Jon Faddis, Lionel Hampton, Billy Taylor, Tito Puente and Al Grey and the tap dancer Jimmy Slyde.
The first of five performances will be given on Sunday at 5 P.M., followed by ones on Monday at 8 P.M., Tuesday at 5 and 8 P.M., and Wednesday at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $20 for adults, $10 for children.
Doors open 45 minutes before each performance for preshow music.
JOHN S. WILSON Scat, With Accordion
Nancy Marano and Eddie Monteiro, Tishman Auditorium, the New School, 66 West 12th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4690.
Nancy Marano, a pianist and singer, and Eddie Monteiro, who sings while he plays an accordion that houses a miniaturized organ with synthesizer effects, are an unusual and provocative team.
Mr.
Monteiro's vocal style -- built on crisply popped scat syllables and lazy hums, which are often intermingled with lyrics -- is inspired by the late Brazilian accordionist Sivuca.
Miss Marano can mix soaring ballad lines with rapid-fire improvisations that make the duets into updated versions of the sounds of the Boswell sisters in the 1930's and Lambert, Hendricks and Ross in the 1950's.
The concert, tonight at 6, is part of the New School's long-running "Jazz at 6" series.
Tickets, $10 apiece, are available at the door.
J.
S.
W.


SCIENTISTS ISOLATE GENE THAT CAUSES CANCER OF COLON
Just half a year after announcing the detection of an entirely novel way that cancer can begin, scientists have isolated the gene responsible for the misdeed.
The discovery opens a new phase in the genetics revolution, with all its wild promise and ethical quandaries.
In its defective form, the gene predisposes people to an extremely common type of colon cancer, called hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer.
The familial disorder is thought to account for 10 to 15 percent of all colon tumors, or as many as 22,000 cases of the cancer each year.


A Gesture for Homeless Children


Petrie Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Art in Review
Barbara Morgan
Laurence Miller Gallery  138 Spring Street  SoHo  Through Dec. 30
Barbara Morgan, who died last year at the age of 92, pursued many photographic themes in her long and distinguished career, and to do justice to the full range of her work would require more space than the gallery allows.
But this welcome if disjointed show does offer the chance to see some of Morgan's best-known images.


U.N. Agency Finds No Assurance On North Korean Atomic Program
The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency declared for the first time today that there was no longer any "meaningful assurance" that North Korea was using its nuclear materials solely for peaceful purposes, adding pressure on the Clinton Administration to reach a diplomatic accord with the North in the next several weeks or move to economic sanctions.
At the opening of a meeting of the agency's board of governors in Vienna, Hans Blix, the agency's director general, stopped just short of saying that the inspection process had totally broken down because of the North's refusal to allow regular inspections.
But his aides made it clear that he was ready to make such a declaration by the end of the month, a step that officials in Washington and Seoul have said would mean sanctions.


Gilliam Wants to Engage a Certain Sun
Armon Gilliam and Charles Barkley were teammates with the 76ers for almost a year and a half.
But don't look for them to be hanging out together after Barkley and the Suns play the Nets Friday night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"No, I won't be in the Charles Barkley fan club," said Gilliam, who was waived by Philadelphia on July 28 and was picked up by the Nets on Aug. 11.
"He had a problem with me because he couldn't control me or dominate me or tell me what to do. For him, it was a personal thing. My position is I forgive him for his ignorance and I have nothing that I'm holding against him."


Diner's Journal
By Lincoln Center
It seems more like the roaring 80's than the frugal 90's at Iridium, which has been created with more than $3 million worth of custom tilework, curving copper, undulating coffered ceilings and smoked glass.
The old O'Neal's Baloon, at 44 West 63d Street, across the street from Lincoln Center, has been transformed with shades of gold, burgundy and apricot by Jordan Mozer, an architect based in Chicago who never puts a straight edge where he can throw a curve.
He designed Vivere in Chicago, Cypress Club in San Francisco and Americas in Houston as well as some of the furniture in Mad. 61 in the new Barneys on Madison Avenue in Manhattan.
But Iridium, opening next week, is his first major project in New York City.
The theme of the design is music and dance.
The copper roof line is meant to suggest the sound box and the finial of stringed instruments.
Metal brackets are made in the shapes of the keys on wind instruments.


KCS Energy Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executive Changes
AMCAST INDUSTRIAL CORP., Dayton, Ohio, named John H. Shuey president and chief operating officer.
He succeeds Leo W. Ladehoff, who will remain chairman and chief executive.
AMERICAN BRANDS INC., Old Greenwich, Conn., named Peter Wilson chairman and chief executive of its British-based Gallaher Ltd. unit effective Feb. 1.
Mr.
Wilson, 52, will replace Anthony Househam, 61, who will retire from the company at the end of January.


Brown Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Mixed Signals From Mr. Giuliani
With his first two appointments, Mayor-elect Rudolph Giuliani sends mixed messages about the quality New Yorkers can expect to see in his administration.
In choosing William Bratton as the new police commissioner, Mr.
Giuliani brings back to New York City a man who proved to be a serious crime fighter during his 21-month tenure as head of the Transit Police.
But Mr.
Giuliani's choice of the Board of Education member Ninfa Segarra as his deputy mayor for education and community affairs is much less reassuring.
Mr.
Bratton, who has served as Police Commissioner in his native Boston since June, was chosen over New York's present Commissioner, Raymond Kelly, who was appointed in October 1992 by Mayor David Dinkins.
Mr.
Kelly, a career officer, is well liked by the rank and file.
He understands the day-to-day grind of police work and was on the right track in emphasizing community policing.


GIULIANI APPOINTS BOSTONIAN TO RUN NEW YORK'S POLICE
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday named William J. Bratton, the flamboyant Police Commissioner of Boston, to lead New York City's Police Department and make good on Mr.
Giuliani's campaign promises to wage a war on crime that would sweep up street-level drug dealers, make schools safer, and shield New Yorkers from violence.
For Mr.
Bratton, the appointment marked a triumphant return to New York, where he won wide praise during 21 months at the helm of the transit police, often riding the subways to check the morale of his officers.
Accepting the Challenge
At a news conference in Mr.
Giuliani's transition headquarters, Mr.
Bratton said in his Boston accent that he accepted the Mayor-elect's challenge to "restore order, to bring back to the streets of the city of New York a sense of well-being, to begin to improve the quality of life in this great city."


Surety Bond For Westpac
The Capital Markets Assurance Corporation, a New York financial guarantee insurance concern, said this week that it would provide a $100 million surety bond to guarantee obligations of Westpac Derivative Products Ltd., a subsidiary of the Westpac Banking Corporation of Sydney, Australia.
The surety bond and $100 million of capital contributed by Westpac Banking enabled Westpac Derivative to earn the highest triple-A ratings from Moody's Investors Service Inc. and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


In Latin vs. Yiddish, The 'Oys' Have It
Oyez!
Oyez!
Make that oy, vay! oy, vay!
All persons are requested to draw near and give their attention.
A linguistic tribunal is now in session, Judge Alex Kozinski presiding.
The verdict: Yiddish may be replacing stuffy Latin phrases "as the spice in American legal argot."


Atwood Oceanics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Pundits Err in India
Since independence in 1947, despite notable wobbles, India has hewed to the democratic and secular compact that has kept a huge, highly diverse country from flying apart.
That Gandhian compact has been severely tested by a Hindu nationalist movement called the Bharatiya Janata or Indian People's Party.
Hindu voters in recent years turned this minor party into a major force in state and national elections.
Many were drawn to its promises of change, and an end to "appeasement" of "minorities," meaning the 120 million Indian Muslims, who comprise 14 percent of the population.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.07
3.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.10
3.28
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.25
3.43
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.34
5.32
6.56
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.28
6.25
7.55
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.31
7.31
8.54
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.66
5.67
6.41
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


People
*
Jay Quinn, chief operating officer at Eric Mower &amp; Associates, Syracuse, was named to the new positions of managing partner and chief operating officer at the agency's Rochester office. *
Donna-Ann P. Hayden was named to the new position of senior vice president of consumer marketing at Bozell Public Relations, New York.
She was previously a senior vice president of alternative media at Grybauskas Beatrice, New York.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about restrictions on journalists covering a Canadian murder case misstated the dates of the killings.
Leslie Mahaffy, 14, was slain in June 1991 and Kristen French, 15, was killed in April 1992.


Magna International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A NEW U.S. STANCE ON ATOMIC WASTES
The Secretary of Energy said today that her department had a "moral obligation" to help electric utilities store spent fuel from nuclear reactors, even though the department could not keep its promise to take the fuel off their hands beginning in 1998.
In a sharp turnaround from the Bush Administration, which denied it had any responsibility for the waste, she said her department might cover the utilities' cost for storage.


Schools Need to Teach Alternatives to Violence
To the Editor:
We applaud your editorial of Nov. 23 on "Controlling School Violence." A "fresh, coordinated attack on the violence convulsing New York City schools" is urgently needed, and we offer a few suggestions.


Subway Data On Punctuality Manipulated, A Study Finds
The Transit Authority's methods for determining how often subways depart on time from the terminals are riddled with problems and have led to gross overstatements about performance success, according to a study released yesterday by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's Inspector General.
Unlike other records kept by the Transit Authority about on-time performance, which are made public, the on-time departure statistics were for internal use only, posing questions about the agency's ability to assess its weaknesses accurately.
It also raises doubts about the accuracy of the published on-time figures, which monitor the trains along their routes.  46% of Trains Left on Time
The investigation by Inspector General Henry P. Flinter, conducted in April and May, discovered during random checks at all terminals that only 46 percent of 305 trains left on time, meaning they departed within a 45-second window when a green light signaled for them to go.
By contrast, the Transit Authority records for 1992 showed that 96 percent of trains started their trips on time.


Home Video
Video distributors say the public doesn't fathom new video CD systems on the market, but if a test promotion in California is any indication, many people are interested.
In 52 of its stores in the San Francisco area, Blockbuster is testing demand for CD hardware and software.
Included are three disk systems used with television sets and two used with computers.


Morita, Sony Founder, Hospitalized
Akio Morita, co-founder and chairman of the Sony Corporation and the leading statesman of Japan's business community, has suffered a cerebral hemorrhage that will force his withdrawal, at least temporarily, from company activities and from his increasingly prominent role as soother of trade tensions between the United States and Japan.
Sony officials said today that Mr.
Morita had been taken to a Tokyo hospital Tuesday morning after feeling ill while playing tennis.
His condition was diagnosed, and he underwent immediate surgery to remove blood from his brain.


Fear of Bomb Closes Tunnel During the Morning Rush
The Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel was closed for more than two hours yesterday morning after a Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority officer discovered a metal box in the Manhattan-bound tube that he believed might be a bomb, the police said.
The New York City Police Department Bomb Squad was called in, and the suspicious object was found to be a toolbox that the police said might have fallen out of a vehicle.


Olajuwon Ineligible For U.S. In Games
For Hakeem (the Dream) Olajuwon, the question of participation in the 1996 Summer Olympics has become something of a nightmare.
Officials of the International Basketball Federation have said that Olajuwon, the Houston Rockets' Nigerian-born center who recently became an American citizen, is not eligible to play for the United States in the Atlanta Summer Games.
Blocking him is an arcane bylaw of the basketball federation that prohibits athletes who have played on the national team for one country from ever playing on the national team for another country.
In Olajuwon's case, he participated as a 17-year-old on the Nigerian junior national team in 1980 in a tournament in Africa.


4 Officers Save 6-Year-Old From Burning Apartment
Groping on their hands and knees through smoke so thick that one of them mistook a doll for a baby, four police officers rescued a 6-year-old yesterday from a burning apartment in Brooklyn.
The rescued child, Michael Johnson, benefited from a lucky bit of timing.
Realizing that one of her seven children was still in the burning apartment at 1317 Union Street in Crown Heights, Maria Johnson, 39, ran, screaming, into the street a few minutes after 3 A.M., just as a patrol car was passing.


Books of The Times; Helpful Hints for an Era of Practical Feminism
Fire With Fire
The New Female Power and How It Will Change the 21st Century
By Naomi Wolf
373 pages. Random House. $21.
Naomi Wolf's messy new treatise, "Fire With Fire," is really two books.
The first aspires to be a kind of sequel to Susan Faludi's best seller, "Backlash," arguing that a new era of gender politics is at hand.
The second purports to be a manifesto for a new, inclusive brand of feminism eschewing extremism and rigid ideology.
As Ms.
Wolf, the author of "The Beauty Myth" (1991), sees it, the backlash against feminism culminated during the years of the Ronald Reagan Administration and ended with the Anita F. Hill-Clarence A. Thomas hearings of October 1991.
Those hearings, she argues, focused women's anger and galvanized the development of what she calls the "genderquake": that is, a major shift in the balance of power between American men and women, accompanied by "unprecedented female political activism."


Trenton's Matter of State: Legislators and a Dog
Taking on one of the more bizarre issues ever to reach the floor of the Legislature, the Assembly today debated whether to grant clemency to a death-row dog whose plight has inspired international appeals for clemency and cost a small fortune in legal fees as the case made its way to the State Supreme Court.
After an hourlong debate in which the dog, a 5-year-old Akita named Taro, was portrayed alternatively as a gentle pet in the mold of "Lassie" and a murderous beast the likes of "Cujo," the Assembly essentially deadlocked on the vote.
The sponsor of the clemency bill, Assemblyman Joseph Azzolina, Republican of Middletown, asked that it be withdrawn.


Rotech Medical Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Helen Marshall; Painter, 88
Helen Marshall, an American painter and art teacher, died on Nov. 24 at her home in Lavenham, Sussex, England.
She was 88.
Mrs.
Marshall, who was born in New York City, studied art here and then in Paris, where she began teaching.
She later taught at the Parsons School in New York City, where she headed the life drawing department.
She had her first one-woman show in 1954 at the Durlacher Galleries in Manhattan.
Her work was also shown by the Museum of Modern Art and the Whitney Museum of American Art.


Russia Election: Some Rah-Rah, No Sis-Boom-Bah
Russia's precipitate election campaign entered its home stretch today with blocs led by two old-time reform rivals leading the pack, but with a large clump of voters still undecided or altogether uninterested.
Today was the last day that public-opinion polls could be published before the Dec. 12 election for a new Parliament, and they showed that Russia's Choice, led by Deputy Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar and tacitly backed by President Boris N. Yeltsin, still holds a commanding lead.


Knicks Are Splintered By One Tough Bench
"Sit down!" yelled a fan behind the Houston Rockets' bench early in the second quarter last night, as Hakeem Olajuwon stepped back and gave Patrick Ewing another handsome facial.
No one in a red warmup suit paid any attention.
No one, not Mario Elie, Carl Herrera or Scott Brooks, even turned around.
This was going to be the night for an aroused Rockets bench to stand up and, finally, be seen, heard and acknowledged.


Petrolite Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


For Yanks, Pitching Market Now Bearish
Anyone for Off Season Plan, Part 6?
Does anyone actually have a Part 6?
The Yankees must unearth one quickly.
They are stuck in the unsettling position of devising another plan to obtain a quality starter now that Dennis Martinez, their most recent target, signed a two-year, $9 million contract yesterday with the Cleveland Indians.
With Martinez out of the picture, General Manager Gene Michael must stare at the ever-shortening list of free agents, ponder his budget and try to perform the daunting task of bringing a starter to the Bronx.
With the $45 million payroll limit that George Steinbrenner has instituted, a trade for a pitcher seems unlikely unless the Yankees magically unload some expensive contracts.
Does anyone want Danny Tartabull, Matt Nokes or Spike Owen?
No Budget Busting
The financial constraints plagued Michael as he pursued Martinez.
A person with knowledge of discussions between Michael and Ron Shapiro, Martinez's agent, said Shapiro continually asked the general manager if New York could match Cleveland as the club increased its offer.
Michael responded, "If I can get rid of salary."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI PICKS BRATTON TO LEAD POLICE
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani named William J. Bratton, the flamboyant Police Comissioner of Boston, to lead New York City's Police Department and make good on Mr.
Giuliani's campaign promises to wage a war on crime.
A1.


Sports of The Times; Basketball Surviving Quite Nicely
ISN'T it a shame what has happened to the National Basketball Association since Magic retired, since Bird's back went out, since Michael packed it in, since Laimbeer no longer had the body or the heart for tag-team basketball?
No heroes, no villains, no fun.
Hakeem Olajuwon did not go along with that theory.
He thought there were a few stars left.
He is much too modest to mention any by name, but you could draw your own conclusions after the old-fashioned lunch-eating Hakeem performed over and around Patrick Ewing last night in a very full and very stunned Madison Square Garden.





Spec's Music Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Zapata Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hunt for Kidnapped Girl, 12, Is Narrowed to Small Woods
The police and Federal agents searching for a 12-year-old girl kidnapped from her bedroom two months ago narrowed their hunt today to a small wooded area where the police had encountered a man shortly after the abduction.
The police said the spot was where Sonoma County sheriff's deputies helped Richard Allen Davis, 39, pull his car out of a ditch within an hour of the abduction of Polly Hannah Klaas on Oct. 1.
The authorities said Mr.
Davis, who was arrested on Tuesday on a parole violation and was being held in the Mendocino County Jail, was now the prime suspect in the case, although he had not been charged in the kidnapping.
Abducted From Slumber Party
Polly was abducted shortly before midnight on Oct. 1 from her Petaluma home, where she and two friends were having a slumber party.
The other girls, who were not harmed, described a bearded man who took Polly away at knifepoint.


When Going Gets Tough, Giants Get Stuck in Sand
Phil Simms buckles when asked what the National Football League can do to improve scoring, and thus make the game more exciting.
No more tinkering, Simms said today.
Leave it alone and the game will be fine.
"There's nothing wrong with the game," he said.
"It's still the most exciting game. I don't care what anybody says."
Besides, Simms argued, do you want the N.F.L. to turn into Arena Football?


Shorewood Packaging Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Wiley (John) &amp; Sons Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Restaurants
Restaurant Raphael
There are four steps down to Restaurant Raphael.
With each one you travel backward eight years.
By the time you walk in the door you have reached the 1960's, when restaurants were polite places and noise was never a problem.
You can't help looking around Raphael with a kind of wonder.
That little garden out back (still green, despite the cold), that fireplace, the mural -- it is all like some cozy romantic holdover from a long-gone era.
The room is filled with all the soft sounds good restaurants once contained: the gentle clink of glasses, the whoosh of unfolding napkins, the low voice of the hostess.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AFFINITY BIOTECH INC., Boothwyn, Pa., signed a letter of intent to buy privately held Bio-Pharm Clinical Services Inc. for $25 million in stock and options.


Art in Review
Kiki Smith
Fawbush Gallery  76 Grand Street  SoHo  Through Dec. 23
Kiki Smith's work over the last decade has been a sustained, single-minded meditation on the vulnerability of the body.
Early images in wax, glass or paper tended to be emblematic and lyrical, but the sculptures of crouching, defecating women from her last gallery show were harrowingly realistic images of humiliation through pain.


Times Mirror President Is Resigning
The president of the Times Mirror Company and publisher of The Los Angeles Times, its flagship newspaper, will step down Jan. 1 because he is suffering from Parkinson's disease, the company announced today.
David Laventhol, 60, will be succeeded as publisher of The Times by Richard T. Schlosberg 3d, 49, a Times Mirror senior vice president who was responsible for the media company's Eastern dailies.


Costs of Depression Are on a Par With Heart Disease, a Study Says
The annual cost of depression in America is $43.7 billion, on a par with heart disease, according to a study made public yesterday.
About 11 million people suffer from depression in a given year, and for nearly two-thirds it goes undiagnosed and untreated, said the study, which was published in The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry.


Chambers and Ellis Suspended by N.B.A.
TOM CHAMBERS of the Utah Jazz and LaPHONSO ELLIS of the Denver Nuggets were suspended for one game each and fined $5,000 yesterday by the National Basketball Association.
Chambers and Ellis were disciplined for their actions during Tuesday night's game in Salt Lake City.


3 People Are Recommended by Moynihan for Federal Judgeships
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan recommended three people for Federal judgeships yesterday, including a Manhattan lawyer who would become the first judge of Chinese ancestry to sit on the Federal bench in New York's Southern District.
In addition to recommending the nomination of Denny Chin, the Democratic Senator put forward the names of John G. Koeltl, a former Watergate prosecutor, and Lewis A. Kaplan, who had previously been recommended to the New York State Court of Appeals.


Review/Film; Part Myth, Part History, Part Art and All Horse
"Mazeppa," which calls itself a speculative meditation on the life and art of the French Romantic painter Theodore Gericault, is a film that will literally make you dizzy.
Conceived and directed by Bartabas, a renowned horse trainer and impresario of the Theatre Equestre Zingaro, it is an equestrian fever dream that suggests Peter Shaffer's play "Equus," but with the mystical fervor multiplied severalfold.
Filmed largely in Bartabas's theater in Aubervilliers, France, "Mazeppa" has many breathtaking scenes of the troupe performing gymnastic feats on the backs of horses.
As the camera tracks the animals trotting around and around the circus ring, you can lose your balance in the gliding merry-go-round swirl.


Canadian Imperial Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Steve's Homemade Ice Cream (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Bosnia Talks: A 3-Way Split
Amid all the inconclusive arguments between the warring factions in Bosnia here this week, one thing became clear: nobody believes in the international proposal for a Union of Republics of Bosnia and Herzegovina and everyone is preparing for a carve-up of the former Yugoslav republic.
Officially, the goal of the peace initiative sponsored by the European Community is still a Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina comprised of largely autonomous, largely ethnically uniform Muslim, Serbian and Croatian mini-republics.
Such a preservation, at least on paper, of a single country would also preserve a supposedly sacrosanct international principle: that the borders of a state recognized by the United Nations cannot be altered by force.


CBS Officer Plans to Quit
Jay Kriegel, a senior vice president of CBS Inc. who led two efforts to win regulatory relief for the broadcast networks, said yesterday that he would leave the network early next year.
Mr.
Kriegel led the battle to acquire financial rights for networks in syndicated programs.
He also fought to allow networks to seek fees from cable companies for rights to carry network programs.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Indian politics misstated the duration of the Congress Party's rule.
Since independence in 1947, that rule has been interrupted not once but twice, from 1977 to 1980 and from 1989 to 1991.


Editors' Note
An article on Oct. 16 about the status of Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip since the signing of the accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization reported without attribution that Palestinians used to be arrested for carrying watermelon slices because the fruit was the colors of the banned Palestinian flag.


Steele L. Winterer; Carpet Manufacturer, 88
Steele L. Winterer, a retired New York carpet manufacturer, died on Sunday at the Moorings Park Health Center in Naples, Fla.
He was 88.
The cause was complications after a stroke, said his son, Philip S. Winterer.


Issues in World Trade Talks
Negotiators are attempting to bring down tariffs and other trade barriers to spur economic growth.
An explanatory chart.
Page D17.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about the entry of United Nations relief convoys into Sarajevo referred incorrectly in some editions to the Bosnian city of Mostar.
It is in the southwest, not the southeast.


Clinton Welfare Planners Outline Big Goals Financed by Big Saving
President Clinton's task force on welfare reform has translated his pledge to "end welfare as we know it" into a plan to spend significant new sums on child care, work and job training programs.
But the plan provides few specifics about the financing and says its ambitious goals can be paid for entirely by cuts or savings in welfare or other programs for the needy.
A draft of the plan was completed 12 days ago and is subject to revisions before it is presented to Mr.
Clinton.


Brooklyn Principal Rejects New Post
The maverick principal who brought law and order to rough and tumble Boys and Girls High School in Bedford-Stuyvesant said yesterday that he would not accept a newly created job of improving safety throughout New York City's schools.
The principal, Frank Mickens, said in an interview that the $92,000-a-year liaison job, which carries the title Special Assistant to the Chancellor for School Environment, did not carry enough clear responsibility.
Though he declined the offer in a letter sent yesterday to Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, Mr.
Mickens did express interest in a deputy chancellorship.


With New U.S. Concessions, Canada Plans to Back Pact
Prime Minister Jean Chretien of Canada announced today that his Government had secured concessions from the United States on the North American Free Trade Agreement and was prepared to drop his opposition to the pact coming into force on Jan. 1.
The announcement removed a last uncertainty about the institution of the three-country accord, which would eliminate most duties and investment barriers within the United States, Canada and Mexico over the next 15 years.


'This New World': One Military-Industry Family Struggles
The two couples at the Podolskys' dinner table had spent their lives working for the Russian military-industrial complex, which dominates this city.
The work could be hard, they said, but it was patriotic, and they had been well-enough paid.
Now, with the Soviet Union gone and military orders down sharply, factories in trouble and layoffs no longer just a rumor, the Podolskys and Kondratenkos have begun to wonder if the sacrifices were worthwhile.


Ram Under Indictment
DARRYL HENLEY, a Los Angeles Rams cornerback since 1989, was indicted yesterday on six counts of participating in a cocaine trafficking ring that extended from Southern California to Tennessee and Georgia.
Henley, 27, will appear before United States Magistrate RONALD ROSE in the United States Court in Santa Ana, Calif., for arraignment, according to Assistant United States Attorney DEIRDRE ELIOT.
Eliot said bail would be determined at that time.


Russia's Workers Pay Price As Military Industries Fade
In the 1940's, the secret ministry charged with developing the Soviet atomic bomb took over the tiny village of Obninsk.
About 65 miles southwest of Moscow, it was close enough to be central, but far enough away not to endanger the capital and the Soviet leadership in the event of a nuclear accident.
Today, what is now called the Russian Atomic Energy Ministry remains in effect the owner of Obninsk.
The main city square of what has become a well-kept city of 120,000 features an electronic sign that shows the time, the temperature and the radiation level.


Sounds Around Town
Alto Improviser
Gary Bartz, Dan Shaku, 300 East 41st Street, Manhattan, (212) 986-1809.
Surprise!
Another jazz club opens up, and already has a reputation as a comfortable place for musicians to "sit in." Mr.
Bartz, one of the finest living alto saxophonists and an explosive improviser, will be in this weekend, backed by Michael Weiss's trio.
Shows tomorrow night are at 9:30 and 12; on Sunday at 9 and 11:30 P.M.
There is a $15 cover and a two-drink minimum.
PETER WATROUS Exploring Contexts
Larry Willis, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
Mr.
Willis is one of the most imposing pianists of his generation, somebody at ease in all sorts of contexts, from be-bop and Latin to more exploratory music.
He'll be backed by one of jazz's great rhythm sections: Buster Williams on bass and Ben Riley on drums.
Mr.
Willis seldom leads his own group, so this is a rare opportunity to hear him in his own context.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 10, 12 and 2.
There is a $12 cover and an $8 minimum.
P.
W.


Art in Review
Kocheisen and Hullman
Annina Nosei Gallery  100 Prince Street  SoHo  Through Dec. 11
The German team of Thomas Kocheisen and Ulrike Hullman have gone to complicated lengths to produce some ordinary paintings.
The artists execute separate versions of a single photographic image, then display them side by side and unsigned, offering a comparative view of technical competence and psychological inflection (as products of a "masculine" versus "feminine" sensibility, for example).


Review/Ballet; The Mice, The Toys: Old Magic Ever New
"The Nutcracker" rules New York.
The film of George Balanchine's version of the holiday classic has conquered movie screens throughout the city.
But to see the one and only, the unique, original and inimitable "Nutcracker," dance lovers must flock to the New York State Theater, where the New York City Ballet presented its first "Nutcracker" of the season on Wednesday night.
And "Nutcracker" will reign supreme there through Jan. 2.
The production remains a charmer.
As in years past, mice menaced a happy home, toys defended it, a little girl made a dreamland journey and the Sugarplum Fairy welcomed her into the Land of Sweets.


Art in Review
Donald Baechler
Sperone-Westwater Gallery  140 Greene Street  SoHo  Through Dec. 23  Paul Kasmin Gallery  74 Grand Street  SoHo  Through Dec. 11


A New Hong Kong Proposal Brings a Warning by China
China and Britain both threatened today to step up their struggle over the future of democracy in Hong Kong when Gov.
Chris Patten said he would begin submitting constitutional changes to the colony's legislature this month without China's approval.
In Beijing, the Chinese Government promptly announced that Mr.
Patten's action would lead to a "breakdown" of the talks the two Governments have been holding since Mr.
Patten proposed to broaden the democratic franchise of Hong Kong's 5.5 million residents before 1997, when the colony is to revert to Chinese sovereignty.


More Questions Than Answers In the Death of School Tryout
More questions than answers remained today in the aftermath of the death of Joseph Marable, a 17-year-old cousin of the late Hank Gathers, who collapsed while trying out for the William Penn High School basketball team on Tuesday afternoon.
After three members of Marable's family were involved in a heated meeting with Coach Arnold Singletary and school and district officials this afternoon, the coach said he left the talks early.


At the Bar; A top Russian judge, in limbo, testifies to the perils and promise of law back home.
Sitting in a New York hotel room recently, Judge Ernest Ametistov of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation took a break from what he called "an absolutely crazy day," filled with speeches, reunions and conversations with the curious.
But the craziness Judge Ametistov found in Manhattan hardly compares to what he has seen in Moscow over the last two years.
Russia, he said, finds itself in a "battle between Communism and democracy, slavery and freedom, the past and the future," and his court, the nation's highest, has been caught in the crossfire.
After the jurisprudential Chernobyl that was the Soviet Union, the first buds of law sprouted through the ashes, only to wither as Russia's President, Boris N. Yeltsin, wrestled with its Parliament.


Sanderson Farms (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Murray, Martinez and Williams Relocate to Cleveland and Houston
The Houston Astros rescued Mitch Williams from a Philadelphia purgatory yesterday, while the Cleveland Indians, foreseeing financially fruitful days ahead with their new stadium, reunited a pair of aging free agents, Dennis Martinez and Eddie Murray.
Williams, who would probably have had to endure daily reminders of his devastating World Series failures with the Phillies, was traded to the Astros for their closing relief pitcher, Doug Jones, plus a young pitcher, Jeff Juden.
The Indians, who in the previous 10 days had lost out in their pursuit of free-agent pitchers Mark Portugal and Sid Fernandez, reached agreement with the 38-year-old Martinez on a two-year, $9 million contract.
They signed the 37-year-old Murray, the Mets' top run-producer the last two seasons, to a one-year contract with a $3 million salary.


Departing Commissioner Displays No Regrets
Raymond W. Kelly strode into the conference room at Police Headquarters once again yesterday, this time to answer questions about losing his job as the head of the department he joined as a police cadet in 1961, at age 19.
His feet planted squarely, he reflected on his long career in the New York Police Department.
He spoke graciously.
He joked.
He expressed disappointment.
He had no regrets.


Man in the News; Policing and Image: William Joseph Bratton
It was a few minutes before 1 P.M. in Police Commissioner William J. Bratton's office, but instead of being there, in the big room with the framed newspaper articles and models of old police cars, he was on television from New York City talking about his plans to become that city's police commissioner.
His television appearance more or less epitomized why people either love or hate William Joseph Bratton.
To his admirers, he came off as smooth and articulate, coolly confident of his ability to get the job done.
To his detractors, it was yet another example of a man who is aloof and ambitious, often seeking the limelight for his own end.


PACIFIC TELESIS PRICES SPINOFF OF CELLULAR UNIT
Trading will begin today in a newly formed company called the Pactel Corporation, a cellular telephone business that is being spun off by the Pacific Telesis Group, the Baby Bell based in San Francisco.
Sixty million shares, or 12 percent of the new company's stock, were priced yesterday by underwriters led by Salomon Brothers and Lehman Brothers at $23 a share.
Pacific Telesis had said it was expecting a price in the range of $21 to $23.
Pacific Telesis says it intends to distribute the rest of the stock to its existing shareholders, probably by in the first quarter of 1994.
Sales at the cellular unit climbed more than 20 percent for the first nine months of this year, to $800 million from $638 million.
Operating profits climbed to $118.5 million, from $71.4 million for the first nine months of 1992.


NATO Backs Broader Links With Ex-Soviet Allies
Western alliance foreign ministers gave general support today to an American plan calling for broader cooperation with the countries of the former Soviet bloc but stopping short of promising any of them early entry into NATO.
The American plan, called "partnership for peace," is expected to be formally approved by a meeting of President Clinton and other NATO leaders in Brussels on Jan. 10 and 11.


Review/Photography; No Cameras: It's Object to Image Direct
In his provocative new works at the Zabriskie Gallery, Joan Fontcuberta gives a fresh twist to old questions about photography's relationship to reality.
For several years Mr.
Fontcuberta, who is from Barcelona, Spain, has worked with the photogram process, a technique dating from photography's earliest days, which was revived in the 1920's by such artists as Man Ray and Laszlo Moholy-Nagy.
Photograms are produced without a camera or lens by placing objects directly onto paper coated with photosensitive emulsion, then exposing them to light.


CHRONICLE
It may not be the event WOODY ALLEN thinks of first when he looks back on the year 1993, but he is about to reach a milestone.
If he appears at Michael's Pub on East 55th Street for his regular Monday night performance on the clarinet, it will mark his 1,000th performance there.
"He's played here almost every Monday since 1971," GIL WIEST, the pub's owner, said yesterday.
"He misses very rarely, only if by chance he's out of town or sick. Last week as he was leaving, he said, 'I'll see you Monday.' "


INSIDE
U.S. Flies Aidid to Ethiopia
After ending a hunt for Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid of Somalia, the United States flew him to Addis Ababa for reconciliation talks.
Page A15.
Canada's Shift on Trade Pact
Canada got U.S. concessions on the North America Free Trade Agreement and will not oppose the pact coming into force on Jan. 1.
Page D1.
A Change of Course for Lilco
After years of increases tied to its never-completed Shoreham plant, The Long Island Lighting Company plans to freeze rates.
Page B1.
Volvo-Renault Merger Is Off
Volvo abandoned a proposed merger with Renault amid opposition from shareholders, prompting its chairman to resign.
Page D1.
Flight of Death for 18
Treacherous terrain impeded investigators at a man-made hill near Hibbing, Minn., where 18 people died in a commuter plane crash.
Page A20.


Review/Film; From Hell To an Arid Respite
The description "living hell" almost doesn't do justice to the portrait of life in a Sicilian sulphur mine during the 1930's that Aurelio Grimaldi's film "Acla"' paints.
Six days a week, the miners descend into a hole in the earth with pickaxes and baskets to chip away sulphur.
Because of the intense heat they work nearly naked, in yellowish-brown lantern light that turns them into gleaming penitents out of Dante's Inferno.
Sustenance is meager, and an olive or an almond is considered a treat.
At night the workers sleep in a cave, sprawled over one another like sweating animals.
Sodomy is rampant.
The Italian film, which is having its American premiere today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, tells the story of Acla (Francesco Cusimano), an 11-year-old boy whose father sells him to a fellow digger for 500 lira.
Working in the mine is a family tradition; Acla's father and brother have spent their lives in the pits.


DM Management Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Pale Journal; Winter Lashes Sarajevo and Both Sides Cower
The snow has frosted the pine trees on the mountains above Sarajevo with delicate tracery and laid a pristine white coating over the pointy-roofed ski chalets, the chairlifts and the gun positions.
In other times, the blizzard of the last three days this early in the season would have heralded fun and profit.
It was hardly a winter wonderland today.


Suicide Attempt Follows Killing, Police Say
Believing that his girlfriend was unfaithful to him, an East Harlem man slashed her throat, killing her as she lay in bed yesterday morning, then tried unsuccessfully to kill himself, the police said.
Using a kitchen knife, the suspect, Marco Pino, 25, killed Lisa Perez, 23, in their apartment at 302 East 126th Street, then he lay next to her and used the same knife on himself, the police said.


NCH Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


T.A.T. Tech. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gregory L. Broyles; Anti-AIDS Project Director, 43
Gregory L. Broyles, a leader in the fight against AIDS among black, Hispanic and Asian New Yorkers, died on Tuesday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 43 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pneumonia, said Michael Tate, a friend.


Navistar International Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


U.S. AND EUROPEANS REPORT KEY STEPS TO A TRADE ACCORD
The top trade negotiators for the United States and the European Community said today that they had made important, potentially decisive progress on a range of issues, including the nettlesome matter of farm exports, that could lead to a world trade accord.
"We have agreed upon an approach to all major issues that would pave the way to the completion of a substantive and comprehensive Uruguay Round," the United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, said here, referring to the negotiations on updating and broadening world trade rules that began seven years ago in Uruguay.
A Way to Break Recessions
The talks, under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, are widely seen as crucial for both economic and political reasons.
Success could help revive moribund economies in Japan and Europe, and stimulate uncertain economic recoveries in the United States and Britain.


Barneys Executive Resigns; She'll Join Italian Company
Connie Darrow, the senior vice president and general merchandise manager of women's fashion at Barneys New York, has resigned.
She is being replaced by Bonnie L. Pressman, who will add women's wear buying to her current responsibilities of cosmetics, accessories and shoes.


Interface Systems Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Zenith Laboratories
Shares of Zenith Laboratories rose sharply yesterday in active trading.
The maker of generic drugs is maneuvering to take advantage of the Government's push to lower medical costs.
The company plans to triple the number of drugs it sells, to 100 by 1997.


Treating Teen-Agers as Adults in Court: A Trend Born of Revulsion
In Denver, a child visiting the zoo last summer was hit by a bullet intended by one teen-ager for another.
In Salt Lake City, a 17-year-old was kicked, then shot to death by a knot of high-school students.
Along a Florida interstate highway, a British tourist was killed after pulling into a rest stop; among the suspects, a 13-year-old.
As if the gunshots summoned them, legislators in Colorado, Utah and Florida met in special sessions this fall and enacted measures making it easier to prosecute teen-agers as young as 14 as adults.
A half-dozen other states took similar steps earlier this year, and many more are considering them.


Accounts
*
Cellular One, West Palm Beach, Fla., to Crispin &amp; Porter Advertising, Miami, to handle advertising and promotions in the Florida region for the cellular communications company, previously handled by the agency on a project basis.
Billings were estimated at $5 million. *
Chattem Inc., Chattanooga, Tenn., to Laughlin/Constable, Milwaukee, as the first agency to handle creative projects for its Sun-In hair highlighting products.
Billings were not disclosed.


Irish Tackle Honored
A Notre Dame offensive tackle, AARON TAYLOR, accustomed to beating defensive linemen, did it again yesterday when he won the Lombardi Award as the nation's top college lineman.
He beat out three defensive players for the honor -- nose guards SAM ADAMS of Texas A&amp;M and ROB WALDROP of Arizona, and linebacker DERRICK BROOKS of Florida State.
Taylor, 6 feet 4 inches and 299 pounds, didn't play football until his junior year of high school, but he showed enough to be recruited by Notre Dame and was starting by his sophomore year.


Bacteria Are Linked to Deadly Childhood Disease
A team of scientists says it has discovered the cause of Kawasaki syndrome, an ailment that often leads to heart disease in children.
But experts on the disease said the claim might be overstated.
The findings, by scientists collaborating in Boston, Denver and Minneapolis, were made on 16 patients but have not been confirmed.
Their report is being published tomorrow in The Lancet, a British medical journal.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "TIMON OF ATHENS," Lyceum Theater, 149 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
Shakespeare's drama, set in the jazz age.
Closes Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $50.
Information: (212) 239-6280.


Technical Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


ABS Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Award for Kicker
JUDD DAVIS, a walk-on who won his job with Florida after the season began, was named yesterday as the winner of the Lou Groza Award as the nation's top place-kicker.


Kovalev Is Banished For Five Games
Rangers forward Aleksei Kovalev must serve a five-game suspension for tripping Dale Hunter of Washington in a game last Sunday night, the National Hockey League announced yesterday.
The penalty, handed down by the N.H.L.'s senior vice president, Brian Burke, matches the longest suspension given by the league this season and will cost Kovalev $27,343.75, his salary for five games.
Burke said yesterday that Kovalev's action in itself may not have been enough to warrant such a severe penalty, but that Kovalev's record of on-ice misbehavior this season had prompted him to send the young Russian forward a message.
The seriousness of the injury -- Hunter will miss four to six weeks with a torn anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee -- also played a part in Burke's decision.


Bomb Scare Closes Battery Tunnel and Disrupts Traffic


GAY WORKERS GAIN BIAS RULE AT F.B.I.
The Justice Department said today that the Federal Bureau of Investigation would not discriminate against homosexual employees, an accusation leveled against it in the past.
The department made its announcement in a statement by Attorney General Janet Reno, who added sexual orientation to the department's list of unacceptable forms of employment discrimination -- race, color, religion, sex, national origin or disability.


Songwriters See Copyrights Infringed in Rap Parody Case
To the Editor:
Your Critic's Notebook article on the "Oh, Pretty Woman" rap parody case pending before the Supreme Court substantially mischaracterizes the views of the United States community of songwriters and music publishers ("Parody, Not Smut, Has Rappers in Court," Nov. 13).


Reporter's Notebook; For Cuba, Mixed Scores In Games and in Politics
When the game was over, and after the Cubans in their bright red uniforms had exchanged handshakes with the San Juan Senators in white uniforms emblazoned with the name of its sponsor, Puerto Rico's major bank, the chant rose from the packed stands.
"Quedate aqui! Quedate aqui!" Stay here! Stay here!


Schools Need to Teach Alternatives to Violence; Front-Line Soldiers
To the Editor:
We take exception to your Nov. 24 news article on the underreporting of school-based crime statistics for the New York City schools.
Specifically, we are outraged by the statement, paraphrased from a panel study, "that principals often cover up assaults and other school crimes," which gives the impression that school principals are criminally negligent bureaucrats who are less concerned about children's lives and more worried about protecting their own keisters.


Massachusetts Museum Idea Adjusted
The troubled plan for a Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art, once envisioned as the world's largest contemporary art museum, has reappeared in a new guise.
The museum's Cultural Development Commission approved a proposal yesterday under which the museum would instead become a multi-disciplinary cultural center containing art galleries, performing-arts and rehearsal spaces, artist studios and production facilities for the visual and performing arts.
The cultural center would occupy part of a complex of 28 abandoned factory buildings on 13.5 acres in North Adams, Mass., in the northwestern corner of the state.


Leo Paquin, 83, One of Fordham's Blocks of Granite
Leo Paquin, one of the nine Seven Blocks of Granite who made Fordham's front line into a formidable football force in 1936 and 1937, died yesterday at his home in Rutherford, N.J.
He was 83 years old.
His wife, Elsie, who could give no cause of death, said her husband died in his sleep.


Bronx Man Dies After Struggle With Officers
A 28-year-old Bronx man who had been running naked in the hallway of his apartment building died in a hospital early yesterday about an hour after he fought with police officers who had struggled to subdue him, the police said.
The man, identified as Vital Montilla, kept fighting with officers even after being struck twice by an immobilizing taser gun and sprayed with a chemical to immobilize him, said Officer Rosa Atamyildiz, a police spokeswoman.


Witness in Trade Center Trial Describes Hydrogen Delivery
A truck driver testified yesterday that he delivered three tanks of hydrogen gas to Mohammed A. Salameh at a Jersey City storage warehouse the day before a bomb made of chemicals and hydrogen exploded in the World Trade Center garage.
That testimony in the trade center bombing trial, as well as two other detailed accounts of Mr.
Salameh's moves at the warehouse the day before the Feb. 26 explosion, offered a vignette that, prosecutors are expected to argue, tie Mr.
Salameh to a rented locker where the bomb was mixed and stored.


Jung's Insights Formed Basis of A. A.
To the Editor:
I was surprised and delighted to see your Nov. 19 Op-Ed article by the great psychiatrist Dr.
Carl Jung.
His thoughts are so pertinent despite the passage of 34 years.


WPIX Is Facing a 3-and-2 Count
This is it, the MSG Network says.
The final offer.
The last chance for WPIX-TV/Channel 11 to air Yankee games on free television and save Phil Rizzuto from idling in pool halls.
After eight months of talks during which both sides negotiated from distant galaxies, MSG yesterday offered a deal to swallow all losses and split any profits with WPIX.
If WPIX says no, that will most likely be it, and all 150 televised Yankees games will appear exclusively on MSG.


Petroleum Helicopters Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Knicks Are All Talk but No Action Versus Rockets
The Rockets came, they dominated and they remained unbeaten.
They left behind a rattled Knicks team that played tentatively and became frustrated against an opponent that looked superior.
Led by the brilliance of Hakeem Olajuwon (37 points, 13 rebounds), Houston tied the National Basketball Association record for most victories at the start of a season, winning their 15th consecutive game, 94-85, last night at Madison Square Garden.


Cabbies Angrily Debate Partitions
Operating on three hours' sleep and six cups of coffee, Alexander Stone Dale gave the surest prescription for how taxi drivers can survive violent nights on New York City streets.
"Have the passenger drive while the cabdriver sits in the back seat with a 12-gauge shotgun," he said.
Mr.
Dale, who has shoulder-length blond hair and strong opinions, has been driving a cab for more than six years.
With 41 cabdrivers killed so far this year in the city, he urged the Taxi and Limousine Commission yesterday to make cabs into "rolling tanks" with bulletproof windows and windshields and bulletproof partitions separating drivers and passengers.


Florence Bibo Alexander; Artists' Agent, 89
Florence Bibo Alexander, a Manhattan agent for illustrators of children's books for many years, died on Tuesday at the New York University Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 89.
The cause was pneumonia, said a friend, Meredith Charpentier.


Shuttle Launched on Mission to Repair Telescope


Adele Earnest, Expert On Folk Art, Dies at 92
Adele Earnest, one of the founders of the Museum of American Folk Art, died on Saturday in a nursing home in Mount Vernon, Wash.
She was 92.
In 1961 Mrs.
Earnest was one of a group of six founding trustees of the museum and helped its early development at 2 Lincoln Square in Manhattan.


Delay in Hearing for Rifkin Stirs Plea Bargain Concerns
A pretrial hearing concerning the seizure of several thousand pieces of evidence from the macabre world of Joel Rifkin, including a blood-soaked wheelbarrow and chain saw, hypodermic needles, women's underwear, used condoms and a box full of personal ads, was postponed this morning when Mr.
Rifkin called in sick from the county jail.
Mr.
Rifkin, a 34-year-old unemployed landscaper, has admitted to killing 17 women, most of them prostitutes.


Democrats Hire New Staff Chief
The Democratic National Committee today announced the replacement of its staff director, the latest move in a shake-up of senior party officials that comes after the Democrats' losses in every major election this year.
Debra DeLee, director of governmental affairs for the National Education Association, will assume the party's newly created post of executive director in January and will have day-to-day control of the party in place of Kent Marcus, who held the title of chief of staff.


Saberhagen May Leave Yet
The Mets, who have hinted at major trades, are engaged in background work for trades that could send Bret Saberhagen to Cleveland and bring Shawon Dunston to Shea Stadium.
The Mets within the last week sent a copy of Saberhagen's contract to the Indians.
The Indians, who talked with the Mets about Saberhagen last month, asked to look at the right-hander's contract to determine whether they could handle the financial obligation.


Circus Circus Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Centrists Are Wary of Clinton Tilting
The Democratic Leadership Council was Bill Clinton's springboard to the White House.
Now that he is there, his close alliance with the council, an organization of centrist and conservative Democrats, threatens to become a substantial political problem for him.
Simply put, the President must try to avoid alienating those of his supporters who are more liberal while still satisfying the expectations of his old allies.


November Uneven for Retailers
Inclement weather and an inexplicable drop-off in consumer demand obstructed significant sales growth among retailers last month, setting an ominous tone as they head into the holiday shopping season.
Sales started strong in the first week of the month, according to retailers' reports yesterday, then dropped off in the second and third weeks.
A rebound in the fourth week, fueled largely by sales during the weekend after Thanksgiving, failed to provide the big lift retailers needed.


Defensive Driver? Princeton Coach Sees His Team Zoom Into N.C.A.A.'s Fast Lane
Bob Bradley, the Princeton coach, moved his team into the fast lane this season and the decision paid handsome dividends.
The Tigers are in the Final Four of the National Collegiate Athletic Association soccer tournament for the first time.
Bradley, 35, is in his 10th season at Princeton, but he spent the first nine teaching a slow, methodical pace with plenty of lateral movement.
It was an attractive style to watch but a failure when it came to the final score.


DVI Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Settlers Pray, Then Protest Israeli Deaths
A dozen residents of this Jewish settlement in the West Bank drove today to the nearby main highway, where they put on prayer shawls, faced toward Jerusalem and blessed the name of the Lord.
It was, they acknowledged, a political act.


The Classical and the New in a Musical Adventure
On an out-of-the-way side street in Brooklyn Heights, nothing is quite as it seems.
You enter a building that appears to be a church or a chapel.
On the ground floor, you hear the bouncy strains of "Meet Me in St. Louis" as a community theater rehearses its winter production.
Upstairs, brightly colored scribblings on the wall strongly indicate a nursery school or a kindergarten.
But now there are strange, dangerous noises coming from behind a second door.
Walking into a white, high-vaulted auditorium, you see 20 musicians dressed in black, pealing forth the mountainous, molten dissonances of "Deserts," by Varese.
This is the Orchestra of the S.E.M.
Ensemble, one of New York City's most adventurous new-music groups.
The surroundings are no great mystery; S.E.M. shares space with the preschool at the Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity.
But the story of how the orchestra came to be formed less than two years ago is an intriguing one.
No less intriguing is the background for S.E.M.'s program tomorrow at Alice Tully Hall, one of the oddest in recent memory: Varese's "Deserts," Morton Feldman's "Turfan Fragments," John Cage's "Concert for Piano and Orchestra" (with the legendary new-music pianist David Tudor) and excerpts from "L'Orfeo," by Monteverdi.


Westernbank F.S.B. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Colombia, One Victory in a Long War
The death of Pablo Escobar Gaviria, Colombia's most notorious cocaine lord, offers the Government a symbolic victory in a war in which it is faring badly.
On the propaganda front, Colombia long ago personalized the drug war against the blood-soaked Medellin traffickers by focusing on Mr.
Escobar.
But what the Government neglected to mention was that its highly publicized war has had very little impact on drug shipments to the United States.


3COM SAYS IT EXPECTS RECORD RESULTS FOR 2D QUARTER
The 3Com Corporation, a leading computer networking company, said yesterday that it expected to report record results for its second quarter, which ended on Tuesday.
Earnings are expected to be 65 cents a share, which is 38 percent higher than the consensus estimate of Wall Street analysts and is more than double the earnings a share for the quarter a year earlier.
Sales for the quarter are estimated at $205 million, which would represent a 34 percent rise from a year earlier.
The company, based in Santa Clara, Calif., said it would report results on Dec. 16. 3Com's shares closed yesterday at $35.75, down 62.5 cents, in Nasdaq trading; the company made its announcement after the market's close.


Inside Art
Grand Palais Ferme
The Paris architect Jean Loup Roubert is at work repairing the Grand Palais, which closed less than two weeks ago after it was declared structurally unsound.
The giant glass-domed exhibition center in Paris just off the Champs-Elysees has traditionally shown everything from fine art to cars.
After a rivet head fell in June, netting was strung from the ceiling of the main dome; a subsequent study found the turn-of-the-century building had structural weaknesses.
When it closed, spokesmen for the Grand Palais said about 20 shows scheduled to be held there in the next year would be canceled.
Two shows were forced to close early: "Les Nabis," an exhibition of works by the group of painters that included Pierre Bonnard, Edouard Vuillard, Maurice Denis and Felix Vallotton, which was to run through Jan. 3, and "The Soul in the Body: Arts and Sciences 1793-1993," which was to close on Jan. 24.
Together, the shows had been drawing about 2,500 visitors a day.


Art in Review
Margartet Sartor and Margaret Moulton
Opsis Foundation  561 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Saturdays, through Dec. 18
Life in America, with its joys and discontents, is the subject of the affecting photographs in this two-person show.
Both Margaret Sartor and Margaret Moulton shoot in black and white, and both use square-format cameras, but otherwise their approaches are different.


Market Place; The Allure of New Biotechnology Stocks
Has the window for biotech stocks opened?
The answer from Wall Street is a qualified yes.
Analysts speak of a window being open whenever biotechnology companies, short on wonder products but thirsty for research dollars, can satisfy their persistent cash needs through stock issues to the public.
The window tends to open and shut with unnerving irregularity and uneven results for investors.


The Big East: Football And Expansion in Air; UConn Early Choice
There was a time only a few seasons ago when the beginning of a new Big East basketball season was accompanied by bells and whistles that heralded another successful season by the still-young superconference.
But as the Big East begins its 15th season, the fanfare has subsided and the focus is not entirely on basketball.


Wellington Leisure reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


U.S. Flies Clan Chief, an Ex-Foe, to Somali Talks
Nearly two months after the United States ended a hunt for him, the Somali faction leader Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid was brought to Ethiopia this evening on an American military plane so that he could take part with other Somali factions in reconciliation talks.
The talks, under the auspices of Ethiopia, will be the first involving all 15 major Somali factions since March of this year.
But they are meant more as an opportunity to create a setting for restarting political negotiations and are not expected to achieve any major breakthrough, a senior Ethiopian official said.


Critic's Notebook; Window to the Mind of Christmas
SHOPPING isn't a chore.
It is a gift.
That's the delightful delusion to which we eagerly fall prey each time we enter the great emporiums of consumer fantasy.
Showered with the free spritz of cologne, the bonus kit of cosmetics, the floral extravaganzas of spring and the thrill of celebrity appearances, we can easily forget that we're the ones who are paying for this copious largess.
Indeed, we may begin to wonder whether we are worthy to receive it.
Christmas decorations, on the other hand, remind us that it is more blessed to give than to receive, a message that calls for a more Baroque set of signals.
For while it is indeed a great pleasure to give, the pleasure is likely to be diluted when the giver is faced with a long list of people who expect to be remembered with, at least, a tie.


Art in Review
Niccola de Maria
Lelong Gallery  20 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Dec. 24
Only a grinch could not get some pleasure out of Niccola de Maria's latest exhibition of cheerful and brilliantly colored abstract paintings.
This Italian artist is part Paul Klee, part Matisse, part gift-wrap designer.
These works -- bolder, more geometric than his recent paintings -- consist of small canvases joined together in ways that suggest faces, and mural-sized images with blobs of paint meant to be angels.
All of the works have been meticulously and somewhat idiosyncratically installed by the artist.
They are a reflection of Mr. de Maria's gentle, feel-good, spiritualistic approach to art.
It's hard to take completely seriously, but the results are just as hard to dislike.
MICHAEL KIMMELMAN


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Progress on many world trade issues was reported by negotiators for the United States and the European Community, which could soon lead to a GATT agreement.
The biggest gains were in agriculture, where France's objections to lowering subsidies have wounded relations with Washington.  [ Page A1. ]


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Harold Baines, designated hitter, and Tim Hulett, infielder, on one-year contracts.


Penguins Come Back to Knot the Devils
Tonight's Devils-Penguins game included several comebacks.
The regular officials came back from their 17-day strike.
Bernie Nicholls of New Jersey came back from a six-game absence.
And Chris Terreri, the Devils goalie, came back from a shoulder injury suffered in pre-game warm-ups.


Rex Stores Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


London's Ulster Lapse
To the Editor:
"Trying Again in Ireland" (editorial, Nov. 22) correctly stresses that deeply alienated Catholics living in barricaded slums provide the social base for the Irish Republican Army.


Hunt for Clues In Plane Crash That Killed 18
Snow and sorrow and twisted steel today covered the man-made hill near here where a commuter plane crashed Wednesday night, killing all 18 people on board.
The plane went down less than two miles from this city in northern Minnesota, about 60 miles northwest of Duluth.
But the crash site was so isolated and the night so dark and thick with fog and freezing drizzle that no one saw the plane hit the side of the hill, an old mine dump.


Rohr Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Volvo Abandons Renault Merger
Faced with growing opposition from shareholders and a revolt from its own management, Volvo of Sweden abandoned a planned merger with Renault of France today, prompting Volvo's longtime chairman to resign and throwing the future of the two big car makers into disarray.
In a move apparently engineered by Soren Gyll, the Swedish company's No. 2 executive, Volvo's board canceled a meeting scheduled for Tuesday at which shareholders were to have voted on the merger, which was to have taken effect Jan. 1.


Stoltenberg vs. Stich
JASON STOLTENBERG, who gave MICHAEL STICH a tough time at the Australian Open, yesterday unexpectedly got the honor of opening Australia's bid for the Davis Cup title against Germany in Dusseldorf.
RICHARD FROMBERG passed a fitness test after a muscle strain in his ribs and will play the second singles against MARC-KEVIN GOELLNER when the three-day competition begins today.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Sonics Beat Bullets  The Seattle SuperSonics scored the first 14 points of the second quarter last night in Landover, Md., and went on to defeat the Washington Bullets, 105-95, finishing 5-1 on a six-game road trip.
Kendall Gill and Gary Payton had 18 points apiece for the SuperSonics, who have the second-best record in the National Basketball Association at 12-1.
Detlef Schrempf added 17 points. (AP) Suns 102, Pistons 101: In Auburn Hills, Mich., A. C. Green scored 10 of his 16 points in the fourth quarter and Phoenix held on for the victory over Detroit, sending the Pistons to their fifth straight loss.
Isiah Thomas returned to the Pistons after missing seven games with a broken bone in his right hand. (AP) Jazz 103, Pacers 87: Jeff Malone scored 27 points and Karl Malone added 25 points and 18 rebounds as Utah defeated Indiana in Salt Lake City.
Utah used a 15-0 run in the third quarter to overcome a 4-point Indiana lead and go in front by 74-63 with 1:01 left.
The Pacers never got closer than 7 points after that.
Reggie Miller scored 15 points to lead the Pacers, but he was only 2 for 10 from the field. (AP) N.H.L.
Panthers Upend Sabres  Jesse Belanger scored 23 seconds into overtime and the Florida Panthers beat the Buffalo Sabres, 2-1, last night in Miami.
Belanger slipped a rebound between goaltender Dominik Hasek's legs.
Gord Murphy had the other goal for Florida, which broke a three-game losing streak. (AP) Maple Leafs 5, Blues 4: Toronto, the league's best road team, got goals from the low-scoring defensemen Bob Rouse and Jamie Macoun in a 31-second span late in the game to beat host St.
Louis.
The Leafs raised their road record to 10-3-3.
That's nearly as good as their 9-2-1 record at Maple Leaf Gardens. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL Arkansas Romps  Scotty Thurman scored 10 points and Clint McDaniel made consecutive 3-pointers during a 27-6 first-half run that helped Arkansas to a 120-68 victory over Missouri in Fayetteville, Ark.
The Tigers (1-1) trailed by 23 at the half and by 40 with slightly more than 8 minutes to play.
The spurt by Arkansas (2-0) began after Chris Heller missed a chance to tie the game at 11-11.
Ten minutes later, Arkansas was in front by 38-15. (AP) Oklahoma State 87, Arizona State 69: Bryant Reeves dominated beneath the basket and scored a career-high 34 points last night to lead No. 8 Oklahoma State over Arizona State in Tulsa, Okla.
Reeves, a 7-foot junior, scored 24 points in the second half, including all 12 of the Cowboys' points during one five-minute run.
The Sun Devils rotated players against him but to no avail. (AP) Georgia Tech 77, W. Carolina 55: In Atlanta, Fred Vinson, who was starting in place of the injured James Forrest, scored 15 points as No. 17 Georgia Tech (2-1) beat Western Carolina (1-1).
Forrest, the Yellow Jackets' leading scorer and rebounder, sat out with a mild bruise of his right heel. (AP) SWIMMING Chinese Set Records  Chinese female swimmers, who emerged as a world force in last year's Olympics, set three world short-course records and won four gold medals yesterday on the opening day of the short-course world championship in Palma, Majorca.
The Chinese women, who won four Olympic gold medals and five silvers in Barcelona, Spain, won all four women's finals and set three world marks in the process.
Guohoug Dai of China swam the 400-meter individual medley in 4:29, topping the old mark of 4:31.36 set in 1987 by a Romanian, Noemy Lung.
Jinyi Le erased a record set by Franziska van Almsick of Germany in the 100-meter free style, swimming a time of 53.01.
The previous record, set in 1992, was 53.33.
The other Chinese record came in the 800-meter freestyle relay with a time of 7:52.45, topping a mark of 7:58.74 set by the United States in 1981. (AP)


Transact International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Merry-Go-Round Dismisses 9 Officials and Incurs Charge
Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc., the faltering specialty store operator, dismissed nine men's merchandising executives yesterday and took a $35.1 million charge against quarterly earnings to rid itself of merchandise that failed to sell at a profit.
The company also announced that Leonard Weinglass, its chairman and co-founder, had taken control of merchandising on a full-time basis.


Justice Dept. Investigating Fraud at Johnson Space Center
The Justice Department, using an agent who posed as a corrupt businessman, is investigating possible fraud and corruption at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration acknowledged today.
Officials at the space agency, which is currently focused on the mission to salvage the malfunctioning Hubble telescope, confirmed the existence of the undercover operation but refused to discuss any details of the criminal inquiry.


Florida Rock Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


N.F.L.'s Panthers Interested in Gibbs
When the expansion Carolina Panthers start playing in 1995, who better for head coach than Joe Gibbs, who owns a Nascar auto-racing team based in Charlotte, N.C.?
Jerry Richardson, the Panthers' main owner, said yesterday that Mike McCormack, his general manager, was trying to determine whether Gibbs was free to talk about the job.
Last winter, the 52-year-old Gibbs quit after 12 years as the successful coach of the Washington Redskins.


What's What In The World Trade Talks
THE OVERVIEW
The United States is negotiating with 115 other nations to broadly rewrite the free trade rules of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which have governed most international trade for 45 years.
GATT was created in 1948 with the aim of expanding economic activity by eliminating tariffs and other protectionist barriers.
Trade ministers have successfully completed seven previous rounds of talks to broaden the original agreement.
The current negotiations began seven years ago in Punta del Este, Uruguay, leading negotiators and commentators to call it the Uruguay Round.
Its main goal is to broaden the rules to cover trade in agriculture and in services like tourism, insurance and telecommunications.
Negotiators are also trying to reduce or eliminate many tariffs.


General Host Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 7


On Stage, and Off
Ascending to Zero . . .
It's either an uplifting or depressing story, depending on whether you view it as an example of perseverance rewarded or as an example of how stacked the odds are against the financial success of a Broadway musical.
On Nov. 15, after 725 performances and 91 weeks at the Shubert Theater, "Crazy for You," the reconstituted Gershwin musical, finally earned back the $8.3 million its investors pumped into it.
The specific records aren't kept anywhere, but according to some of Broadway's most reliable memories, perhaps only "Grand Hotel," which took exactly two years, has recouped its investment on Broadway over a longer span. (Many shows, of course, have run longer, but they either broke into profit sooner -- "Miss Saigon," for instance, recouped a $10 million investment after 39 weeks -- or, in a few cases, like the $7.5 million "Will Rogers Follies," never did.)
Even for a Tony-winner like "Crazy for You," this is the official crossing of the line from flop to hit, so let's call it uplifting.
Anyway, the show has performed well all along, weekly filling more than 80 percent of the Shubert's 1,465 seats and often earning $450,000 or more a week.
There is currently a $3.5 million advance.


Susan Resnick Fisher; Family Therapist, 50
Susan Resnick Fisher, a family therapist who specialized in stepfamily problems, died yesterday at her Manhattan home after a long illness.
She was 50 and practiced in Manhattan and Mount Kisco, N. Y.
Mrs.
Fisher was a founder of Yeshiva University's Albert Einstein College of Medicine, a benefactor of the Metropolitan Opera and a board member of the Make a Wish Foundation.


Partisan Jostling Frays Health Care Cooperation
The recent pledges of bipartisan cooperation on health care reform were somewhat frayed today: House Republicans complained in high dudgeon to President Clinton that the Democratic National Committee was planning counter-demonstrations at Republican "town meetings" on the health care issue.
"Given your repeated assurances that you want to work in a bipartisan manner to pass a health care bill, we trust that this arm of the Democratic National Committee is acting without your knowledge in suggesting party activists disrupt these meetings between Republican Senators and Representatives and their constituents," the Republicans said in a letter to the President.


Shuttle Blasts Off on Mission to Correct the Space Telescope's Sight
With the rockets' bright glare turning night into day, seven astronauts on the space shuttle Endeavour were launched early today to attempt the most complex orbital repair job of all time.
The astronauts steered the spaceship on course for a 357-mile-high rendezvous with the Hubble Space Telescope on Saturday morning.
Using the shuttle's mechanical arm, they must hook the 25,000-pound telescope, place it in the open cargo bay and then, beginning on Sunday, try to restore the instrument to clear-sightedness.


Schools Need to Teach Alternatives to Violence; Legislative Tool
To the Editor:
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines should certainly join together as you suggest in combating violence in New York City schools (editorial, Nov. 23).
But every elected official in New York State should join with them as well.
The State Legislature, for example, has before it legislation that would give them the tools to do the job.


Review/Theater: All in the Timing; Merrily Sputtering Along
IN "Universal Language," one of the six utterly delightful one-act plays that make up David Ives's "All in the Timing" at the Primary Stages Company, a young woman with a stammer wistfully reflects that language is "the opposite of loneliness." If only everybody spoke the same language, she continues, nobody would be lonely.
Each of the works in this evening, in its own way, makes the point that communication is largely a comedy of errors.
And the possibility of words from different speakers intersecting in a way that truly matches their intentions has about the same chance that two comets, hurtling on wildly different trajectories, have of colliding in the middle of space.


A Christmas Tradition Glows Anew


Abroad at Home; A Christopher Shuttle?
Warren Christopher will be in the Middle East this weekend, and the timing of his visit gives him a rare opportunity.
He may be able to start a process that would finally end the conflict between Israel and its Arab neighbors.
The crucial need now is to break through the stalemate in negotiations between Syria and Israel.
From that much else would follow.
And the person best placed to do it is the American Secretary of State.


TVWeekend; Geronimo and His People, From Their Perspective
Once upon a time, tales of cowboys and Indians were anything but complicated.
On one side there were hostile Indians, on the other, heroically pioneering white men, often in United States Army uniform, imposing "civilization" on the tribes.
The whites wore the white hats, and that was that.
Exalted notions of expansion and progress overwhelmed doubts, if any, about what today might be called ethnic cleansing.
No longer.
The inroads of revisionists over the past decade or so now reach a new plateau in what Turner Broadcasting terms its "Native American initiative," a yearlong effort, the company says, to "present an educational and enlightening view of America's indigenous people, past, present and future." The multimedia project includes several movies, the first of which, "Geronimo," has its premiere on TNT Sunday.
The Apache leader, his tribe and his family are portrayed exclusively by Indian actors.
The story, a true one, is told from the point of view of their culture and historical records.


Some Letters to Leon
Not all the letters sent to LEON LETT of the Dallas Cowboys these days are in the form of hate mail.
A elementary school students in Mesquite, Tex., a Dallas suburb, have written 886 encouraging letters to the lineman, letting him know they have forgiven him for his Thanksgiving Day blunder that cost the Cowboys a victory.


Kmart Selling Payless To Thrifty Drug Group
The Kmart Corporation said today that it had agreed to sell its 572-store Payless drugstore chain for $1 billion in cash and securities to a leveraged buyout group that owns Thrifty Drug Stores.
The combination of Payless, the 10th-largest drugstore chain, and Thrifty, No. 6, would create North America's second-largest drugstore company.
The new chain would have had sales of $5.9 billion in 1992 from more than 1,000 stores, according to Chain Drug Review, an industry publication.
The industry leader remains the Walgreen Company with sales of $7.5 billion and 1,700 stores.


Rabin Bluntly Tells Christopher To Stay Out of Talks on Self-Rule
As Secretary of State Warren Christopher arrived to push Middle East peace talks forward, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said today that the United States should stay out of negotiations between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization on bringing about Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territories.
The Prime Minister's remarks came as violence flared anew in the territories, this time in the tinderbox West Bank town of Hebron, where Jewish settlers firing guns battled Arabs hurling rocks and bottles.


Classical Music in Review
Voytek Matushevsky Pianist Alice Tully Hall


National Medical Enterprises Selling 28 Hospitals
National Medical Enterprises Inc, the troubled hospital chain, announced yesterday that it was selling 28 hospitals and 45 satellite outpatient clinics to the Healthsouth Rehabilitation Corporation for about $300 million in cash.
The shares of both companies rose yesterday in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Healthsouth, based in Birmingham, Ala., rose $3.25, to $20 a share; National Medical Enterprises, based in Santa Monica, Calif., gained 62.5 cents, closing at $12.50, a high for the year.


BCE to Buy 30% of Jones Intercable
In the latest twist in the mating dance between cable television and telephone companies, Canada's biggest telecommunications company said it planned to buy a one-third stake in Jones Intercable Inc. of Englewood, Colo., for $400 million.
BCE Inc. of Canada, which owns the telephone company Bell Canada as well as a controlling stake in the equipment maker Northern Telecom Ltd., said Thursday that its international subsidiary planned to acquire 30 percent of Jones.


Marijuana as Chemotherapy Aid Poses Hazards
To the Editor:
The recent distribution of marijuana cigarettes by a concerned rabbi to alleviate the discomfort and suffering of patients undergoing chemotherapy is a most compassionate gesture ("Healing Herb or Narcotic? Marijuana as Medication," Nov. 14).
Unfortunately the claims for the unique therapeutic properties of marijuana smoking in alleviating the nausea and vomiting induced by chemotherapy for cancer or AIDS do not withstand scientific scrutiny.


New York to Bar Age Bias in Public Places
New York City merchants, restaurateurs and hospitals are bracing themselves for an influx of new patrons and visitors in nine days.
No, not holiday tourists, but people some establishments have worked hard to keep out: the elderly, teen-agers, children and possibly even -- now stay calm -- infants.
New rules issued by the city's Commission on Human Rights will take effect on Dec. 13, prohibiting discrimination based on age -- or youth -- in public places.


Mediation Board's Role in the Airline Strike
To the Editor:
The article on the ending of the strike at American Airlines (Nov. 23) reported that the President had the power to establish a Presidential Emergency Board if he first found that the labor disruption interfered with interstate commerce or deprived a region of essential services.
If he makes such a finding, you reported, he must establish an Emergency Board to mediate the dispute.


No Headline
Why?
We don't have an answer.
That's what's frustrating to us.
These were not high-risk kids.
There was nothing that would suggest that they would do something like this. -- ROBERT C. McKEAN, a high school principal, on the apparent suicide of two honor students.  [ 26:1. ]


Elevator-Shaft Fall Injures 11-Year-Old At Harlem Building
An 11-year-old girl plunged two stories down an elevator shaft last night after she leaned against a set of broken elevator doors at a Harlem apartment building, the police said.
The girl, Cassandra Warren, was in critical condition at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, a hospital spokeswoman said.
She suffered multiple fractures and other injuries.


These Singles' Bars Are Only Hummed
Dan Barth has found an alternative to singles bars, but there's a catch.
He has to sing.
"Singing to each other is a real icebreaker," said Mr.
Barth, a Social Security claims representative who was about to give an a cappella rendition of "Mr. Tambourine Man" at a meeting of a group called Singles That Sing.


Jobless Picture Brightens In New York and New Jersey
The employment picture improved in New York and New Jersey last month, according to figures released yesterday, but a persistently high rate in New York City continued to drag down the region's recovery.
In New Jersey, where the unemployment rate had dropped sharply in October, to 6.5 percent from 7.7 percent, the improvement continued in November, falling to 6.2 percent, according to the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics.


Pocono Journal; Winds of Secession Chill One of the World's 'Last Great Places'
The 2,060 residents of this rural township in the Pocono Mountains enjoy low taxes and an unspoiled pine barrens.
In March the Nature Conservancy, a land conservation organization, included the Pennsylvania area on its global list of "Forty Last Great Places."
Now residents and environmentalists fear a change could come if a local property owner succeeds in seceding from the township, in northeastern Pennsylvania, and building a convention and resort complex there.


Rangers Are in the Market For More Than a Victory
They came for the big matchup, the National Hockey League's top team in the Eastern Conference versus the top team in the Western Conference.
First, though, the Rangers had to go shopping.


Forget Heavyweights; Small Is Now Beautiful
Suddenly, small is back in the fight game.
The public is hardly in awe of nice-guy heavyweight champion Evander Holyfield.
So with no big bully of a heavyweight out there, an attractive collection of smaller fighters is drawing attention, especially from HBO, a television network that needs a marquee name.


Mohammed Kasrawi, Newspaper Aide, 67
Mohammed Kasrawi, office manager for the Beirut bureau of The New York Times for 35 years, died Thursday night at American University of Beirut hospital.
He was 67.
The cause was complications from leukemia, doctors said.


Review/Film; A Man's Best Friend Can Wear the Pants And Dabble in Sleuthing
In his animated characters Wallace and Gromit -- an eccentric inventor and his faithful dog -- Nick Park, the English film maker who won an Academy Award in 1991 for his animated short "Creature Comforts," has created a pair who could easily become a classic cartoon duo.
"The Wrong Trousers," the second Wallace and Gromit adventure, is a comedy thriller of such charm that it walks away with the 16-film program, "Spike and Mike's Festival of Animation 1993," which opened yesterday at the Cinema Village.
In this edition, Wallace gives Gromit a birthday present of a pair of pants called techno-trousers that look like the bottom half of a space suit.
When put on, their adhesive shoes enable the wearer to climb the sides of buildings and walk upside down on ceilings.
The trousers are also guided by remote control.
And their very first assignment is to give Gromit his morning walk.
Gromit isn't so sure he likes his gift as it mechanically jerks him along the street.


A Restaurant in Bryant Park May Bloom in Spring


Technology Stocks Post Gains as Dow Rises 1.96
Strong employment data and a firm bond market helped stocks move higher in lackluster trading yesterday.
Technology stocks, rising on earnings expectations tied to an economic recovery, led the advance.
The Dow was up 1.96 points for the day, to 3,704.07, while posting a gain of 20.12 points for the week.
In Nasdaq trading, technology stocks helped push up the composite 5.49 points, to 772.22.


Review/Music; Santeria's Arresting Songs
Lazaro Ros's first few notes at S.O.B.'s on Monday night stopped all conversation in his packed audience.
Mr.
Ros, a Cuban singer whose specialty is the songs of the Santeria religion, has an immediately arresting voice, nasal and harsh.
When he sings his chants, he lets his notes float until he snaps them into tight, drumlike patterns.
He was scheduled to be accompanied by the Cuban pop band Mezcla, but the State Department wouldn't allow the group to enter the United States, his manager said.
Instead, Mr.
Ros was backed by percussionists and singers, and the combination gave the religious chants a spare beauty they wouldn't otherwise have had.


Lewis Thomas, Whose Essays Clarified the Mysteries of Biology, Is Dead at 80
Dr.
Lewis Thomas, the poet-philosopher of medicine who was president of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and dean of the medical schools at New York University and Yale, died yesterday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 80.
The cause was Waldenstrom's disease, a condition resembling lymphoma, a cancer of the lymph system, said Jonathan Weil of Cornell University Medical College.
The condition was diagnosed in 1988.


Pretoria Journal; About Blacks, Jews and a Bridge Between Them
Two photographs measure the distance Aron Liel's world has lurched in the year since he became Israel's Ambassador to South Africa.
The first shows Nelson Mandela joyously embracing Yasir Arafat.
To many South African Jews, the hug had come to symbolize the estrangement between this country's black government-in-waiting and Israel -- and potentially, many feared, between blacks and Jews.


CLINTON REASSURES CENTRIST COUNCIL
Gently admonishing centrist Democrats, President Clinton today called for them to be a little more understanding of his need to compromise with the right and the left to build coalitions that will advance the centrist's own cause.
The President delivered his plea in a keynote address to the Democratic Leadership Council, an organization of centrist and conservative Democrats that he helped found and that later helped him in his march to the White House.


CHRONICLE
The melody lingers on. . . .
BARRY TUCKER never knows when he is going to hear the voice of his father, RICHARD TUCKER, the legendary tenor who died in 1975.
"I often hear it when I'm not expecting it," his son said the other day.
"I can be driving alone and say, 'Hey, I know that sound on the radio.' "


Classical Music in Review
Works of Somei Satoh  Merkin Concert Hall


Irish Politicians to Blame for the Ulster Conflict
To the Editor:
In your editorial on the Irish problem (Nov. 22) you state that "Americans are baffled by the fierce persistence of this conflict." Many Irish at home and abroad are also baffled, but not so much at the persistence of the struggle as at the attitude of Irish politicians north and south of the border and their lack of honesty in the pursuit of a peaceful solution.


The Growing Allure of Municipal Bonds
President Clinton's tax rise has sent many investors into municipal bond funds.
These bonds are one of the few remaining ways to shelter income from taxes.
When tax rates rise, the returns of these funds become even more valuable.
How much more?
To compute the taxable equivalent yield of a municipal fund, begin by subtracting your tax bracket from one.
Then divide the fund's yield by that difference.
Say you are in the 36 percent tax bracket and considering a tax-free fund yielding 5.25 percent, the average 12-month trailing yield in October for the 775 municipal funds tracked by Morningstar Inc.
The equivalent yield would be 5.25, divided by 0.64 (1 minus 0.36).
The result: 8.2 percent.


Delay in Mercer Trial?
District Attorney ROBERT MORGENTHAU of Manhattan will ask for a month's postponement in the trial of RAY MERCER, the heavyweight charged with sports bribery.
The trial is scheduled to begin on Monday.


Corrections
A table in Your Money on Nov. 27, with an article about mutual funds' investments in derivative securities, included an outdated figure provided by Morningstar Inc. for the percentage of interest-only, mortgage-backed securities held by the Smith Barney Shearson Adjustable Rate Government Income Fund.
The fund says it currently has less than 1 percent of its $425 million portfolio invested in those securities, down from 8.1 percent in November 1992, when its portfolio totaled $150 million.


In 2 Young Patients, Rare Transmission Of H.I.V. Is Detected
Scientists have detected two cases in which the AIDS virus has been transmitted from one child and one adolescent to others but apparently not by the usual routes.
The most likely cause is believed to be that infected blood from one entered the other through a cut or disease that broke the skin.
Such a mode of transmission has rarely, if ever, been documented before.
Although the cases can be expected to raise questions about the current policy of admitting infected children to schools and day care centers, experts familiar with the two cases say they strongly believe that there is no reason to change public policy because of the rarity of such transmission.


Q &amp; A
A 401(k) Distribution
Q I have a 401(k) plan from which I must take a distribution in October 1994 when I reach 70 1/2.
Which is the better strategy from a tax perspective, a lump-sum distribution or a rollover into an individual retirement account?
JACK L. FOX, Greenville, N.Y.


The Knicks' Latest Maneuver: Circling the Wagons
The day after the Knicks were humbled at home by the Houston Rockets, the president, general manager and coach met at the team's practice center today to evaluate the situation.
Afterward, the Knicks' leadership vowed not to overreact to one early-December loss.
The most immediate concern was to avoid long-term damage from Thursday's one-sided 94-85 defeat in which Houston magnified some of New York's offensive shortcomings.
Not only did the Knicks look horrible, but their fans also became frustrated, singling out Greg Anthony and Charles Smith for verbal abuse.


Shuttle Nearing Space Telescope For Repair Job
The astronauts of the space shuttle Endeavour closed in for their rendezvous with the myopic Hubble Space Telescope and were set to haul it into their cargo bay for major repairs, flight controllers reported today.
If they retrieve the telescope early Saturday, two astronauts are prepared to venture out into the open cargo bay Sunday morning for the first of five planned space walks, carrying dozens of tools and replacement parts.
Their first task will be to install new gyroscopes, replacing failed instruments designed to point the $1.6 billion telescope precisely for its observations deep into the cosmos.


Religion Notes
Churchgoing Teen-Agers
Some parents may be surprised, but a new Gallup Poll shows that on any given weekend in the last year, teen-agers were more likely to go to church than adults.
The survey found that about 50 percent of all teen-agers attended religious services, or nearly 10 percentage points higher than adults.
"It's clear that church attendance is one of those areas where adults tell teen-agers, 'Do as I say, not as I do,' " said Robert Bezilla of the Princeton Religion Research Center, an affiliate of the Gallup Poll.


A One-Game Season for Army and Navy
John Lane, who will start at left halfback for Army against Navy today at Giants Stadium, was recently asked what the game meant to him.
"Well, I'll remember it because it's going to be my last football game," he said.
"And I've put a lot of my life into football since I was 6 years old."


Making Some Quick Moves in a Fast Town on a Warm Day


Financing Finally Seals Deal for a Restaurant in Bryant Park
Yes, there will finally be a restaurant in Bryant Park -- in time for lunch come spring, if all goes as planned.
After more than a decade of proposals and hearings, design changes and changed signals, the last hurdle -- financing -- has been cleared.


Pitching GATT's Pluses To a Reluctant France
A spearhead of free trade for most of the world, GATT has become a four-letter word in France, a frightening symbol of a perfidious American plot to drive French farmers off the land, crush French culture in Hollywood's vice and rob France of its very identity.
Indeed, for more than a year now, first a socialist Government and then its conservative successor have been preparing the French to stand alone in the world, even face ostracism, if France decides it must torpedo a liberalized General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade pact to save the republic.


INSIDE
Lewis Thomas Is Dead
The physician and biologist, prominent as both a medical philosopher and an administrator, was 80.
He is shown during a recent interview, in which he reflected on the philosophy and physiology of death.
Page 28.
North Korea Eases Standoff
North Korea offered wider access to its nuclear sites, keeping alive the possibility of a diplomatic solution, American officials said.
Page 3.
Gulf War Hero Is Punished
The general who directed the allied air campaign against Iraq was disciplined for trying to block the promotion of another general.
Page 10.


Booster Rockets In Shuttle Fleet Cause Concern
New debate is swirling over the degree of danger posed by the space shuttle's solid-fueled rocket boosters, despite the successful launching this week of Endeavour on its mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope.
The boosters are like giant, complex Roman candles -- 15-story tubes packed with rubbery, highly explosive fuel that once ignited cannot be extinguished.
A pair of boosters, mounted on either side of the shuttle, assists the spacecraft into orbit on each flight.
After falling away from the speeding shuttle and parachuting into the ocean, they are recovered and repacked with fuel for another flight.


The Millennium Doesn't Start Until 2001
To the Editor:
I know it seems correct to state, as you did in "Millennial Chaos for Computers" (Topics of the Times, Nov. 15), that the new millennium will begin on Jan. 1, 2000.
But in truth it won't begin until Jan. 1, 2001.


Texas Instruments Shuffles Management
In a reorganization that obscures the company's line of succession, Texas Instruments said today that it was forming a three-member office of the chief executive and named four executive vice presidents to run its major businesses.
Jerry R. Junkins, the company's chairman, president and chief executive, will share the chief executive office with William B. Mitchell and William P. Weber, who will become vice chairmen.


U.S. Should Regulate Corporate Maneuvers
To the Editor:
Missing from your discussion of the contest between Viacom and QVC over acquisition of Paramount (Business Day, Nov. 25, 26) is whether a decision of such importance to the nation's communications systems, its economy and Paramount's employees and shareholders should be made under Delaware law.


Thousands Mourn Colombian Drug Baron


COMPANY BRIEFS
CASTLE HARLAN INC.
New York, a merchant bank, said the $230 million acquisition of Indspec Chemical Corp., Pittsburgh, by management, employees and the Castle Partners 2 investment fund had been completed.
CATERPILLAR INC., Peoria, Ill., announced its second joint venture with Russia's largest truck manufacturer.
Terms were not disclosed.


Bridge
It is generally unwise to lead a singleton trump, since this may damage a partner who holds one or two trump honors.
Exceptions occur when dummy is likely to take several ruffs, and West might have risen to the occasion on the diagramed deal.
It occurred Sunday in the final of the Reisinger Board-a-Match Teams in Seattle.
North and South were Chuck Burger of West Bloomfield, Mich., and Jim Cayne of Manhattan, members of the team that finished second in the event.


Saberhagen Still on the Block
The Mets spoke with the Cleveland Indians again yesterday about trying to work out a trade for Bret Saberhagen, and also indicated that they were interested in signing Dwight Gooden to a contract extension before next season.
The Mets had sent the Indians a copy of Saberhagen's contract and were eager to determine Cleveland's plans in the wake of signing Dennis Martinez.
"They could still use another pitcher if they are going to go for it all right now," said Joe McIlvaine, general manager of the Mets.


CONCLUDING REPORT IN IRAN ARMS CASE TO BE MADE PUBLIC
A panel of Federal appeals court judges said today that it would soon make public the final report of the Iran-contra independent prosecutor.
The report is expected to be a harsh parting shot at Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush.
The possibility that the three-volume report might never see daylight had emerged as the last big legal hurdle of the protracted and tangled affair.
Lawrence E. Walsh, the Iran-contra prosecutor, submitted the report to the three-judge panel in August as required under the Ethics in Government Act of 1978, which created the independent counsel.


Robinson Wins Battle With O'Neal
Spurs 94, Magic 84
John Lucas would have understood if David Robinson had taken the night off.
Robinson, who flew home on Thursday to be with his wife, Valerie, after she had a miscarriage, rejoined the Spurs and had 23 points, 11 rebounds and 10 assists in San Antonio's 94-84 victory over the Magic in Orlando on Friday night.


Want to Reduce Those Tax Bills for 1993? Only 27 Days Left; Try Software to Get Good Advice for Less
From a tax standpoint, is it better to get my bonus in December or January?
Should I take some of the capital gains in my stock portfolio now or wait until next year?
If I exercise an incentive stock option, will it trigger the alternative minimum tax?
The best way to get the answers to such questions is to sit down with a top-flight tax professional because the "right" answers depend on personal circumstances.
But that advice can be expensive.
An alternative?
Tax software.
Computer packages, like tax experts, provide advice and prepare returns.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philomusica  Merkin Concert Hall


Classical Music in Review
Harrington String Quartet Merkin Concert Hall


Ethics Code Covers Lawyer-Client Conduct
To the Editor:
Both your news pages and letters column have reflected a growing controversy over whether there should be a rule prohibiting matrimonial lawyers (or all lawyers) from engaging in sexual relations with their clients, a controversy brought to the fore by Chief Judge Judith Kaye's proposed promulgation of such rules.
I am concerned that your readers have been left with the mistaken impression that, in the absence of an explicit rule, sexual relations between lawyers and clients are permissible under existing ethics codes.


Planning to Preserve a Windfall
Tax collectors love a windfall nearly as much as recipients do.
In Kathleen's Shilkret's case, a winning run on a game show is also a surge in taxable income.
Mr.
Shilkret, who works for a bank in Los Angeles, wanted to put a new roof on her house.
Rather than go into debt, she decided to take a chance as a contestant on "Jeopardy."


Two Somalis, at Talks, Don't Talk to Each Other
They are staying two floors apart in the same hotel, closer than they have been in months.
But although the Somali clan leader, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, and his rival, Mohammed Ali Mahdi, call each other brothers, they still have not talked to each other.
The last time General Aidid and Mr.
Ali Mahdi came face to face was in March, here in the Ethiopian capital, as both signed an agreement with other clan leaders to disarm and form a transitional government to end the civil war and threat of more starvation.


Mexico's Uncertain Future Path
While there is little doubt that the governing party's candidate to succeed President Carlos Salinas de Gortari will uphold the President's economic programs, many questions remain about how he will guide the economy.
The candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio Murrieta, who was chosen last Sunday, is virtually guaranteed to win the August election since his party has not lost in 64 years.
His initial statements that he had no intention of reversing any of Mr.
Salinas's programs may have calmed the immediate fears of investors.
But they leave unanswered such questions as what Mr.
Colosio would do about the strength of the Mexican peso, balancing inflation against economic growth or maintaining a balanced budget.


Abduction Charge Expected In Case of a California Girl
Kidnapping charges in the case of a girl abducted during a slumber party in a town north of here will be filed early next week, law-enforcement officials announced tonight after a palm print found in the bedroom of Polly Hannah Klaas was reported to match that of the prime suspect in the case.
The officials of the Petaluma Police Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation said the palm print was just one piece of evidence linking the abduction to the suspect, Richard Allen Davis.
But they would not discuss any other details.


ULSTER TALKS FAIL TO MAP PEACE DEAL
After seven hours of apparently heated discussions, the Prime Ministers of Britain and Ireland failed today to reach agreement on a new formula that could lead to an end to violence in Northern Ireland and pave the way for formal peace talks involving the Irish Republican Army.
But both John Major of Britain and Albert Reynolds of Ireland said they would meet again next week in Brussels, and there is also expected to be a third meeting, probably in London, before Christmas.


Review/Music; An Example for Violin Prodigies
A suggestion for the current crop of violin prodigies: perfect your tone and do as you like until you turn 20 or so, then go have a long talk with Anne-Sophie Mutter.
A decade ago there was little reason to believe that Ms.
Mutter would develop much beyond her gorgeous purity of sound to achieve thoughtful musicianship.
Now, perhaps partly because of her impassioned involvement with contemporary composition in recent years, as she herself professes, the 30-year-old fiddler continues to evolve into a savvy, individual artist at an astonishing rate.
Ms.
Mutter's performance of the Brahms Concerto with Kurt Masur and the New York Philharmonic on Thursday evening was utterly fascinating, putting indomitable virtuosity to the most compelling rhetorical use this side of Gidon Kremer.
Tonal beauty abounded, often in spite of the abandon with which Ms.
Mutter lit into passages.
No phrase went unconsidered, least of all in the standard first-movement cadenza by Joseph Joachim, where Ms.
Mutter's deconstruction turned up not only Viennese schmaltz but also real humor.


Review/Jazz; Trio of Peterson Stand-Ins
Carnegie Hall presented three pianists on Thursday night as a tribute to Oscar Peterson, who had been scheduled to appear but canceled because of ill health.
The three -- McCoy Tyner, Ahmad Jamal and Dave Brubeck -- brought radically different styles, and being such strong musical personalities, they played works that rarely had much to do with Mr.
Peterson.
Mr.
Tyner opened the show with a set of unaccompanied tunes.
He's a virtuosic pianist, and on piece after piece, from Tadd Dameron's "Ladybird" to a closing blues, he piled ideas and harmonies on top of ideas, stopping suddenly to introduce moments of quiet.
He cut time down to a crawl, only to make it bolt.
Mr.
Tyner's time is so strong that his rippling lines, spaced out between melody notes, seemed like foundations for the performances.
On each tune Mr.
Tyner stacked up sound, letting the piano ring with overtones that filled up the hall.


Supreme Court Justices Sit for Pictures, but Only Briefly


Want to Reduce Those Tax Bills for 1993? Only 27 Days Left; Capital Gains Look Attractive, But May Lead Investors Astray
"Eat your vegetables!" If you ignored this parental order as a child, you probably got to hear "The Boy Who Was Too Weak to Play Baseball" or some other, equally alarming tale.
In similar fashion, investment advisers issue stern orders, a main one being, Don't let taxes drive your investments!
"Tax considerations in investments should be just that -- a consideration," said Terry J. Siman, the president of the Institute of Certified Financial Planners.
For the heedless, advisers trot out scary stories worthy of Mom and Dad.
A favorite: "Young Couple's Tax-Free Portfolio Eaten by Inflation."


New Job for Tollner
TED TOLLNER, who coached Southern Cal from 1983 to 1986, signed a five-year contract as head coach at San Diego State yesterday.
Tollner will remain quarterback coach of the Los Angeles Rams through the end of the National Football League season, while at the same time assembling a coaching staff and beginning to recruit at San Diego State.


Alabama's Langham Finished as a Collegian
The National Collegiate Athletic Association yesterday denied Alabama's appeal to restore the eligibility of ANTONIO LANGHAM, ending the college career of one of the country's top defensive backs.
The decision makes Langham, the Crimson Tide's career interception leader, ineligible for the Southeastern Conference championship game today against No. 9 Florida.
He will also be barred from No. 16 Alabama's bowl game, expected to be either the Sugar Bowl or the Gator Bowl.


Same Script: Nets 1 Step and 1 Point Too Short
Although Charles Barkley had a game-high 34 points, it was Kevin Johnson and Oliver Miller who secured the Suns' 104-103 victory over the Nets tonight before 20,049 fans, the second sellout crowd of the season at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
It was Johnson who drained a 21-foot shot from the right corner with 2.2 seconds left to give the Suns their margin of victory.
And it was Miller who kicked the ball out to Johnson and then, after a Nets timeout, blocked Armon Gilliam's shot from the left corner at the buzzer.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about death threats against a Bangladeshi writer referred incorrectly to fighting between Bangladesh and Pakistan in 1971.
Three million people died in the war, not 30 million.


Observer; The Princess, Stupid
Whenever I find myself growing grim about the mouth; whenever it is a damp, drizzly November in my soul; whenever I find myself involuntarily pausing before coffin warehouses, then I account it high time to consult People magazine as soon as I can, for I recognize the symptoms all too clearly.
Elitism has cast its pall upon me.
The mail confirms it.
"Elitist!" growls the displeased reader, proud of being that celebrity-besotted corporate human, The Common Person, which is composed of The Common Man and The Common Woman.
People magazine is my cure for this elitist onset.


In Albany, a Gridlock of Egos; Legislative Principle at Issue? 'Not Giving In to Norman.'
This is a city long used to legislative gridlock.
But even here, the tale of how a $15 million rail project has stalled a $21 billion transportation plan has raised eyebrows.
For seven months, negotiators for the Republican-controlled Senate, the Democratic-controlled Assembly and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo have been trying to divide $21 billion for road, rail and airport projects across the state, $9.5 billion of it for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which operates New York City's mass transit system.


3's Are Wild as Virginia Beats Princeton
Princeton was unable to use its speed from midfield today and suffered a 3-1 loss to Virginia in the semifinals of the National Collegiate Athletic Association soccer tournament.
Nate Friends scored the goals for Virginia, all in the first half, putting the Cavaliers (21-3) in position not only to capture a third consecutive title and fourth in the last five years, but also to become the first team to three straight times in the N.C.A.A. tournament, which began in 1959.


Bosnia Muslims Vow to Keep Whole Capital as Land Is Split
Grimly facing the carving up of their infant country into Serbian, Croatian and Muslim cantons, Bosnian Government leaders returned today from inconclusive peace talks in Geneva vowing that their besieged capital would not be divided.
Government officials said glumly that the partition of Bosnia now seemed inevitable and that negotiations were focused on the fate of several crucial pieces of land.
But even though the status of Sarajevo was discussed at the talks, Bosnian Government officials said they would not agree to a partition of the city.


Coach Rants and Raves But Islanders Still Lose.
On Thursday night he benched them.
Tonight he screamed at them.
If only he could play the game for them, then Coach Al Arbour might be able to prevent his Islanders from doing themselves these dread disservices on the ice.
Instead, the team is slumping along on a two-game losing streak, first by 7-3 to the Bruins in Boston on Thursday and then by 3-2 to the Quebec Nordiques tonight at Nassau Coliseum.


As Oil Prices Slide, OPEC Reaches Out for Cooperation
Steep drops in oil prices, like those that followed OPEC's failure to agree on production cuts last week, are usually greeted with relief from consumers.
But the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, in an apparent retreat from a seven-year policy of defending oil prices, has issued a tacit warning that lower oil prices are a double-edged sword that can wound all the world's producers, and eventually its consumers.


Russia Showing Gains in Economic Performance
Nearly two years after Russia began its great economic experiment, freeing prices as it moved toward a market economy, industrial production seems to have stopped falling and the ruble has become relatively stable against the dollar.
Together with the privatization of important parts of state industry, these are considerable achievements as the Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin approaches a crucial parliamentary election and constitutional referendum on Dec. 12.
They mean that most Russians still have jobs, that their salaries are worth more in dollars, and that there are goods in the shops to buy, though often at prices that make Russians blanch.


A Drug Lord Is Buried as a Folk Hero
To chants of "Viva Pablo!" thousands of mourners crowded a muddy hilltop cemetery today to bury Pablo Escobar Gaviria.
A ruthless cocaine baron to the outside world, Colombia's most wanted criminal was a folk hero to many poorer residents of Medellin's tough hillside shantytowns.
"He built houses and cared about the poor," lamented a 29-year-old engineering student as mourners scrambled over broken glass in a cemetery chapel window and swarmed around the open casket of the trafficker, who died Thursday in a hail of police bullets.
"In the future, people will go to his tomb to pray, the way they would to a saint."


U.S. Seeks to Bring France Into Trade Pact's Fold
On Nov. 19, two days after the House of Representatives had approved the North American Free Trade Agreement, Joseph O'Mara, the chief United States trade negotiator for agricultural questions, arrived here with a startling new mandate: look for compromises with the French and make a long-stalled world trade accord happen.
His mission to Brussels, which started a process that has brought the European Community and the United States to an outline agreement on farm trade that opens the way for a GATT accord, reflected a key policy decision taken by President Clinton and the United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, immediately after the passage of the North American pact, senior United States officials said.


U.S. Offering to Mediate Russian-Ukrainian Disputes on Security
The United States offered today to mediate a range of thorny security disputes between Russia and Ukraine, including military protection for Ukraine, the dismantling of its nuclear arsenal and Russian compensation for Ukraine's highly enriched uranium, senior State Department officials said today.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher made the offer during a meeting with Ukraine's Foreign Minister, Anatoly Zlenko, as part of the Clinton Administration's strategy to nudge Ukraine into giving up its nuclear weapons by offering it political and economic incentives, the officials said.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
DETROIT LIONS -- Signed Eric Lynch, running back, and Marty Thompson, tight end, from the practice squad.
Waived Toby Caston, linebacker.
Hockey


Sports of The Times; Another Exercise In Hoopla
EFFECTIVE immediately, sportswriters and broadcasters who vote for the national championship in college football should cease and desist.
Give back the ballot.
This is a suggested first step toward recovering the credibility that has been lost during a season in which the lines separating observer from participant began to blur.


U.S.-Made Vehicles Sell Briskly
With car and truck sales having been down so long, automobile executives here seemed reluctant, until recently, to hail the upturn that began last spring, as though fearing they might jinx it.
But these days terms like "boom" and "record sales" are heard and auto makers reported today that sales of domestically made vehicles surged 12 percent in late November.
For the month, they reported that sales of all vehicles -- cars and light trucks assembled in North America or shipped from overseas -- climbed 10.4 percent from a strong period last year, to a total of 1,113,233.


So Much Stray Gunfire, How Many Stray Lives?
IN the first 11 months of this year 327 people who were not intended targets were shot in New York City.
Last year the total was 342, and the year before that it was 384.
Nobody knows how many bystanders were hit by bullets 10 years ago because no such tallies were maintained.
Back then no one felt the need.
Now there is a running count, as almost every day people are gunned down minding their business.
Children lying in bed have been wounded by stray fire from the streets.
Shoppers or people driving to work have been killed by shooters aiming at someone else, killers who never knew those they killed.


Bobsled Driver Is Sliding Backward
This was going to be Brian Shimer's year at the Winter Olympics.
He drove the USA I four-man bobsled team to first place in the World Cup standing last winter, then grabbed a bronze medal at the world championships.
Two months ago, he set a course record of 53.01 seconds for a two-man sled at the Olympic track in Lillehammer, Norway.
America seemed likely to win its first Olympic bobsledding medal since 1956.
Since then, though, nothing has gone right for Shimer.
The United States has no Olympic-caliber bobsled run, so the American team spent its autumn training in Europe.
It has been difficult finding sufficient time to train and test new sleds, Shimer said in a telephone interview from Lillehammer.
Unfamiliar food hasn't helped, either.
The members of his team have all dropped 5 to 10 pounds, Shimer said, which saps strength needed for a critical part of any bobsled race, the 50-meter push start.
Throw in a calf injury suffered by Shimer, and it's no wonder that his team has had trouble finishing in the top 10, much less the top three, on the early World Cup circuit.


Effort to Curb Drug Flow May Be More Difficult, Officials Say
Despite the death on Thursday of the murderous cocaine trafficker Pablo Escobar Gaviria, drug experts and law enforcement officials said yesterday that efforts to curb drug shipments to the United States might become more difficult rather than less so in the months ahead.
The remaining traffickers will no longer be distracted by fears of Mr.
Escobar's assassination squads, the officials said, but are likely to form closer relationships to make the exporting of drugs more efficient and more profitable.


U.S. JOBLESS RATE FALLS IN NEW SIGN OF BRISK RECOVERY
In what analysts called clinching proof of economic speed-up, the nation's unemployment rate fell four-tenths of a point in November, to 6.4 percent, the biggest monthly improvement in 10 years.
The unexpected decline resulted mainly from strong job creation that removed 534,000 people from the unemployment ranks, according to a survey of the nation's households.
Many of those people returned to jobs from which they had been laid off.
Adult men were the principal beneficiaries.


2 Students' Apparent Suicides Bewilder L.I. Town
Two high school honor students, described by friends as normal teen-agers who gossiped in the library, danced at parties and wore the latest combat boots, lay down in front of a rushing train Thursday evening in what the police have called a double suicide.
The two girls, Mili Subudhi, 15, and Ellen Liu, 16, had apparently been planning their deaths for a month, a law-enforcement official said, adding that notes about the suicide had been found among their belongings, including an apology by one girl for the pain it would cause her boyfriend.


Want to Reduce Those Tax Bills for 1993? Only 27 Days Left; Smart Strategies in a Year Marked by Higher Rates
Special! This month only! Save money on your 1993 income taxes!
The Internal Revenue Service does not advertise this fact, but the holiday season is a good time to take advantage of savings opportunities.
Most taxpayers who spend a Saturday or a couple of evenings in the coming weeks reviewing their financial records can ferret out some savings or at least avoid unpleasant surprises, including penalties, in April.


One Drug Lord Dies
Pablo Escobar is dead, gunned down by Colombian security forces as he fled a hideout in Medellin, his hometown and the base of his former international drug empire.
The fugitive who once controlled by violence most of the hemisphere's cocaine traffic has himself died violently.
Regrettably, however, the demise of one powerful drug lord will not bring much relief to societies victimized by the drug trade.
Market control in cocaine has already passed to a cartel based in Cali, another Colombian city.
Even if the suppliers' identities have changed, demand from users remains insatiable.


Pactel's Initial Stock Offer Snapped Up for $1.38 Billion
Investors eager for the third-largest initial sale of stock in history snatched up new shares of the Pacific Telesis Group's wireless telephone operations today.
Shares of the Pactel Corporation, which consists of the fast-expanding cellular telephone and paging subsidiaries of Pacific Telesis, began trading on the New York Stock Exchange at $25.50, well above the $23-a-share price that underwriters had set.
It closed today at $25.50.


Youths Injure Two Sleeping Homeless Men
A group of youths set fire to a cardboard box in which a homeless man was sleeping in Riverside Park yesterday morning, giving him burns on one hand, and they struck another homeless man in the face with a bottle.
Advocates for the homeless called the incident just the latest gruesome reminder of a rising tide of violence against the homeless by young people who view them as less than human.
Six teen-agers, who the police said were so brazen that they did not leave the scene after attacking the men, were arrested.
The youths live within a few blocks of where the attack took place, in a concrete culvert in the park across Riverside Drive from 105th Street.


Pity the Poor Horses
In 1989 the New York City Council, presumably saddened by the sight of carriage horses trembling, collapsing and occasionally dying on Manhattan's hectic streets, wisely passed Local Law 89, which restricts the times and areas in which the carriages may operate.
A few years later the Council had a change of heart and tried to weaken those restrictions.
But Mayor David Dinkins became the horses' champion; he vetoed the bill.
Now the Council is at it again.
Two weeks ago Councilman Noach Dear introduced a bill that would increase the animals' workweek, abolish most of the safety and humane provisions of Local Law 89 and return the carriages to heavy traffic.
And this week the Council's Transportation Committee approved a "compromise" bill, not as sweeping as Mr.
Dear's entry, that nonetheless would lengthen the horses' hours between the shafts, expand the midtown areas where the carriages can cruise and pick up passengers and extend their weekday hours of operation.
To which one can only respond: Why?


Plan to Select City Tenants Is Affirmed
A Federal court yesterday upheld the selection process for a new public housing project in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, that Hispanic residents there have charged favors the community's Hasidic families.
The decision, rendered by Judge Robert W. Sweet of Federal District Court in Manhattan, affirms a new plan by the New York City Housing Authority to draw prospective residents for a new 150-unit complex on Berry Street, as well as other new developments citywide, from two waiting lists rather than one.


Review/Film; 'Blue,' the First Installment of a Tricolor Trilogy
"Blue" was shown as part of the recent New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 12.
The film opens tomorrow at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas, Broadway and 63d Street.
Krzysztof Kieslowski's "Blue," the Polish director's latest French film, is about Julie (Juliette Binoche), a grieving widow and mother whose husband, "one of the most important composers of our time," and young daughter are killed in the car accident she survives.


Scars of Mining Endure as Repair Fund Dries Up
Like almost everybody who lives in Ajax Hollow, Charles Miller set his house high on the mountain, far above the winding road and out of the path of the unpredictable stream that floods its banks after heavy rain.
Then the hill that was his front yard melted away in a landslide last year.
The slide, caused by the steady seepage of water from a coal mine abandoned decades ago, carried away so much dirt that Mr.
Miller's front door is now only a few feet from the edge of a 100-foot cliff.


Review/Television; The Case for Dogs (And Against Mankind)
On the evidence of "Dogs," the six-part documentary that begins tomorrow evening on the Arts &amp; Entertainment cable channel, a dog's life takes many forms, mostly to suit its masters.


'Squeegees' Rank High on Next Police Commissioner's Priority List
William J. Bratton, the next Police Commissioner of New York City, promised today to redirect the city's police force, to attack the largest crime problems by focusing first on the smallest and to press for changes in the courts and prisons to handle the added burden of more arrests.
As an example of seeking large rewards by solving little problems, he said that one of his priorities would be to order a crackdown on "squeegees," the men and women who wipe the windshields of motorists waiting in traffic.
Mr.
Bratton argued that a tolerance for such minor infractions of the law has demoralized police officers and contributed to the city's sense of menace.
A Change in Approach
"As minute a problem as that might seem in the overall scope of a city with 2,000 murders, squeegees are of great significance," said Mr.
Bratton, now the Boston Police Commissioner, "because like fare evasion and like disorder on the subways, it's that type of activity that is generating fear."


Review/Opera; Blood and Thunder From the Young Verdi
The Metropolitan Opera has taken on an ambitious project this season: to expand its repertory with first productions of neglected works ("Stiffelio" and "Rusalka"), to pay tribute to the 25th-anniversary Met seasons of the world's two most renowned tenors (Placido Domingo and Luciano Pavarotti) and to explore the range of Verdi's achievement.
And that project, so far, has been an astonishing success; Mr.
Domingo has been in top form, and both productions are deservedly entering the repertory.
But on Thursday night, with its first production of "I Lombardi alla Prima Crociata," clunky early Verdi about the first Crusade, the Met was defeated by directorial misconception, hazard-strewn vocalism and the bluntness of a potboiler by a nascent genius.
Despite James Levine's presence in the pit and the much-heralded appearance of Luciano Pavarotti as the tenor love interest, the case for this opera's revival has actually been set back by this production.


More Students Are Violent At Young Age
New figures on crime and disorder in New York City public schools, show that more and more serious incidents are occurring among younger and younger students in many junior high schools and even some elementary schools.
Most schools still report few problems.
But, student for student, more serious incidents -- from assaults to the possession of guns and makeshift weapons -- were reported last year in eight junior high schools than in the worst, long-troubled high schools.


North Korea Softens Nuclear Stance
In a move that keeps alive the possibility of a diplomatic solution to the escalating crisis over North Korea's nuclear program, Clinton Administration officials said today that North Korea had offered to allow international inspectors wider access to nuclear sites.
North Korea's latest diplomatic initiative falls short of American demands that it broaden its dialogue with South Korea.
But Administration officials said tonight that North Korea hadpresented a proposal that offered hope that international economic sanctions might not be needed.
North Korea has said it would view such sanctions as an act of war.
Presented at U.N.
Meeting
The new North Korean proposal was presented in a meeting today at the United Nations between North Korean diplomats and mid-level State Department officials.


How Bob Wagner Jr. Delivered the Goods
To the Editor:
With the passing of Robert F. Wagner Jr. and the many remembrances of his accomplishments, his self-effacing personality brought to mind an encounter with him some years ago.


CHRONICLE
Complaining of "overwhelming" intrusion by the news media into her life, and saying she hoped for "more time and space," the PRINCESS OF WALES said yesterday that she would reduce her public commitments and scale back her charitable affiliations.
With tears welling up in her eyes, the Princess, who separated from PRINCE CHARLES last year, made her surprise announcement at a luncheon given by the Headway National Head Injuries Association in London.


Corrections
A list of credits on Thursday with a cable television review of "All Aboard" misspelled the given name of a producer.
She is Jana DeHart.
The list also gave incorrect titles, provided by the American Movie Classics channel, for Ms.
DeHart and another producer.
Ms.
DeHart was the editor and producer; Marcia Ely was the writer and producer.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  North Carolina Routs George Washington  With all the attention on the matchup of the marquee centers, two North Carolina reserves stole the show in Charlotte, N.C.
Freshman forward Jerry Stackhouse scored 19 and sophomore guard Dante Calabria added 17, both career-highs, as the No. 4 Tar Heels beat No. 22 George Washington, 87-62, last night in the opening round of the Tournament of Champions.
North Carolina (5-1) meets Brigham Young, a 72-68 winner over South Carolina, in tonight's championship game. (AP)


Want to Reduce Those Tax Bills for 1993? Only 27 Days Left; Capital Gains Look Attractive, But May Lead Investors Astray
"Eat your vegetables!" If you ignored this parental order as a child, you probably got to hear "The Boy Who Was Too Weak to Play Baseball" or some other, equally alarming tale.
In similar fashion, investment advisers issue stern orders, a main one being, Don't let taxes drive your investments!
"Tax considerations in investments should be just that -- a consideration," said Terry J. Siman, the president of the Institute of Certified Financial Planners.
For the heedless, advisers trot out scary stories worthy of Mom and Dad.
A favorite: "Young Couple's Tax-Free Portfolio Eaten by Inflation."


Cal Names a New A.D.
JOHN V. KASSER, a veteran administrator with a reputation for building programs, was hired by the University of California as athletic director yesteday.
Currently the athletic director at UC-Santa Barbara, he will begin his new job on Jan. 17.


U-Haul Bid Is Challenge To Shurgard
U-Haul International Inc. challenged one of its competitors in the do-it-yourself storage business, Shurgard Inc. of Seattle, yesterday.
Shurgard had been seeking since February to consolidate or "roll up" ownership of 17 real estate partnerships that it runs into a single publicly traded entity or trust.
Those partnerships represent interests in rental storage spaces.
Investors were told that they would receive a package of stock and notes backed by $387 million worth of assets after expenses if they consented to the roll-up no later than Jan. 28.


Budget Advice for the Mayor-Elect
Mayor-elect Rudolph Giuliani was too quick to reject new proposals to end the annual agony of closing New York City's budget gap.
Mayor David Dinkins sought these proposals for his own use, turning to three New Yorkers with a wealth of experience in budgets and politics.
Mr.
Dinkins's defeat does not diminish the practical value of their work.
Indeed, their proposals offer Mr.
Giuliani a smart starting point.
Without the hedging that is common among public officials, the three advisers say the budget outlook for next year and beyond is even worse than the latest forecast, which was worse than the one before.
Given that bad news, the advisers produced a "menu" of deficit reduction options, virtually all so painful or politically risky that their chances seem slim.
But their underlying point is that permanent budget repair hurts, and is not possible unless everyone shares the pain.


A Bad Gag Order in Canada
A Canadian judge has gagged his country's press from reporting about a notorious murder trial, ostensibly in the interests of fairness.
The gag order is broad even by the standards of a Canadian judiciary that is far more tolerant of censorship than U.S. courts.
To help enforce it, border police have been stopping trucks carrying U.S. newspapers to keep Canadians from learning what their neighbors to the south know about the case.
This bizarre episode reminds us why the U.S. places a high value on public trials, reported in a free press.
Two centuries of strife over freedom of the press have taught that gags on speech, even in the name of justice, are instruments of tyranny even when they fail at total suppression.
With due respect to Canada's sovereign power and the judge's sincerity, his action is both futile (the news will get out) and wrong in principle.


Egg Ad Dispute Goes to F.T.C.
A dispute over advertising for an egg product has been referred to the Federal Trade Commission by the National Advertising Review Board, an advertising industry self-regulatory organization that settles complaints about ads' truth and accuracy.
It was the first time such a disagreement has been referred to a Government agency since the board, under the aegis of the Council of Better Business Bureaus, was established in 1971.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7 SIGNS OF RUSSIAN ECONOMIC GAINS
Nearly two years after Russia freed prices for a market economy, industrial production seems to have stopped falling and the ruble is relatively stable against the dollar.  1


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.97
3.04
2.86
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.10
3.25
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.26
3.24
3.38
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.30
5.34
6.46
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.23
6.28
7.48
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.25
7.31
8.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.65
5.66
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Girls' Cross-Country Taking A Heavy Toll, Study Shows
Three years ago, Melody Fairchild of Boulder, Colo., then a feathery 5-foot-2-inch, 95-pound runner, was heralded as the greatest female distance-running prospect since a teen-aged Mary Decker first appeared on the track scene nearly 20 years before.
Fairchild, of Boulder High, won two national high school cross-country titles, broke many records in track and cross-country and became the first American girl to break 10 minutes for the two-mile run, clocking 9 minutes 55.92 seconds on an indoor track.


METRO DIGEST
QUESTIONS AFTER TEEN-AGERS' SUICIDE
Two Setauket, L.I., high school honor students, described by friends as normal teen-agers who gossiped in the library, danced at parties and wore the latest combat boots, lay down in front of a rushing train Thursday evening in what the police have called a double suicide.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY
NEW RULES AGAINST AGE (OR YOUTH) BIAS
New rules issued by the City's Commission on Human Rights will take effect on Dec. 13 prohibiting discrimination based on age -- or youth, right down to infants -- in public places.
Laws prohibiting age discrimination are common, but most of those pertain to housing and employment.
City officials said they thought this was the first law in the country specifically aimed at barring such bias in places that are generally open to the public.
Page 1.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The nation's unemployment rate fell four-tenths of a point in November, to 6.4 percent, the biggest monthly improvement in 10 years.
The decline resulted mainly from strong job creation and the hiring back of many people who had been laid off.  [ Page 1. ]  The employment picture improved in New York and New Jersey, but New York City's rate continued to run high.  [ 48. ]
Stores, restaurants and hospitals in New York City will no longer be allowed to bar the elderly, teen-agers and children under new age-discrimination rules that will take effect on Dec. 13.  [ 1. ]


Sparks, If Healthy, Has Job Security
Cornerback Phillipi Sparks need not worry. His job is safe.
Sparks tore ligaments in his right foot against the Los Angeles Rams on Sept. 19 and has been out of action ever since.
Only recently has Sparks been able to run hard on the foot, and this week he looked so good he will probably be able to begin practicing again with the team.
Chances are that Sparks will be ready for Indianapolis next Sunday.


Those Heady Dreams of Jets Are Resting on One Very Stiff Neck
Boomer Esiason's physical condition is not critical.
The quarterback's mood today, though, had certainly been downgraded to serious.
There were no jokes about the next day's newspaper headlines.
There were polite refusals to answer direct questions about his sore neck.
And there was a limited practice, the Jets' quarterback forced to "shut it down" after a handful of passes and proclaim that he expected improvement by Sunday, when the Jets play Indianapolis at Giants Stadium.


Ichiro Isoda, 80, Dies; Ran Sumitomo Bank
Ichiro Isoda, once one of Japan's most powerful bankers, died yesterday at a hospital in Osaka.
He was 80.
News reports said he had had a heart ailment.


A Signal to Holiday Travelers


General Is Scolded in Ethics Inquiry
The Secretary of the Air Force announced today that the general who directed the allied air campaign against Iraq improperly intervened with a promotion board this fall in an effort to block the advancement of a lower-ranking general, and as a result has been disciplined.
The officer, Lieut.
Gen.
Buster C. Glosson, 51, received a letter of admonishment from Secretary Sheila E. Widnall, a step that will severely hamper any chances for promotion.


Yacht in Distress Found Safe in Ocean
A rescue effort by two competitors in the Whitbread Round the World Race succeeded last night in finding the damaged Italian yacht, Brooksfield.
The 60-foot yacht, which had sent off a distress signal earlier in the day, was located about 2,000 miles southwest of its next port of call, Fremantle, Australia, in the Indian Ocean.
No injuries were reported among Brooksfield's 11-person crew.
But the yacht reported that its rudder had broken, opening a hole in the back of the boat.
Ocean water poured in and short-circuited the yacht's electronics, said Bill Trenkle, an associate of the yachtsman Dennis Conner.


Are Four Jock Heroes So Saintly After All?
Arthur Ashe's likeness gazes somberly at us from books, awards, solicitations and now from Mike Tyson's arm.
Joe Paterno broadcasts noblesse oblige after one of his quarterbacks quits the team.
Dennis Byrd is walking to work after being carried off the field.
David Williams misses a game to be father of the year.
But before we induct a new class of sports saints, do we need to hear from the Jock Devil's Advocate?
Everyone understands that at one level sports stars are like rap stars, rock stars, movie stars, just products selling products.
Shaquille O'Neal having the Superman logo tatooed onto his flesh is a cartoon wearing a cartoon.


Constant Updates for a True Student of the Game
It is the fax machine that makes one realize the extent of the obsession.
Neil Smith gave it to his mother shortly after he was named the Rangers' general manager.
It was a simple gesture, a way for his mother, the hockey fan and former player, to keep up with the team.
The fax machine, though, was only one means of keeping Marg Cater informed.
She also receives a tape of every Ranger home game.
And packages of newspaper clippings from New York.
And a whole host of hockey publications.
And, of course, regular phone updates from her son.


A 3d Pitch on Ruth's House
On a cool and cloudy April 18, 1923, 60,000 fans crowded into Yankee Stadium to witness the opening of a quantum leap in ball parks: a triple-deck Colosseum built for a mere $2.5 million.
The concrete-and-steel gem had quirky outfield dimensions tailored for Babe Ruth; three grand entrances graced by carved eagle-and-baseball bat emblems; ornate ticket kiosks and an exquisite Gothic facade -- a copper tiara for the greatest of baseball cathedrals -- ringing the overhanging roof.
Its capacity was 50 percent larger than any ball park built before it.
It would later expand to 74,000 seats, and stone monuments honoring Ruth, Lou Gehrig and Miller Huggins would be planted in center field, fostering the aura of a baseball shrine.


A School Case Goes to the Heart Of a Great Issue
THE village of Kiryas Joel, N.Y., founded and inhabited exclusively by deeply observant Jews of the Satmar Hasidic sect, is such an unusual piece of the American fabric that the isolated life there might ordinarily appear far removed from the rest of the country's concerns.
But four years ago, New York State gave the Hasidim of Kiryas Joel their own public school district.
When the Supreme Court agreed last week to decide the district's constitutionality, Kiryas Joel suddenly became a mirror for the ambivalence of a society that both honors religion and regards with deep suspicion any effort to harness government for religion's benefit.


Fixing Doorbells and Chimes to Ring in the Holiday Season
THE holidays are high season for doorbells and chimes, and so now is the time to fix them.
Bells and chimes operate on very low current -- 6 to 24 volts, depending on the model -- and because shock from such a small charge is virtually imperceptible, most repairs can be made without turning off the power.
But do not perform tests or make repairs with the power on if wearing a pacemaker, as contact with even small amounts of electricity can disrupt it.


Manager's Profile
Jean-Marie Eveillard  Fund: Sogen International; $1.3 billion in assets; 3.75 percent sales load.
Manager since 1979. (Sponsor: Sogen A.M. Corporation, New York.)  Born: Jan. 23, 1940; Poitiers, France.
Education: Ecole des Hautes Etudes Commerciales, Paris.
Last Vacation: Two weeks in August with family on the coast of France.
Fund Performance: Year through October: +22.1% (all asset-allocation funds: +17.4%); five years: +12.7% (+10.8%)*
Stock Market View: (self-rating; = most bearish).
Stock Pick: Bank for International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland, because the stock trades at less than the net cash and gold held at the bank.
Current Strategy: "To preserve capital" with cash (an unusually high 30 percent) and gold-related securities (8 percent).
Another 30 percent of the fund is invested in overseas equities, 20 percent in United States stocks and the balance in fixed-income securities.  *Source: Morningstar Inc.


The Glorious Mosaic
IT may be hard to be a saint in the city, but it's not for lack of places to worship.
From sweat-soaked services at a storefront Pentecostal church in Red Hook to midday prayers at a gleaming new mosque on the Upper East Side to weekend vespers at the grandly unfinished Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, the changing religious terrain of New York reflects both the city's ethnic diversity and people's need to make sense of their lives in terms that bind them to one another and transcend the ordinary.
"Whatever you're comfortable with -- culturally, esthetically or emotionally -- you'll find it in New York," said the Rev.
Patricia Reeberg, executive director of the New York Council of Churches, "whatever your tastebuds fancy in a spiritual way."


Academics and Their Prose
To the Editor:
As the widow of two writers, I certainly identified my personal experience with Patricia Nelson Limerick's essay.


World Markets; London's Early Christmas Present
The annual unveiling of the British Government's spending and taxation plans is nothing if not political theater, and this year's ceremonies, held last Tuesday, have won rave reviews on London's financial markets.
Following tradition, Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke emerged from his official residence at No. 11 Downing Street last week and hoisted the tattered briefcase long used to carry the budget speech to Parliament.


Bookshelf
A GREAT MIRACLE HAPPENED THERE: A Chanukah Story.
By Karla Kuskin.
Illustrated by Robert Andrew Parker.
Willa Perlman/ HarperCollins. $15. (Ages 5 to 8) The narrator has invited Harry, the boy who lives across the street, to share the first night of Hanukkah with his family, hear the story of the great miracle of the lights, have supper and play dreidels.
The text is conversational and engaging, and the watercolor illustrations, set both in the present and in the past, seem to glow.
WHILE STANDING ON ONE FOOT: Puzzle Stories and Wisdom Tales From the Jewish Tradition.
By Nina Jaffe and Steve Zeitlin.
Illustrated by John Segal.
Holt. $14.95. (Ages 8 and up) This collection of "wisdom tales" comes from many times and places in the Jewish experience -- the Middle East, medieval Spain, Eastern Europe and contemporary New York.
The stories are both provocative and entertaining.
HANUKKAH, OH, HANUKKAH!
A Treasury of Stories, Songs, and Games to Share.
Compiled by Wendy Wax.
Illustrated by John Speirs.
Bantam. $12.95. (Ages 6 and up) Just what the title says: some pleasing craft ideas, songs, latke recipes and how to spin dreidels.
KING OF KINGS.
By Susan Hill.
Illustrated by John Lawrence.
Candlewick Press. $14.95. (Ages 6 to 10) Mr.
Hegarty, an elderly widower who lives by the wharves, keeps Christmas in his heart and rescues an abandoned baby.
It's a modest but affecting story, deftly illustrated.
CHRISTMAS GIF': An Anthology of Christmas Poems, Songs, and Stories.
Compiled by Charlemae Hill Rollins.
Illustrated by Ashley Bryan.
Morrow Junior Books. $14. (All ages) The text of this fine anthology, which includes works by Langston Hughes, Paul Laurence Dunbar, Zora Neale Hurston and Effie Lee Newsome, was first published in 1963.
The handsome new edition is illustrated with woodcuts.


Anna Grimaldi and Mark Eskenazi
Anna Marie Grimaldi, a graduate student in education at New York University, and Mark Steven Eskenazi, a medical student there, are planning an October wedding.
Miss Grimaldi, 24, is the daughter of Joseph A. Grimaldi of Roslyn, L.I., and Camille C. Grimaldi of Commack, L.I., and the stepdaughter of Fern Nelson Grimaldi.
She graduated from the State University at Albany and is studying for a master's degree at N.Y.U.
Her father is a senior executive vice president of the Bank of New York in Manhattan and the president of its subsidiary the BNY Financial Corporation.


Carmen Torruella, Jarvis Slade Jr.
Carmen Beatriz Torruella, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Radames A. Torruella of San Juan, P.R., was married yesterday to Jarvis J. Slade Jr., the son of Mr.
Slade and Alice P. Slade, both of New York.
The Rev.
Juan Berdnarik performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at San Jose Church in Old San Juan.
Mrs.
Slade is a securities analyst at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University, where she also received an M.B.A. degree.
Her father is a senior partner and the head of the labor department of McConnell Valdes, a law firm in San Juan.


Trailing by 16-6, Union Rallies to 3d Title in Row
It took Union's line averaging 230 pounds longer to dominate today's championship game than Coach Lou Rettino preferred.
But once it dug in on the muddy field at John Bauer Stadium, a third consecutive New Jersey state title was inevitable.
Union (10-1) rallied from a 16-6 deficit to beat Randolph (9-1-1), 19-16.
"I got nothing but respect for that Randolph team," said Rettino.
"They were so gritty and gutty. But we were just too big and strong for them in the fourth quarter."


Lisa J. Tropp, T. E. Fitzgerald
Mrs.
Alan R. Tropp of Mamaroneck, N.Y., has announced the engagement of her daughter Lisa Jill Tropp to Timothy E. Fitzgerald, a son of Gerald and Eileen Fitzgerald of Cooperstown, N.Y.
A March wedding is planned.


Party


Under Their Skin
"I can't believe he put that on the cover," Mariella says with a groan, studying a close-up photograph of herself, bug-eyed on cocaine, a hypodermic needle clenched in her gap-toothed jaws.
Months before, when the photographer Eugene Richards showed it to her for the first time, the self-recognition left her in tears.
"I never looked at it from an outsider's point of view, cause I'm living it," she explains.
"Gene told me, 'You have to see what it looks like.' "
Leafing through an advance copy of "Cocaine True, Cocaine Blue," the intimate record of lives scorched or terminated by drugs that has preoccupied Richards for the last four years, Mariella now seems to take a disguised pride in having been chosen as the terrifying poster image.


Brooks Johnson, George Johnson
Heather Brooks Johnson, a daughter of J. Robert Johnson of New York and Mrs.
Paul G. Sullivan of White Plains, was married yesterday to George Marshall Johnson, a son of Helen Kemp Edwards of Four Oaks, N.C., and the late George E. Johnson.
The Rev.
Jonathan Coffee officiated at the Episcopal Church of St.
James the Less in Scarsdale, N.Y.
The bride, 29, is known as Brooks.
She is a sales representative for All-Tel Cellular Phones in Gastonia, N.C.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.


Correction
A chart with the Mutual Funds column last Sunday rendered the 1991, 1992 and 1993 figures for rights offerings by closed-end funds incorrectly.
A corrected version appears today on page 37.


Gunman Robs Riders in Van, Killing Driver
A man driving an illegal livery van on a Brooklyn street was shot to death on Friday night in front of four other passengers in what the police said was the first shooting involving the unlicensed vans, which have proliferated on city streets in recent years.
The shooting of the driver, Frank James, 45, comes as the police struggle to stop a seemingly unending series of killings of cabdrivers.
But unlike the 41 cabby killings this year, the shooting Friday night happened in front of several passengers who were also held up by the gunman.


SUNDAY, December 5, 1993; Buying Out of the Dream
No one should get the idea from the Ed Rollins-Christie Whitman show that Americans don't like crooked politicians.
Americans love crooked politicians.
Well, some Americans and some politicians, like Huey Long and James Curley.
At every election some television pundit will revive and venerate the old Irish-American political adage: Vote early and vote often.
Actually, Americans have a fondness for all sorts of crooks - Jesse James, Willie Sutton, Bonnie and Clyde and, most recently, the possibly crooked Father Pat Moloney, an alleged accomplice in a big Brink's robbery.
Who could not like a priest who steals $7.4 million, even if it may have been for the I.R.A.?
Americans don't support terrorism, or robbery for that matter; they just like people who can put novel financing plans into action.


Q and A
Traveling in England
Q.
My family will be in England for a week next February.
We will be staying in London and hope to visit Greenwich, Windsor and Salisbury.
Will those trips be covered on the London Visitor Travelcard?
And will the plan cover the train from and to Gatwick Airport? -- Marlene Ovrut, Foxboro, Mass.


Knicks Have Recovered, but Smith Hasn't
Other than another flare-up in Charles Smith's left knee, normality returned to Madison Square Garden yesterday afternoon.
The Knicks (10-3) controlled play.
Patrick Ewing (31 points, 10 rebounds) rediscovered the art of making shots.
And the home fans left the building delighted instead of disappointed.
Taking advantage of a weaker, injury-riddled Sacramento Kings team, New York recovered from Thursday's whipping by the Houston Rockets and rolled to a 123-101 victory.
The only troubling aspect for the Knicks was that Smith missed another game because of soreness in his left knee.
Smith missed eight games last month because of cartilage damage in the knee, and he had only returned to the lineup two games ago.
It was uncertain whether Smith would be able to play Monday in Utah, and there was even a chance that Smith would be placed on the injured list.


Why Mexico Has Only One Big Hat In the Ring
THERE was no white smoke.
No cannons boomed.
But when the man handpicked by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari to be his successor was brought to the headquarters of Mexico's governing party last week, the event represented as secretive and undemocratic a process as any selection of a pope or coronation of a king.
That night, thousands of people surrounded party headquarters.
And the streets rang not with rage but elation.
The scene might have dispelled President Clinton's vision of a rising democracy in Mexico, and it probably disappointed those who believed that Mr.
Salinas would make the process of picking the next president more open than it has been during the 64 years that his party or its predecessor have been in power.


'Black Rider' Gives Old Songs a Bitter Twist
"It's so nice to hear all the old songs, isn't it?" says the devil at the close of "The Black Rider," the brilliant and disturbing theatrical collaboration among Tom Waits, Robert Wilson and William S. Burroughs that ended its short run at the Brooklyn Academy of Music last week.
The audience laughs, because Mr.
Waits's score includes many deft imitations of innocent old songs.
But they are far from old and very far from innocent.
Mr.
Waits has made a pop career combining an ominous, despairing sneer with a bemused sentimentality; here all genres become subversive.
Gospel turns demonic; vaudeville turns acidic; 1930's ballads turn morbid.
Some of the best songs sound familiar, as if known for a long while; on closer examination they seem to be walking around in drag.
Styles associated with comfort and sentimentality are inverted, the way David Lynch twisted the warm innocence of the pop standard "Blue Velvet" into an expression of sexual perversion in his film of that name.


We Hardly Knew Ye . . .
To the Editor:
Perhaps Douglas Coupland aspires to attain the same eminence as other generational spokesmen.
Who would not wish to characterize an age as F. Scott Fitzgerald did with the Jazz Age, as J. D. Salinger did with Holden Caulfield and as Jay McInerney did in "Bright Lights, Big City"?
But those of us who read those writers can say we "knew" Fitzgerald and Salinger and McInerney.
And you, Mr.
Coupland, are no Fitzgerald, Salinger or McInerney.
NATALIE ROTHSTEIN  Brookline, Mass.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Upper East Side; Street-Level Fallout From a Tunnel
Ear-rattling jackhammers, the shrill beep of a truck backing up before 7 A.M., debris littering the street: these are some of the complaints heard from Yorkville residents whose lives have been disrupted for the past 15 months by construction work on the city's third water tunnel and distribution system.
"We understand the construction of the new water main is necessary, but the way it has been done shows indifference to the lives of people," said Steven J. Greenberg, a member of the co-op board at 315 East 68th Street.


All Eyes Are on Reyna, Virginia's Star Player
There is widespread agreement that Claudio Reyna of the University of Virginia might just be the most talented individual ever to take part in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's soccer tournament, which began in 1959.
The 20-year-old midfielder from Springfield, N.J., has been blessed with an abundance of soccer gifts, so much so that he may be an integral part of the United States team in the World Cup next summer.


Once Again, President Finds Time to Visit a Troubled State
If Bill Clinton hadn't paid a sick call on California this month, it would have been an exception.
The workaholic President has found time for only three weekends at Camp David and five visits back home to Arkansas.
But the trip this weekend to California, a continent away, is his eighth since taking office.


Corrections
A listing of holiday celebrations in today's issue of The City, section 13 (distributed in most of New York City), misstates the starting date of Hanukkah.
The eight-day festival starts Wednesday at sundown. (As noted in the heading, two pre-holiday celebrations are scheduled today -- a latke-eating contest at the Kings Bay Y.M. &amp; Y.W.H.A. and a holiday workshop at the Riverdale Y.M. &amp; Y.W.H.A.)


THERE'S NO SIMPLE SUICIDE
You showed the kind of leadership one expects from your publication by printing "There's No Simple Suicide." It is time that this issue was faced openly.
Modern medicine has improved the way we are born and live today; shouldn't it also improve our ways of dying?
BIRUTA CAP Easton, Pa.


Atlantic 10 Conference Comes Out of the Cold
They weren't going to make it home.
Of all the possibilities Ron Bertovich faced that messy Sunday last March, selection Sunday, the day that can define or destroy years of effort, the one thing the commissioner of the Atlantic 10 Conference realized was that a family tradition would have to be rearranged.
The blizzard had slowed the trip home to New Jersey from the league's women's tournament in Washington.
His wife, Cheryl, and his daughters, Meghan and Kimmi, would not be able to watch the pairings for the national collegiate basketball tournament at home.
But there were too many hopes at stake to miss this announcement.
They would have to stop along the way.


Academics and Their Prose
To the Editor:
I am a rare one to defend scholars; I live with them, and they mostly get on my nerves.
However, they are usually highly trained and rigorous; they are not well paid for what they do.
Moreover, they have the good taste to stick to the rigors dictated by their work, even if this should not easily translate into publicly approved language usage.
AVITAL RONELL  Berkeley, Calif.


THERE'S NO SIMPLE SUICIDE
As a physician who has cared for and counseled thousands with life-threatening illnesses, I know the subject of dying needs to be re-evaluated.
I have found that dying is not difficult when one takes control of one's life, and if physicians and the family do not interfere.
Any of us can die if we don't eat and drink.
When Dr.
Kevorkian went to jail and threatened not to eat or drink, it showed that he could have told his clients to do the same thing.


Carla L. Wheeler, Jeffrey P. Naimon
Carla Leight Wheeler and Jeffrey Paul Naimon, associates at the Washington law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton, were married last evening.
Rabbi Warren Stone performed the ceremony at the Woman's National Democratic Club in Washington.
Ms.
Wheeler, who is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from Yale University and received a law degree from the University of Texas.
She is the daughter of Jo Carolyn Wheeler of Dallas and the late Charles R. Wheeler.
Her father was the assistant attorney general of the former United States Trust Territory of Micronesia.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING  Kelley Takes Title  Kevin Kelley survived the first knockdown of his career to take the World Boxing Federation featherweight championship from Gregorio Vargas by a unanimous decision in Reno last night.
Kelley, of Flushing, Queens, went down in the ninth when Vargas connected with a straight right, but he got up to record his 37th victory without a loss.
He has 26 knockouts.
In another bout, a lethargic Michael Moorer of Detroit, the No. 1 ranked heavyweight by the International Boxing Federation and the World Boxing Association, outpointed Mike Evans of Chicago in a 10-round bout.


THERE'S NO SIMPLE SUICIDE
All of the current attention to assisted suicide leaves the impression that there are two alternative approaches to terminal illness in our society, the horrors of the intensive-care unit or taking pills.
This is simply not the case.
Just as the benefits of Eastern meditation techniques have been adapted for Western use in alleviating the symptoms of stress, there are Eastern approaches to dying that can alleviate the fear and suffering and do not exclude the use of pain-killing medication.
I would recommend "The Tibetan Book of Living and Dying," by Sogyal Rinpoche, as a starting place for anyone seriously interested in a more hopeful alternative.
RUTH ALSUP St.
Louis


F.B.I. Denies Aiding Suspect in '57 Racial Killing
The Federal Bureau of Investigation says an internal inquiry has cleared its agents in Alabama of any effort 17 years ago to discourage the prosecution of an indicted suspect in the racial slaying of a young black man two decades earlier.
But the bureau's report on that inquiry, issued on Tuesday, does say the agents provided the suspect, a former member of the Ku Klux Klan, a document verifying that he had been an informer for the F.B.I. in the years after the slaying.


NOV. 28-DEC. 4: A Washington Critic; Nominee for Banking Post Bitterly Withdraws
Stanley G. Tate, the nominee to head the troubled Federal agency that is cleaning up the savings and loan mess, angrily withdrew last week after waiting more than four months for a Senate committee to schedule confirmation hearings.
Mr.
Tate criticized what he called the unfair behavior of the Democratic chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr. of Michigan, who had opposed him.
The stated reason was a concern about how well he would manage the Resolution Trust Corporation.
The unstated one: Mr.
Tate, a wealthy Florida developer, is a prominent Republican campaign contributor.


The Executive Life; The Rules for Giving, And for Giving Back
PRICE WATERHOUSE, Aetna Life and Casualty and Polaroid will each ring in the holiday season with a letter to vendors and suppliers asking that they not make gifts to company employees.
Martin Marietta plans to issue a letter reminding its staff not to accept invitations from suppliers.
While interest in gift policies increases around holiday time, executives are tempted by a variety of goodies year-round -- from sky box tickets at sports events to product demonstrations at resorts.
Nearly 9 of every 10 companies surveyed this year by the Bureau of National Affairs, a Washington research company, limited employees' ability to accept gifts from clients and outside business contacts throughout the year.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen108.55
108.90
124.95
per Dollar
German Mark1.7200
1.7130
1.5930
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.3284
1.3290
1.2774
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.4905
1.4775
1.5595
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold376.50
N.A.
$335.60
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Business Diary: November 26 - December 3
THE ECONOMY If the Numbers Don't Lie, America's Going Back to Work  Is it as good news as it seems that the nation's unemployment rate plunged from 6.8 percent to 6.4 percent in November?
Skeptics were quick to say that for complicated statistical reasons, the progress reported by the Labor Department last week was almost surely overstated, and financial markets shrugged it off.
But with any kind of faith, what you see is a stunning number -- the biggest improvement in a decade, and a compelling sign that this on-again, off-again economy is at last performing its most basic function: creating jobs.
Employers added jobs from California to Florida to New York, and most places in between -- and they were more likely to be full-time jobs, too.
As those of you with jobs well know, companies have been putting off hiring and leaning on existing workers, uncertain about things like medical costs, but this news may show that they just couldn't hold out any longer.
An Economy on a Spree It's more than jobs.
The economic engine keeps gaining speed as it barrels toward that year-end blowout -- which long ago, rumor has it, was some sort of religious celebration.
But once Christmas is past, will the vigor survive?
Economists are cautious.
Last week, though, the numbers were strong: income, construction spending, and factory orders all up, the purchasing managers' index showing the fastest growth since last winter.
There were some blips: new-home sales were off, but that followed a surge the month before, so housing still looks good.
And retail sales rose just slightly -- but of course any shoppers worth their credit cards would not dream of going wild till it's almost Christmas.
Tired of Waiting for S.&amp; L. Job  It's clearly liberating to be nominated for a Government job and then decide it isn't worth jumping through all the hoops.
Stanley Tate, named in July to head the Resolution Trust Corporation, but still awaiting a confirmation hearing, didn't mince words last week when he called it quits.
"Washington," he said, "is a vicious city, with all kinds of hidden agendas. It is a city full of rumors, allegations and accusations." And why did his nomination die?
Because he's a Republican?
Because Bill Clinton didn't back him fully?
Or because there was something to the "serious questions" that Donald Riegle, Senate Banking chairman, had about Mr.
Tate?
Mr.
Tate's version: bureaucrats were afraid he'd root out mismanagement.
Whatever the reason, Mr.
Tate, a Florida developer, said he felt "disposable and dispensable." And the bailout agency just keeps on drifting.
Mending Hubble, Mending NASA  If NASA were a corporation, it would long since have become an obscure Wal-Mart subsidiary.
It's made one cosmic gaffe after another: the Challenger disaster, the flawed Hubble Space Telescope, the apparent kidnapping of the Mars Observer by little green spacepersons.
It's no understatement to say, as one space expert did last week, "NASA can't afford another highly visible failure." So the pressure's on the astronauts on the shuttle Endeavour, which lifted off on Thursday.
The astronauts' mission: to fix Hubble in mid-space, essentially by putting a pair of eyeglasses on it.
If they succeed, secrets of the universe could snap into focus; if they fail, the focus will be on NASA's jugular.
But as one Hubble scientist put it, "This is not like going to Grandma's to fix a leaky faucet."  OPEC, Where Is Thy Sting?
Twenty years ago, OPEC seemed sure to strangle America with ever-higher oil prices.
But last week it was clear just how times had changed.
After slipping all year, oil prices plunged to a five-year low after OPEC failed to agree to cut output.
So gasoline, steadily cheaper in 1973 dollars, seems likely to get cheaper still, which would help the economy.
But everything has a cost, and cheaper gas means auto makers are less likely to put their efforts into making more efficient cars.
Victor Posner Is Out of Play  It was an unusual penalty, but the judge said the scope of the violations justified it.
Saying they "have had a long and notorious history of engaging in self-dealing and corporate waste," a Federal judge last week banned Victor Posner and his son, Steven, from serving as officers or directors of any public company.
The order came in a civil suit brought by the S.E.C. as part of a broader case against Michael Milken and Ivan Boesky, and it involved charges that the Posners made secret stock deals with Mr.
Boesky.
In light of past abuses, the judge said, another warning "would serve little purpose."  COMPANIES Paying a Price for Family Values  Family values.
So simple a term, yet so laden with subtext.
On the surface, it means apple pie, caring, a cozy hearth; but it can also be a code phrase for excluding, condemning, even denying the existence of anything but cookie-cutter Americans.
Normally, to cry "family values" is just free speech, but in Texas last week, the price was high.
Apple Computer planned to build an $80 million office complex north of Austin, creating 1,500 jobs.
But county officials rejected a $750,000 tax abatement, citing Apple's policy of granting health benefits to employees' unmarried partners, and Apple took its blueprints and hit the road.
Sony's Pain, And the World's In 1946, in a bombed-out Tokyo department store, a young man named Akio Morita helped found the Sony Corporation.
Since then, as both Sony and Japan grew mighty, Mr.
Morita became, in one American's words, the world's "leading Japanese business statesman." So it is symbolic that as Japan's phenomenal half-century shows distinct wear and tear, Sony's chairman falters.
Last week Mr.
Morita, 72, underwent brain surgery, and he may have to retire.
That would be bad news for Sony, where, even removed from day-to-day operations, he remained the "psychological backbone." And it would be bad news abroad, for Mr.
Morita has played a leading role in smoothing trade tensions with America.
Volvo Vants to Be Alone  The planned Volvo-Renault merger created serious friction at Volvo.
Many executives wanted to back out, loath to let Sweden lose one of its corporate stars.
But the chairman, Pehr Gyllenhammar, stuck to the plan, seeing strength in having a European partner.
Last week Mr.
Gyllenhammar lost his fight: The merger was called off, and he quickly resigned, saying that Volvo's managers had "turned their backs on Europe." Job Cuts: A Weekly Ritual  It almost stops being news, squarely in a class with "Dog Bites Man." Another week, and more corporate giants cut thousands of jobs.
Last week was no exception.
A.
T.&amp; T. may cut as many as 4,500 jobs as the long-distance wars take their toll.
And airline woes continue to seep through to Boeing, which will cut production, meaning a loss of up to 3,000 jobs.
Even the beer industry is pulling in its belly, as Miller said it would close a plant in upstate New York, eliminating 900 jobs.
G.M.
Downsizes Its Data  Saturated with economic numbers?
Good news: Detroit is going to spare you some.
Much as eager-beaver pundits crave the latest word, General Motors decided last week that 10-day sales reports were overkill and would scrap them in January; Ford will probably follow suit.
Chrysler went to monthly figures a couple of years ago, but then some helpful souls started estimating 10-day sales.
While some analysts found the figures useful, most were relieved.
"About time," said one.
INTERNATIONAL Again, Hope for World Trade  Your eyes glaze over at the words "Uruguay Round"?
You're forgiven: these trade talks have long since taken on a Dickensian dimension.
Begun seven years ago to lower tariffs worldwide, the talks have hit more snags than "Bleak House" has characters.
But yet again last week the tireless negotiators, including Mickey Kantor of the United States, cried, "Breakthrough!" One snag has been French objections to cutting farm subsidies, but a resolution may be at hand.
If there is an accord, it could do much for the world economy.
But that's still a big "if." Trade progress is possible, though: last week Canada's new Prime Minister, Jean Chretien, dropped his opposition to Nafta.
The pact now goes into effect on Jan. 1, and the vigil will begin to see which side was right about jobs.
Tokyo Sweet-Talks the Market
All the Japanese stock market was waiting for, it seems, were some rosy words from the Government; last week it got them.
Stock prices had been sliding for weeks.
But after the Government finally promised to do what it could, the Nikkei index surged more than 4 percent in a day, then 2 percent the next.
Prices are still depressed, though, and they are likely to stay that way until Government actions follow words.
"Jawboning," one analyst said, "won't work for too long."


Somewhere East of Laramie


Harlem Girl Who Fell Into an Elevator Shaft Dies
An 11-year-old girl who fell two stories down an elevator shaft on Friday died yesterday afternoon of head injuries, a spokeswoman for St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital said.
And inspectors from the City Department of Buildings said they had not determined why the accident occurred, even after two inspections of the elevator shaft yesterday.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Lee Goldfarb; Recalling That Day at Pearl Harbor
"NOW this is really something," said Lee Goldfarb, pointing to a framed memento hung on a wall full of mementos in the family room of his home here.
Inside the frame was a U.S.
Government check made out to Mr.
Goldfarb.
The check was dated February 13, 1942.
"That is not only the original check, but the note underneath it is the original note that came with it," Mr.
Goldfarb said.


Lai Y. Chong, Barry K. Chung
Lai Yee Chong, a daughter of Choy Kiu Chong of New York and the late Suey Chong, was married yesterday to Barry K. Chung, a son of Bowman Chung of Sterling Heights, Mich., and the late Lillian Chung.
The nondenominational ceremony was performed at the Church Center for the United Nations by the Rev.
Dr.
Melvin A. Hawthorne, its chaplain.
Ms.
Chong, 30, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant vice president of the Marine Midland Bank in New York.
She graduated from New York University.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Asoria/Astoria Heights; Last of the Homeless Families Leaving Westway
Three years of dissension in Astoria Heights could come to a close by the end of the month, when the city moves the last of about 30 homeless families from the Westway Motel, where it has been providing temporary housing.
"We're absolutely pleased," said George Delis, the district manager for Community Board 1.
"I see no reason why government should disturb a residential community this way."


Cabbies From Subcontinent Handle English Just Fine
To the Editor:
What I observed and was party to the other day left me outraged.
It was raining profusely at the corner of 95th Street and Second Avenue.
I had left one store and was walking toward another when I noticed a well-dressed young black woman at the corner, her left arm filled with files and books, hailing a cab.
As I was walking, I saw two empty yellow cabs pass her by.
When I reached the corner, the young woman, almost in tears, asked this white female to please help.
She said four empty cabs had already refused to stop.
"It happens all the time," she said.


Stuffing Outrage For Thanksgiving
To the Editor:
I am one of those whose adrenalin gets going in the morning more by reading your editorial page than by drinking six cups of black coffee.
My wife quite rightly asks me daily, "Look, if it upsets you so, why do you bother?" And I reply something like, "Well, it's good for me to suffer; and anyway, as someone brilliant once advised, 'Know thine enemy.' "


Abbondanza
COCO PAZZO ***  (212) 794-0205; 23 East 74th Street; $$$; all major cards
Portions are enormous at this colorful northern Italian trattoria, making it easy for groups or families to share its lusty herb-infused fare.
A meal might begin with grilled vegetables, carpaccio of tuna, grilled bread and polenta, or the classic Tuscan bean and bread soup.
Enticing pastas and entrees include tagliolini in mushroom sauce; rigatoni with sausages in a spicy tomato sauce; grilled shrimp with roasted tomatoes and pancetta; veal shank with polenta, and grilled Black Angus steak with fresh herbs. (Review:  1/11/91; revisited: 12/2/93)


Fast Boat to Manhattan May Sail From Yonkers
WITHIN two years, Westchester residents may have another way to travel to Manhattan: a 30-minute ferry ride from a Hudson River pier here to 38th Street.
Mayor Terence M. Zaleski of Yonkers announced late last month that he was negotiating with the Port Imperial Ferry Corporation of Weehawken, N.J., to start the commuter service as early as 1995.
Arthur Imperatore, owner and president of the ferry company, said that a new generation of high-speed boats traveling at 35 miles an hour -- more than twice the speed of his present fleet -- would be used for the Yonkers run.


Puppet Show
Jack Skellington and cohorts from "Tim Burton's the Nightmare Before Christmas" have taken up residence at Disney-MGM Studios Theme Park outside Orlando, Fla.
Visitors can see about 25 of the sculptured heads used to animate Skellington's face, along with 20 miniature sets. (407) 824-4321.


New &amp; Noteworthy Collection
This selection of paperbacks is from the New &amp; Noteworthy column since the 1993 summer reading issue.
AFRICAN LAUGHTER: Four Visits to Zimbabwe  By Doris Lessing.
Harper Perennial, $13.
An author reports on her homeland and its hardships.


Sports of The Times; In Ballamer, Marching Against an Injustice
THEY took the news hard in Baltimore.
Not only are the Colts not coming back any too soon, but the National Football League, in all its inexplicable sunstruck wisdom, has awarded the 30th franchise to the northern coast of Florida.
" 'Jacksonville!?' we kept saying. 'Jacksonville!?' 'Jacksonville!?' " This was the reaction of John Ziemann, a keeper of the flame for professional football in the city they pronounce Ballamer.


Students Dissent On Football Article
I would just like to let you know as a cheerleader I did not appreciate the way you made the Division Avenue cheerleaders look.


Upper East Side, Italian Style
AZZURRO **  (212) 517-7068; 245 East 84th Street; $$$; AE, MC, V
Expressive, sun-ripened Sicilian fare is served in this handsome (if loud) setting.
Recommended starters include the antipasto plate of vegetables, shrimp and red bean salad; caponata of eggplant, and marinated fish.
Artichoke hearts sauteed in sizzling olive oil are brittle and delicious, as are grilled shiitake mushrooms.
The chef tosses garlic around as if it were confetti.


Drums for a New President
American Museum of Natural History welcomes Ellen V. Futter, Dec. 2.


Students Dissent On Football Article
I am the quarterback for Division.
The article you wrote about the parents and fans who go to games is in no way indicative of their behavior.
You made it seem that some of these fans are lunatics.
Granted that my father does get into the game, but he doesn't hurt anyone.
He simply roots my team on.
I feel that it's better that our parents and peers go to the games than not to go and watch their sons.
MATT ANDREWS


Kentucky's Rally Fails to Catch Indiana
Indiana 96, Kentucky 84
Damon Bailey scored 29 points, 23 in the first half and 6 on free throws in the closing minutes, as No. 21 Indiana beat No. 1 Kentucky, 96-84, yesterday in Indianapolis.


F.Y.I.
Empire State Daze Q. The Empire State Building is confusing me with its many-colored lights.
Red and green on Christmas I understand, and red, white and blue on the Fourth of July, but once in a while the building is inexplicably colored yellow or red and white.
A.
In the spirit of inclusiveness, many a holiday has been added since the Empire State Building first lit up red, white and blue to commemorate Independence Day in 1976.


What's Partying?
Causes for celebration ranged from care for the aging to India's healing plants, AIDS donations, a new store and minority journalism students.


Modern Tea in SoHo
A 5,500-square-foot tea emporium is opening in stages under the Guggenheim Museum SoHo at Prince and Mercer Streets.
T, as it is called, opened its retail shop last month.
A salon and lounge will follow by late January, serving a 6 P.M.
"New Yorkers Tea" and a midnight "Champagne Tea." Food prepared with tea will be featured.
For non-teetotalers, there will be a port and wine bar.
Information: (212) 925-3700.


Cookbooks
IF it is true, as many people say, that fine raw materials for cooking invariably inspire equally good food, then by all rights Florida should always have been a cook's paradise.
Here was a region blessed with a year-round growing season, an unmatched wealth of seafood, and the motivation to use them well to serve a dining-out tourist industry.
But until quite recently, the main request you had to keep in mind in a central Florida eating establishment was "Hold the mayo"; and at the southern end, in Miami Beach, it was useful to remember to ask for the corned beef lean.
Of course, the great Cuban and Caribbean influx, and the development of Miami as a Latin American center of commerce, have led to cultural and culinary influences no one could have imagined in the 1960's, say, when Wolfie's, the Miami Beach restaurant known for its delicatessen specialties, was king.
Yet the books that have come along touting a new Florida cuisine (as if there had ever been an old one) always struck me as a bit unpersuasive; it didn't look like the birth of anything, or even a new synthesis, so much as like a simple borrowing from the peoples to the south.


Israel Restoring Drained Wetland, Reversing Pioneers' Feat
Rumbling across a desolate landscape of dark brown earth, a fleet of bulldozers has been working to reverse part of what was long considered one of the major feats of Zionist pioneering: the draining of the Hula swamplands in the Galilee region of northern Israel.
Churning up clouds of peat dust, the bulldozers have been scooping out earth for a lake that will be the core of a planned area of 1,500 acres of restored wetlands at the heart of the Hula Valley.


HARD SELL
As a cousin of Jamison Handy, I read Diane Keaton's essay with great interest.
Handy was an Olympic athlete who won bronze medals for breaststroke and backstroke.
His lunch breaks became known as "swunch," because he preferred to swim 500 meters in lieu of lunch.
He was known to swim in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans on the same day, if business took him from coast to coast.
DAVID L. LEE New York, N.Y.


Academics and Their Prose
To the Editor:
Students might behave intelligently if they could understand what their textbooks were trying to say.
LOUISE WALLER  New York


An Optimist's Eye in Ridgefield
DOUGLAS MAXWELL, curator of "Timely and Timeless" at the Aldrich Museum in Ridgefield, is an adjunct professor of contemporary art at New York University.
He is also a practicing psychoanalyst who teaches at the Training Institute of the National Psychological Association for Psychoanalysis and the Institute for Expression Analysis.
And he is the arts editor of Psychoanalytic Review.
This combination of disciplines, though formidable, is not without precedent.
Hans Prinzhorn who, in the late 1920's, built the collection of art by the insane that bears his name at the University of Heidelberg, and who wrote a book on the subject, was both psychiatrist and art historian.
In addition to influencing the course of Modernism, Prinzhorn's findings show that many of the esthetic achievements of the demented, unsedated and untutored were not only comparable with those of professionals but were also quite often ahead of their time.
Incidentally, it is not unlikely that Adolf Hitler was influenced by the collection and its exegesis in his attempt to root out "degenerate art."


Self-Image Plays a Role in Police Suicides
To the Editor:
For the more than 14 years that I have been a member of New York City's Finest, I have tried to understand the disheartening suicide rate among our ranks.
Contrary to Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly's contention that the ready access to a handgun is a major factor, I propose a much deeper and personal connection between "the job" and our disproportionately high rate of selfdestruction.


For Christopher, New View of Mideast Peace Role
After nearly a year as Secretary of State, Warren Christopher has begun to see himself as a Middle East peacemaker.
Ask him in public about his expectations for a comprehensive peace in the region, and he is certain to give an intensely guarded answer.
His remarks to reporters in Brussels on Thursday about his current eight-day trip were typical: "I would urge that expectations be lowered about what can be accomplished over just a few days' period."


Russia's Army Is Not the Red Army
Who could have imagined just five years ago that the vaunted Red Army would withdraw from Eastern Europe and the Baltic republics, begin dismantling its nuclear and chemical arsenals, shrink to 1.5 million troops and find itself unable to meet its payroll?
A six-part series in The Times finds that the collapse of the Soviet Union has cut the Red Army adrift and turned a proud force into a defeated army -- all without a fight.
The wretched condition of Russia's army poses potential dangers.
It also offers the West opportunities to convert Russia's military from its aggressive past.


Never Mind Bicycles: What About the Cars?
To the Editor:
I have been an active New York City pedestrian since 1976.
I gave a little cheer when I saw that the Nov. 21 column ("A Civility Quiz: Do You Believe in 'WALK'?") was about pedestrian safety.
But it turned out that the column concentrated on bicycle messengers and failed to deal seriously with the real problem.
I am talking about the threat posed by cars.


Last-Minute Shopping: A Tinsel Tale of Love and Larceny
WHEN O'Brien answered the doorbell, it was Officer Keenan standing there.
"Oh, no!" O'Brien cried.
"Not on Christmas Eve! Besides, I didn't do anything!"
"Take it easy, O'Brien," Keenan said. "I'm not here to arrest you."


Silence From Foe of Military Puzzles Nigeria
Nearly two weeks after the coup that brought Gen.
Sani Abacha to power, there still has not been a clear statement by Moshood Abiola whether he supports or plans to oppose the country's newest military rulers.
Mr.
Abiola, who is presumed to have won last June's presidential elections, has been uncharacteristically reticent when asked to comment on the military's renewed grip on power.
Mr.
Abiola traveled to Britain last weekend, leaving many of his closest friends and advisers puzzled over his behavior.


INTO THE PIT
Perhaps for some people a mosh pit is a communal experience, but for those who come to watch a band play, it is a considerable nuisance ("Into the Pit," by Paul Tough, Nov. 7).
More than once, I've found myself kicked in the face or thrown to the floor simply because I prefer to stand somewhere near the stage when I attend a rock concert.


Academics and Their Prose
To the Editor:
As the author of nine novels, who, sadly, has been exposed to academic prose, I can only applaud Patricia Nelson Limerick's effort.
She has indeed pricked the pompous balloon of academic writing.
Yet, as a great admirer of terse writing, I must point out that her journey into the mind-set that has seized academic writers was more succinctly made by Eric Hoffer (in only 17 words) when he wrote: "A person's creative ability decreases in direct proportion to the degree to which he takes himself seriously."  WILLIAM HEFFERNAN  Huntington, Vt.


In the Region/Connecticut; A Principled Approach to Lower-Cost Housing
IN his 30 years as an architect, Zane Yost of Bridgeport has put principle over profit.
The principle is to create quality housing for people with modest incomes.
In the best of times, his profits are meager.
In a recession, they drop to negligible.
This limited architectural niche has brought him some celebrity.
Anticipating by two decades society's current perception that packing thousands of people into enormous masonry projects would not solve the problem, he began designing individual clusters of private homes in 60 developments with a total of more than 7,000 units throughout New England.
He is involved now in half a dozen projects around Connecticut.


To Save a Park Where Drug Users Prowl


Washington Memo; 'Alliance' to Buy Health Care: Bureaucrat or Public Servant?
If the Clinton health plan becomes law, it will put a new institution into the lives of most Americans: the health alliance.
Almost no other aspect of the plan is so little understood or so radically different from the status quo.
Administration planners envision the alliances as benign and helpful organizations that would perform many functions now handled by employee benefit departments.


Gabriel Abdelsayed; Archpriest, 66, Was U.S. Coptic Leader
The Rev.
Gabriel Abdelsayed of Jericho, L.I., the archpriest of the Coptic Orthodox Church of St.
Mark in Jersey City, died on Thursday at the Methodist Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 66.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said his daughter, Wafaa Abdelsayed.


BLAMING THE BUNDESBANK
It is correct that in the interview with Handelsblatt of Sept. 15, 1992, quoted in Craig Whitney's article "Blaming the Bundesbank" (Oct. 17), I did not rule out the possibility that "one or two currencies could come under pressure." Your article does not state, however, that in the same interview, I expressly exempted the pound sterling from any suspicion of devaluation.
I substantiated this by saying that the U.K. monetary authorities had taken adequate precautions to resist any pressure.


Girl Kicker Ends Season As the Best in 2 Counties
HEATHER SUE MERCER, the kicker for Yorktown High School's football team and the only female varsity player in the county, had mixed emotions as she played her final game of the season last month.
First there was the excitement.
The Yorktown Cornhuskers were playing the Chittenango Bears in the Carrier Dome in Syracuse for the New York State High School Class B football championship.
Then there was the forlorn realization that time was running out on her football-playing career.


The Difficult Math of Welfare Reform
There are approximately 60,000 words in the Administration's plan to overhaul the welfare system, but three of them have the potential to mock the rest and expose President Clinton's bold promises as empty slogans.
Those words are: "Deficit neutral funding."
That means Mr.
Clinton plans to finance an ambitious set of child care, education and work programs for people on welfare by cutting other programs for the poor.


The Perils of Loving Old Records Too Much
TODAY'S ALTERNATIVE ROCK suffers from a strange kind of nostalgia -- a yearning for a golden age that one never personally experienced.
There's a term for this born-too-late feeling: "epigonic." Derived from a peculiar Greek verb that means "to be born after," it describes anyone who labors under the delusion that the present era is less distinguished than its predecessor.
Rock is full of bands that resurrect the sound and the look of a period when music seemed to be more exciting or seemed to mean more than mere commerce -- an activity known in the trade as unit-shifting.
But since nothing is more modern than the conviction that earlier generations had it better, these groups have been shifting a lot of units lately.


Richard Goode Has Done It His Way (and Beethoven's)
After many years as an artist perhaps best known for not being better known, Richard Goode has finally achieved a measure of the fame as a soloist that he deserved long ago.
Having spent nearly three decades as a performer, especially of chamber music, before making his Carnegie Hall debut in 1990, he is now something of a fixture there as well as on the world's other major stages.
His recital on Monday evening at Carnegie is one of the most anticipated events of the musical season, and not only among aficionados of the piano.
But if much has changed in Mr.
Goode's career, not much has changed about Mr.
Goode himself.
Because of his stocky build and broad features, his looks have been aptly compared with a Rembrandt self-portrait from the 1650's.
Beethoven isn't a ridiculous comparison, either.
Now that he has turned 50, his longish, scraggly hair has become silver.
He is a slightly tamer, less gyroscopic presence at the keyboard.
And his playing has steadily deepened.


Fur-Import Ban Seen as Threat in New York
The beaver, New York's state mammal, has become the focus of an international trade controversy.
The dispute centers on the use of leghold traps, the most common and efficient way of trapping beavers and other fur-bearing animals.


Honing Haggling Skills
AMERICANS are accustomed to paying the ticketed prices for what they buy, from a tube of toothpaste to a VCR.
If they don't like what's being charged they take their business elsewhere.
They don't haggle.
No wonder so many people are inexperienced in negotiating the price of a house, one of the few items that does not carry a prix fixe.
"Most buyers don't know enough to do a good job," insisted Helen Gardner, a branch manager in the Hartford, Conn., area for Prudential Connecticut Realty, and tend to rely totally on the expertise of their broker.


Bora-Bora Prices
To the Editor: Bravo on your first color section (Oct. 31), and the Bora-Bora cover photo.
As a long-time sales agent for Tahiti, however, I want to clarify Lenore Magida's classification of Tahiti as "expensive."
Over the last year, French Polynesia has experienced a surge in tourism from North America.
The addition of two new airlines serving Tahiti has helped bring arrivals up while lowering air costs.
Packages now start as low as $1,132 for a seven-day vacation (per person for accommodations in double occupancy, air fare from Los Angeles and inter-island air).
While Ms.
Magida comments that "dinner for two can easily run close to $100," this is true in many locations from Bora-Bora to the Caribbean.
Our Sofitel resorts in Tahiti, like many other large hotels in Tahiti and the outer islands, offer a meal plan at $45 a day for American breakfast and dinner with a choice of entrees.
Many packages include day excursions -- such as the shark feeding mentioned in the story -- in the overall rate.


Making Towers Less Massive
How high is too high?
That question, at the heart of a long, heated public debate over the East Side's soaring residential towers, may soon be answered.
Last week, the City Planning Commission heard testimony on two proposed zoning amendments that would effectively reduce the height of new towers and encourage tower-on-a-base, wedding-cake buildings as opposed to tall, thin towers.
The commissioners are scheduled to vote on the amendments on Dec. 20.
If approved, the measures will go before City Council.
PROPOSAL 1
Co-sponsored by Manhattan Borough President and Community Board 8, this amendment rezones 143 blocks between 59th and 96th Streets and between East End and Third Avenues to conform with the zoning pattern in the rest of the city.
It would reduce the permissible depth of lots along avenues from 125 feet to 100 feet.
Because the size of a building's bases determines the height allowed, this would have the effect of reducing the building's height.
PROPOSAL 2


Baby's First Christmas Could Be a Pain in the Neck for Dad


2 Bills May Give Florio His Final Battles
A lame duck has trouble following a straight path, and so it is not surprising that the 205th New Jersey Legislature is having trouble deciding what it wants to do as it waddles toward its dissolution on Jan. 11.
In particular, legislative leaders have to decide whether to tackle a couple of bills, introduced or released from committee since the Nov. 2 election, that could become the last battleground between Gov.
Jim Florio, the defeated Democrat, and the Republican-dominated Legislature that has already overridden more than a dozen of his vetoes.


Corrections
A picture caption with an article on Nov. 21 about John F. Kennedy memorabilia misidentified the addressee of a letter signed by Kennedy.
The letter was written to the wife of a crew member on the PT-109 torpedo boat Kennedy skippered, not to the crew member himself.


How to Protect Your Plants From Deer
DEER continue to be a problem in suburbia as the density of the herds increases.
Gardeners relate many stories of damage to their plants by indiscriminate deer nibbling.
A few growers have become so discouraged they have almost given up.
It seems that when deer are hungry, they dine on almost anything, much to a planter's heartbreak.
What to do?
This perennial question has no easy answers.
The increase in deer population without the natural predators for control and the invasion of their once wild habitat for development exacerbate the problems.
This provides more opportunities for many deer-human conflicts.


Germans Flip To New Pages In Their Baedekers
EARLIER this year, Mr. and Mrs.
S. received terrible news at their home near Frankfurt.
One of their close relatives had been attacked and murdered while on vacation in Miami.
Because the couple, who asked that their full names not be used, were planning to visit friends in the United States, they decided to change their plans and choose a less violent destination.
"After a while, though, we began to consider the situation more calmly," said Mrs.
S.
"We saw Illinois, Oklahoma, St. Louis, Cape May and Boston, and we didn't have any problems at all. Violence can happen anywhere. You have to be careful, but you can't let your fear keep you at home."


Airline Luggage
To the Editor: I am writing in response to your article "Baggage Check: Weighing Risks" (Practical Traveler, Oct. 31) The last paragraph advising against packing valuables in checked luggage should have been the first paragraph.
As a frequent traveler I am amazed how often people forget the simple precautions.
I also believe people should be encouraged to check luggage, not discouraged.
Carry-on luggage has become a serious safety hazard.
Passengers try to bring golf clubs, 100-pound bags, etc., onto planes.


Lloyd B. Gottlieb; Lawyer, 58
Lloyd B. Gottlieb, a specialist in corporate-commercial law and real-estate law, died on Nov. 24 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 58.
His family said he had had a brief flu-like illness.


The Man Who Hitched a Reindeer To Santa Claus's Sleigh
FROM early on, Christmas for me was always built around Clement Clarke Moore's poem "A Visit From St. Nicholas." I first heard that mind-blowing poem while perched on my mother's lap -- a place where a poetry reading makes a lasting impression.
On Christmas Eve I always left Santa a hot snack because from what Moore said I figured the poor old duffer would have had a long flight.
So I'd set a bench close to the fireplace and lay out some cookies and a cup into which my father promised to pour Ovaltine last thing before he went to bed.
Sure enough, in the morning the drink would be consumed, the plate of cookies a shambles.
Had I read Sherlock Holmes, whose adventures I was too young for at the time, I might have scouted the grounds for telltale reindeer droppings.
But that empty cup and those crumbs were solid proof.
Santa Claus had been there -- Clement Moore and my own eyes had told me so.
And to this day I believe that no one but Moore has ever supplied a more convincing explanation of how your presents arrived so miraculously.


Joy Brandt, Joseph Viertel
Joy Brandt, the coordinator of voluntary services at the Peabody Natural History Museum at Yale University in New Haven, was married on Nov. 22 to Joseph Viertel, a writer and real estate investor in White Plains.
Jeffrey D. Buchanan, a justice of the peace, officiated in his office in Katonah, N.Y.
The bride, the daughter of the late Samuel and Rosalie Goidell, graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Arlene Pilson, M. G. Partellow Jr.
Arlene Pilson, an interior designer in Pound Ridge, N.Y., was married on Thursday to Myles Gordon Partellow Jr., the president of MPI Inc., a general contracting company in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
Rabbi Robert A. Rothman officiated at Le Chateau restaurant in South Salem, N.Y.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Some Flock of Birds
THEODORE has an identity crisis.
Theodore is a pigeon, but thinks he is a chicken.
Unfortunately the chickens he lives with know he's not a chicken.
That makes his courtship attempts less than satisfying.
Still he puffs himself up and walks, pecks and woos like a chicken.
"He's in his elements with the chickens," Dr.
Bob Valenti said.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Mott Haven; After Arrests, a Security Push
The recent arrests of 38 members of a drug gang called the Wild Cowboys ended a particularly brutal period of killing and intimidation around the Jose Diego Beekman Houses in Mott Haven.
Prosecutors say the gang was responsible for 10 murders, 8 within a block of 348 Beekman Avenue, a building at the complex that the Bronx District Attorney's office says served as the gang's main distribution point for crack.
But two months after the initial arrests, tenants at the complex say their problems are far from solved.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Upper West Side; Efforts on Town House Fail
Community groups opposing additional social-service centers on the Upper West Side lost another round recently when they failed to find developers for a town house at 11 West 103d Street.
Control of the building is now likely to fall to the Bridge, a nonprofit organization that treats the mentally ill.


Making Towers Less Massive
How high is too high?
That question, at the heart of a long, heated public debate over the East Side's soaring residential towers, may soon be answered, Last week, the City Planning Commission heard testimony on two proposed zoning amendments that would effectively reduce the height of new towers and encourage tower-on-a-base, wedding-cake buildings as opposed to tall, thin towers.
The commissioners are schedule to vote on the amendments on Dec. 20.
If approved, the measures will go before City Council.
PROPOSAL 1
Co-sponsored by the Manhattan Borough President and Community Board 8, this amendment rezones 143 blocks between 59th and 96th Streets and between Eas End and Third Avenues to conform with the zoning pattern in the rest of the city.
It would reduce the permissible depth of lots along avenues from 125 feet to 100 feet.
Because the size of a building's bases determines the height allowed, this would have the effect of reducing the building's height.
PROPOSAL 2
Sponsored by the Department of City Planning, this amendment would apply citywide to buildings on avenues but have particular impact on high-density residential areas like the Upper East Side.
The amendment calls for wedding-cake towers on bulky residential buildins with high street walls.
This would effectively reduce the maximum height of towers from 50 to 32 floors.
The amendment would eliminate the extra-floor bonuses given to developers for incorporating plazas; bonuses for including moderate-cost housing in designs would remain.
FOR
"The rezoning is consistent with citywide trends, reducing avenue zoning depts to 100 feet. Eliminating the plaza bonus will increse incentives to utilize a bonus of far more public merit, lower-cost housing." Ruth W. Messinger, Manhattan Borough President.
"We stronly support the amendments reducing bulk on the avenues. They will restore and reinforce the neighborhood character of the Upper East Side and retain existing, affordable housing units." Genie Rice, president of Civitas, an East Side zoning organization AGAINST
"These changes will unquestionably add to the costs of housing and reduce affordable housing. The occasional misuse of plaza bonuses is not a reason to eliminate them. Plazas address a specific need, but they should be truly public, better used and better enforced." Michael Slattery, senior vice president, Real Estate Board of New York.
"The proposed rezoning would negatively affect the ability of developers to provide efficient apartment layouts and deigners to create alternative spaces." Sherida Paulsen, a member of the American Institute of Architects.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Asoria/Astoria Heights; A Chilly Reception for Pathmark Project
The Pathmark chain wants to move into Astoria and build a vast, modern supermarket like the ones people have long taken for granted nearly everywhere in the United States, but to which New Yorkers have had only limited access.
But Astoria residents say their neighborhood, with its modest shopping strips of Italian delis, Greek pastry shops and other mom-and-pop businesses, is simply not the place for the nearly 60,000-square-foot behemoth.
They contend it would draw throngs of shoppers, creating congestion and crushing smaller stores.


THERE'S NO SIMPLE SUICIDE
In Lisa Belkin's article "There's No Simple Suicide" (Nov. 14), the questions raised about what Ralph Mero would have done if the pills had not worked and death had not occurred are the very questions the Hemlock Society raised, when he discussed his program with us.


Dog Bites Little Girl. Doesn't Anyone Care?
THE yellow flier, taped to a lamppost on a patch of the park where dogs run free, shouted: "Little Girl Bitten." But its voice quickly dropped to a beseeching whisper: "We want to know if pup is healthy and/or has rabies shots." Then, underlined: "We love animals. No Threat to Animal or Owner!"
For weeks I jogged past the sign, imagining pain and fury, a relentless dog hunt.
Although I have loved individual dogs, I am no muzzle-nuzzler.
There are too many dogs in this city, and too many of them are providing inadequate therapy to two-legged nut cases.
When I finally called a number on the flier, I was surprised to learn that in eight weeks I was the only caller, but affirmed in my suspicions about dogs and their owners.


Network Maps Way Out of Medical Maze
THE feeling of being in a medical maze is familiar to any patient in a suburban hospital who has had to go to an acute-care medical center in Manhattan for surgery.
Under State Health Department regulations, community hospitals, like the United Hospital Medical Center in Port Chester, can offer patients only primary care and routine surgical procedures.
Havva S. Idriss, president and chief executive officer of the 294-bed United, said:


Indian Point 3 Rekindles Energy Debate
THE New York Power Authority wants to restart its Indian Point 3 nuclear plant here early next year -- close to a year after it voluntarily shut down.
But while the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which licenses reactors, and the power authority report that they are working hard to remedy problems at the 17-year-old plant, critics say that, good intentions notwithstanding, this plant -- like others in the country -- should be retired to make way for newer forms of energy.


Sound Bytes; Dilbert's Creator Espouses The Interactive Life Style
INTERACTIVE television may be the future, but the interactive comic strip is here now.
Readers of Scott Adams's daily newspaper comic strip "Dilbert," which has grown from a cult favorite among corporate and high-tech workers to reach a wider audience through some 150 papers, were asked to vote last month on the fate of a character.
Ballots were cast via the Internet electronic mail system on this matter of public import: Should Dilbert, a cubicle-dwelling electrical engineer who works for a nameless bureaucracy, strike his pet rodent, Ratbert, with a rolled-up magazine?
Or should Ratbert be spared in a blow against gratuitous violence? (Answer below)


Early-Reading Program Helps Families Avoid School Failure
AS the late-morning sun filtered through the living room window, scattering dancing patterns of light on the rug, Donna Setford held her 20- month-old son, Christopher Murphy, on her lap while they sorted the pieces of a puzzle with vegetable shapes.
Nearby, her 3 1/2-year-old son, Michael, snuggled close to a visitor, Barbara Greene, while she read him the story of "The Three Little Pigs."
This scene could be played out in almost any living room in the county, where mothers and their preschool children share books, blocks and toys as part of their daily routine.
But for families in which the idea of reading to a 2-year-old is unheard of, or where electronic toys and videotapes take the place of blocks and puzzles, the Mother-Child-Home Program in which Donna Setford and her sons are participating offers an opportunity to achieve parity with their middle-class counterparts.
Early Intervention
The program, run by Westchester Jewish Community Services, offers training to parents in families where there is a probability of later school failure.


Corruption Overseas
To the Editor:
In "U.S. Must Halt Corruption -- Abroad" (Viewpoints, Nov. 21), Frank Vogl highlights the consequences of corruption, from political instability to wasting and rerouting aid money and foreign investment.
However, his suggestion that the United States persuade or pressure developed and developing countries to adopt its moral, ethical and legal anticorruption standards misses the point.


Felicia Thomas, Walter Parrish
UNION THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY, which stretches from 120th to 122d Street on Broadway, is a Gothic-style building with high stone walls, ornately carved towers and heavy wooden doors.
It looks like a 19th-century convent, the sort of place where a vow of silence is required to get in and mountain-climbing skills are needed to get out.
When Felicia Thomas entered the seminary as a theology student in 1987, not long after graduating from Mount Holyoke College, she did not expect to ever drink a beer again, let alone fall in love.
"I thought, 'Oh, these people will be so holy and I won't be able to date or dance and have fun,' " she recalled.
"I didn't know whether to be scandalized or relieved when I got here and found out they have plenty of parties, and you can bring your own liquor."


Mammogram Guideline Is Dropped
In a major shift in policy, the National Cancer Institute has changed its formal guidelines for breast cancer screening and dropped the recommendation that women under 50 should have regular mammograms.
The change brings the institute into line with an emerging new consensus that screening for women under 50 may not save lives, despite the clear benefits for women over 50.


With Holidays Coming, It's Time to Save
WE are in Holiday Gulch here, with Thanksgiving over and the end-of-the-year festivities looming, and there's a good chance that dollar signs are waltzing with the sugarplums in your head.
Not a good time to be thinking about tuneups and tires, right?
Wrong, actually.
With the official start of winter only two weeks away, this is exactly the time to think about ways to save money and trouble with your car.


Never Mind Bicycles: What About the Cars?
To the Editor:
It is not only bicyclists who carelessly cause accidents.
A few years ago my bicycle and I collided with a pedestrian on Fifth Avenue.
It was raining, and he had his head covered with a newspaper, eliminating his peripheral vision.
He darted across the street against the light without looking, and because of the wet weather I couldn't stop quickly enough.
We both went down.
I was wearing a helmet so I escaped with scratches and bruises.
He just picked himself up and dashed off.
To add insult to injury, as I was getting up, the light turned red, and a woman on the sidewalk started screaming at me for riding through the light.


O'Bannon Brothers Team Up at U.C.L.A.
Ed O'Bannon kept swatting little brother Charles's shot into Mr. McGrew's yard.
"Go get it," Ed would say.


Redmen Make The Hall Cry Ouch
St.
John's and Seton Hall, the two Big East powers hit hardest by graduation, opened their conference season last night at Madison Square Garden in a game that presumably would show which program was hurt the most.
Seton Hall lost Terry Dehere, Jerry Walker and Luther Wright after last season, while St.
John's lost its premier point guard, David Cain, plus forward Lamont Middleton and the key reserve Mitchell Foster.


THERE'S NO SIMPLE SUICIDE
Why are there so many articles about terminally ill people who want to die and virtually none about those who want to prolong their lives as long as possible?
Anyone who is terminally ill and has the temerity to want to live as long as possible must be feeling pressured and out of place nowadays.
FELICIA ACKERMAN Providence, R.I.


Compromises Edge GATT Nearer New Pact
Efforts to strike a free trade pact among 116 countries have dragged on for seven years for a simple reason: A deal would hurt many politically powerful industries in many countries.
American steelmakers worry that the Commerce Department would not be able to slap steep taxes on low-priced foreign steel.
Insurance companies in Southeast Asia worry that they will go broke if American insurers are allowed into their markets.
French grain farmers worry that crop prices will fall there if their Government pays them less to export their harvests than if they sell them in France.


The Trade Deadline Approaches
Top negotiators say they have made important progress toward agreement on new international trade rules.
Yet the world's 116 trade partners remain divided on critical details with only 10 days left to strike a deal.
Over the last 50 years, trade has been the foremost engine of growth: In seven previous rounds of negotiations, tariffs have been brought down from an average of 40 percent to under 5 percent.
That, in turn, has allowed trade to grow at a 5 percent clip -- fast enough to add trillions of dollars to the world economy.


Bora-Bora Prices
To the Editor: Having returned a few weeks ago from Tahiti, I was delighted to see the great color pictures of Bora-Bora ("Baguettes Beneath Pacific Skies," Oct. 31).
We read the same literature the author, Lenore Magida, did saying there would be no bad meals and everything would be expensive.
Unlike Ms.
Magida, however, we truly had no bad meals and found many prices pleasantly reasonable.
Prospective visitors should keep in mind that there is no sales tax, and tipping is frowned upon.
We took an Islands in the Sun package tour, which can be booked through any travel agency.


TRIAL IN SINGAPORE TESTS PRESS CURBS
There was unexpected bad news for Singapore investors in the summer of 1992, when Government figures showed that economic growth was sluggish, at least by the standards of this booming Southeast Asian city-state.
A year later, the news may be far worse for the newspaper editors who dared to run an exclusive article citing the Government's numbers.
Their exclusive may send them, and their sources, to prison.


Corrections
A picture on Nov. 14 in The Sophisticated Traveler, part 2 of The Times Magazine, with an article about Australia, carried an incorrect caption and credit.
The picture, an aerial view, was of Lizard Island, not Lady Eliot Island; the photographer was Craig Lamotte.


To Fight the Drug Trade, Go After the Customers
To the Editor:
Mayor-elect Giuliani's proposed drug strategy, which relies on massive law enforcement sweeps in small areas, will fail because it is based on a flawed understanding of the basic problems.


Habitats/The Helen Hayes House; For Sale: 7-BR Victorian, w/Rvr Vus and Memories
IN the last year of her life, Helen Hayes sat at her mirrored dressing table in the cove of a big bay window looking past her own reflection to the terraced lawns dipping to the Hudson River.
"She became lost in her fantasies," said the actor James MacArthur, her son, who is now selling the family's fine Victorian house in Nyack.
"She said she saw my sister and me as kids, throwing snowballs on the slope. After a while, she'd fall asleep."


Academics and Their Prose
To the Editor:
Bad academic writing is like bad weather; everybody talks about it, but nobody does anything about it.


Memorial Services Held for Classmates Who Died Together


Candidate's Easy Campaign Reflects Chileans' Satisfaction
The warm Pacific sun gave this beach resort in northern Chile a drowsy feeling this week, when Eduardo Frei and his presidential campaign team moved in for a day on the hustings.
Mr.
Frei (pronounced fray) sat for an interview at the local television channel, then removed his blue-checked jacket, climbed on top of a Chevrolet pickup truck, toured some poor neighborhoods, gave a second interview in the central market and then retired to his hotel room for a rest.


SUNDAY, December 5, 1993; Step On It!
All over the city, yellow taxis are creeping on little cat feet.
Their drivers are stopping on yellow lights, using their turn signals and struggling futilely to maintain a distance of at least two lengths from the car ahead.
When cursed by a real New York driver, they smile sheepishly.
Once the nightmare cabbie was the mumbling lunatic with a death wish, his dashboard lights flashing and radio tuned to a religious program.
Now the driver to fear is a mild-mannered vegetarian who has not only studied the rules of the road but sincerely believes they apply in New York.
He is polite.
He is careful.
He is a menace.


The Public Interest vs. Solo Motorists
To the Editor:
The article by Barbara Presley Noble on proving commuting options for workers ("Getting Them There Is Half the Job," At Work, Nov. 21) did not address the social, economic and environmental impact of not dealing with pollution and congestion caused by excessive use of automobiles.


Cafe Manhattan
Appetizers Anti pasta . . . . . $3.49


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions; A Vanished Tudor on Park, a Georgian on 42d Street
This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about New York's changing streetscapes.
Pinpointing
Q.
In 1946, at age 20, I studied piano in New York and stayed at the Helen Norfleet Individual Study Programs Inc., a boarding school at 900 Park Avenue, which is now gone.
Can you give me any references on its history? . . .
Lois M. Wright, Oakland, Calif.


A Tailor's Full-Court Press
EVERY week in the local newspapers, there's this ad from Mohan's Custom Tailors of 42d Street with this solemn-looking man standing next to a towering basketball star or baseball star while he drapes a tape measure along the player's arm.
The ad states that he will give away a suit or eight shirts if you come in and buy one of his custom suits.
Who is this guy Mohan?
How does he get these big-time athletes to promote his clothes?
What are Manute Bol and Bobby Bonilla and Charles Oakley doing going up to a 17th-floor suite to see a guy named Mohan?


May It Be Ever Thus
To the Editor:
It is admirable of Tony Kushner to thank the two dozen friends who helped him write "Angels in America"  [ "Is It Fiction Playwrights Create Alone?" Nov. 21 ] .
But has he just discovered that writing is a collaborative effort?
The theater has always functioned because of the actors, directors and designers who not only furnish their own skills but often contribute some dialogue to the play.
And friends and relatives not only supply information and inspiration: They often serve as models for characters.


Sheer Victims
To the Editor:
I have some thoughts to add to Emily Prager's wonderfully on-target "Neither Virgin Nor Siren" (Nov. 14).


This Year, 'Wide Right' Becomes Navy's Lament
There have always been good reasons to remember Army-Navy games, like Patmon Malcom's winning field goal for Army with 12 seconds left last year.
Or Frank Schenk's winning kick for Navy with 11 seconds remaining the last time the game was held here at Giants Stadium, in 1989.
But today's game will be remembered for a less heroic reason.
It was decided by a missed kick, an 18-yard field-goal attempt by an 18-year-old Navy plebe named Ryan Bucchianeri on the next to last play.
The 142-pound freshman's boot went wide to the right and so Army won the 94th game of the series, 16-14, before a crowd of 67,852.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 5, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
2
2
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Warner, $5.99.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a serial killer in Washington.
3
49
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
4
1
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) After being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells about killing her husband nearly 30 years earlier.
5
7
THE KILLER ANGELS, by Michael Shaara. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The Battle of Gettysburg.
6
42
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
7
6
INADMISSIBLE EVIDENCE, by Philip Friedman. (Ivy, $5.99.) A prosecutor struggles to convict a real estate tycoon of murder.
8*
2
THE REMAINS OF THE DAY, by Kazuo Ishiguro. (Vintage, $11.) The life of an English butler and the "great gentleman" he served.
9
5
KEEPER OF THE HEART, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A woman flees yet yearns for a man chosen to be her mate on a distant planet.
10*
1
CLOSE COMBAT, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Jove, $5.99.) In Volume 6 of "The Corps," there are new challenges for the Marines in World War II.
11
6
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $6.50.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
12
86
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
13
2
RED SQUARE, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The detective Arkady Renko returns to Moscow after the fall of Communism.
14*
10
THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, by Edith Wharton. (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) The 1920 novel about New York society life in the 1870's.
15
5
THE COPPER BEECH, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) The romances, plots and crimes that go on behind closed doors in an Irish village.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
5
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photographs of and observations by the retired basketball superstar.
2
12
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
526
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
4
2
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) The case of a Southern woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of murders.
5*
6
SUBMARINE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $14.95.) A guided tour through a nuclear warship and the world of which it is a part.
6
42
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
7
21
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
8
112
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
9*
1
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
10*
9
THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH SECURITY PLAN. (Times Books/Random House, $8.) The Clinton Administration's health care proposals.
11
32
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
12*
6
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
13*
1
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy, as seen in the actions of an A.A.
Milne character.
14*
3
A CALL FOR REVOLUTION, by Martin L. Gross. (Ballantine, $8.99.) More examples of Government waste, and how to stop it.
15*
16
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
10
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
146
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
2
MTV'S BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD, by Sam Johnson and Chris Marcil. (MTV/Callaway/Pocket, $10.) Cartoon humor featuring the television characters.
4
4
THE FAR SIDE GALLERY 4, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of cartoons.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 20, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Nunsense


ELECTION COVERAGE IS VARIED IN RUSSIA
It's been two weeks since Pravda disappeared from print, this time for failing to pay its bills, but even declared Communists are not bemoaning its absence too loudly.
True, the venerable daily founded by Lenin himself in 1912 was probably the only major Russian newspaper to openly support the Communist Party in the campaign for a new Parliament, but then there was never any doubt how its readers would vote, anyway.


SUNDAY, December 5, 1993; Reality Land
Fresh from a truly Mickey Mouse performance in Europe (a $900 million loss in the first year at Euro Disney), the Walt Disney Company now wants to take on American history in Manassas, Va., the site of two famous Civil War battles.
The idea is to build a theme park of the American experience, from Indian villages to factory towns to Civil War and World War II battlefield experiences.
Disney has no doubt researched the market.
Civil War buffs who re-enact battles abound.
They take costuming as a matter of life and death.
Of course, that's where they stop.
They don't actually take life and death as a matter of life and death.
They leave a smile on the face of battle.
Disney designers, on the other hand, want "to make it real." Really?
The company has dealt in the past with magic kingdoms, fantasies, storybook villages.
The history it wants to reproduce now is messy, violent and tragic.


Even the Most Dedicated Need More Help to Help the Neediest; Teen-Ager's Peaceful Fight for Change
Paul Rodriguez dreams of breaking out of the violence and poverty of West Harlem by getting an education and then a good job, a family and a safe place to raise them.
It is a far cry from his life now as a 16-year-old who risks getting shot as he walks home on West 135th Street or crosses a nearby playground.
Paul was 2 years old when his father walked out.
Soon after, Paul and his brother and sister lost their mother to drugs.


A Foreign Aid Of Words, Not Cash
PRESIDENT CLINTON stood at the White House with the leaders of all five Central American countries last week and noted that it was the first time in the 20th century that a United States President was meeting a group of democratically elected Presidents from the region.
"My message to these distinguished leaders and to the millions whom they represent is simple: The United States will be there as your partner to help," Mr.
Clinton said.
"We will not make the mistake of abandoning this region when its dramatic recovery is not yet complete."
Fine words, but like much of what comes out of the deficit-plagued Federal Government these days, the reach exceeded the grasp.


The Voice Is Familiar but I Can't Place the Overbite
No wonder Lisa Simpson fell in love with her substitute teacher, Mr.
Bergstrom; he was Dustin Hoffman.
Homer's sometimes-rich half-brother is Danny DeVito.
And when the baby, Maggie, speaks (which, granted, has only been once), she is Elizabeth Taylor.
In its fourth full season on Fox, "The Simpsons" has had enough big-name guest stars to make Ed Sullivan proud.
The audience hasn't seen any of them, of course, "The Simpsons" being prime-time network television's only hit series drawn by animators.


Academics and Their Prose
To the Editor:
With trepidation, I applaud Patricia Nelson Limerick's essay "Dancing With Professors: The Trouble With Academic Prose" (Oct. 31).
She has told the village that the emperor is wearing no clothing.
I fear for her (academic) life.


Fixing Doorbells and Chimes to Ring in the Holiday Season
THE holidays are high season for doorbells and chimes, and so now is the time to fix them.
Bells and chimes operate on very low current -- 6 to 24 volts, depending on the model -- and because shock from such a small charge is virtually imperceptible, most repairs can be made without turning off the power.
But do not perform tests or make repairs with the power on if wearing a pacemaker, as contact with even small amounts of electricity can disrupt it.


SUNDAY, December 5, 1993; Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow
In case you were wondering, Jan. 5 is St.
Agatha's Day (she appeared as a cat and summoned storms).
On May 17, 1954, the Supreme Court ruled school segregation unconstitutional.
And the three days of Idul-Adha next year are May 20-22.
This information is culled from "Cat Lovers Against the Bomb," "The Words of Martin Luther King Jr." and the "New York City Alternate Side of the Street Parking Calendar," just a small sampling of the 141 calendars displayed at one Manhattan bookstore.
Others feature the usual cars, trains, cats and Irish landscapes.


A Jolly old Elf, a Master of Gloom: The Gifts of Peter De Vries
EARLIER this year a friend of mine said of an ineffectual person, "She will never pass mustard." I knew I would go on muttering this bewitching malaprop until I was able to share the gift with someone else.
So I called Peter De Vries, the master of malaprops.
I was unreasonably surprised to hear a strange voice at the other end.
A year or more of silence goes by and you phone someone and you expect the number and the person to be unchanged.
She was a nurse, she explained: Mr.
De Vries was ill.
"Just say I called," I said.
The nurse hesitated, then told me to hold on, and after a while Peter came on the line.
"I'm sick -- and it's bad this time," he said, but his voice was strong with the kind of indignation that made me think he would overcome whatever illness he had.
So I protested on his behalf.
But he said no, he was bedridden.
He had had a series of strokes.
He couldn't move.


Renae Walker, Jonathan Pine
Renae Delann Walker, the daughter of Marlene Hagen of Crosby, N.D., was married last evening to Dr.
Jonathan Bruce Pine, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Murray Pine of Maplewood, N.J.
Rabbi Stephen Schafer performed the ceremony at the Malliouhana Hotel in Anguilla, British West Indies.
Mrs.
Pine, 32, graduated from the University of North Dakota.
She teaches kindergarten at the Watchung School in Montclair, N.J.


Travel
READING travel narratives, we may find ourselves pausing to wonder precisely how great travel writing (say, Rebecca West's "Black Lamb and Grey Falcon") differs from the neighbors' slide show of the family's five days in Rome.
In neither case do we take the journey, but only hear about it secondhand; in both cases, selected moments and views have been chosen for us, so unlike the total immersion we seek when we travel ourselves.
Having felt our eyes glaze over when dear ones describe their sojourns abroad, we can only marvel at the skill of those rare writers we'll allow to travel for us.
Often, they are people to whom odd or exciting things happen, authors who can observe and describe, deep thinkers or snappy prose stylists.
Agreeable or crabby, their dispositions hardly matter so long as they are smart, aware, fired with curiosity and untroubled by the more banal tourist prejudices and anxieties.
A survey of recent travel books inspires us to consider the chasm between Rebecca West's accounts of Dubrovnik or Mostar and the slides of the kids next door, posed in front of the Colosseum.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Flatbush; Citing Image, Group Resists Aid for Poor
After a restructuring of the city's anti-poverty program, 11 more communities began receiving a share of $13 million in city and Federal money last week intended to finance programs to combat problems like unemployment and school dropouts.
Most of the communities welcome the money, but in one, East Flatbush, the designation has prompted serious opposition.


Jean Williams, Richard Mercurio
Jean Teresa Williams, a daughter of George and Rosemary Williams of Smithtown, L.I., was married there yesterday to Richard Ralph Mercurio, a son of Richard and Frances Mercurio of Commack, L.I.
The Rev.
Bill Breslawski performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Mercurio, 28, is an associate at Firestone &amp; Firestone, a law firm in Hauppauge, L.I.
She graduated from the University of Scranton and received her law degree from the Catholic University of America.


Part Two of The Free Trade Triathlon
THE Clinton Administration is trying to complete a free trade triathlon: the North American Free Trade Agreement with Mexico and Canada last month, a global trade pact this month and greater economic integration with Asia, including a deal with Japan on cars, insurance and several other industries early next year.
After seven years of tedious negotiations and missed deadlines, a global free-trade pact may be just 10 days away, trade officials said last week.
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, and Sir Leon Brittan, the European Community's top trade official, are expected to announce in Brussels tomorrow a settlement of many trans-Atlantic trade squabbles that have blocked completion of an overall trade pact among 116 nations.


How to Protect Your Plants From Deer
DEER continue to be a problem in suburbia as the density of the herds increases.
Gardeners relate many stories of damage to their plants by indiscriminate deer nibbling.
A few growers have become so discouraged they have almost given up.
It seems that when deer are hungry, they dine on almost anything, much to a planter's heartbreak.
What to do?
This perennial question has no easy answers.
The increase in deer population without the natural predators for control and the invasion of their once wild habitat for development exacerbate the problems.
This provides more opportunities for many deer-human conflicts.


TODAY IN The City
THE GLORIOUS MOSAIC
Exploring the varieties of religious experience in New York.
Page 1.
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT
A warehouse store heads for Harlem; saying "no" to anti-poverty aid in Flatbush.
Pages 6 and 10.
SOAPBOX
178th Street and Vyse Avenue, the South Bronx, 1980-1993: a photographer's journal.
Page 25.
The City, section 13 (distributed in most of New York City).


Seeing Hong Kong on Foot
HONG KONG has one of the world's most efficient public transportation networks -- a user-friendly subway, dozens of bus lines, the cheap (about 12 cents a ride) and charming Star Ferry and even a vast new escalator system climbing 2,600 feet through the Central and Mid-Levels districts.
But like any city worth its salt, this metropolis of six million people is best seen on foot.
You can hire a guide, plunge in on your own, or take the middle road -- a series of self-guided walking tours outlined in booklets published by the Hong Kong Tourist Association.
Two of the tours cover neighborhoods in the city center, and two are devoted to nearby islands.
The fifth and latest, published this year, guides the visitor through the town of Sai Kung in the eastern part of the New Territories on the mainland.
The tourist association also publishes a less elaborate series of four country walks that begin within striking distance of the city.


Hideko Udagawa, Harvey C. Dzodin
Hideko Udagawa, a concert violinist, and Harvey Cary Dzodin, vice president for commercial standards at Capital Cities/ABC Inc. in New York, were married last evening at the Seventh Regiment Armory in New York.
Rabbi Joel S. Goor performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Udagawa, who is keeping her name, is a daughter of Masako Udagawa of Tokyo and the late Dr.
Kanehisa Udagawa.
The bride graduated from the Tokyo University of Arts and studied at the Juilliard School.
Her father was a professor of electronics, and the author of 26 books on the subject, at Nagoya University in Japan.


Barbara M. Kellogg; Dog Breeder, 82
Barbara M. Kellogg, a dog breeder in Connecticut, died on Thursday at Bridgeport Hospital as a result of burns she received on Nov. 27 during a fire at her home in Easton, Conn.
She was 82.
Mrs.
Kellogg bred, raised and showed collies and was the first woman to be a director of the American Kennel Club.
She was a graduate of Vassar College.


A Natural Longing for Nature
Why do people gravitate to parks, visit zoos, keep pets and covet a room with a view of nature?
It may be in the genes.


'A National Touchstone'
To the Editor:
I knew that Douglas Coupland was in way over his "post-modern" head the moment he evoked the band Devo in the lead sentence of his article "J.F.K. Remembered, Even for Those Who Don't"  [ Nov. 14 ] .
Instead of a thoughtfully considered overview of the television coverage that surrounds the 30th anniversary of Kennedy's assassination, Mr.
Coupland treated us to an inconsequential litany of pop blather (Warhol, MTV, the Simpsons, Barbie and Halston hats), thereby neglecting a valuable opportunity to examine whether television has helped all of us (with or without memories of Dallas) reflect upon this singular, tragic event.


Penniless Yuppies/Preppies
To the Editor:
Since I am one, I would agree with John J. Keefe's letter (Nov. 21) that no yuppie/preppy would be caught without penny loafers.
My sense of yuppie/preppy good taste is, however, offended by his inference that penny loafers are for showing off shiny pennies.
Where has he been?
We leave loafer pennies to the grade school kids.
The trick of being a mature yuppie/preppy is to don the appropriate apparel without being ostentatious about it.
Pennies in loafers is just a bit over the line.
All respectable yuppies/preppies know the meaning of metaphor and are convinced that "penny loafer" is not to be taken literally.
REV.
LEW TOWLER  Wickford, R.I.


A Day Without Art


Informal Cuisine in a Lush Hotel Atrium
SEVERAL months ago the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Old Greenwich closed its upscale restaurant Conde's (except for private parties) and is now "making do" with its second-tier eating place, Winfield's Cafe, in keeping with current lighter, more informal dining habits.
Conde's was part of a 1980's national trend toward small, gourmet-style restaurants that many hotel chains embraced.
Economic times and changing eating patterns have been hard on such efforts.
Winfield's Cafe is situated in the vast 56-foot-high glass-roof atrium that is the hotel's centerpiece.
Towering columns covered by climbing greenery, ficus trees, hibiscus, philodendron and other plants, a small pond, streams and waterfall all add to the appeal.
In the evening, the sound of live piano music drifts over from a small bar across the way.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Named Mike Griffin pitching coach.
Named Jim Thrift coach of Indianapolis of the American Association.
College
EASTERN NEW MEXICO -- Announced the resignation of Howard Stearns, football coach.


Lee Hayne, Thomas J. Gavula
Martha Lee Hayne, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Hayne of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to Thomas Joseph Gavula, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Gavula of Malvern, Pa.
The Rev.
James Kowalski performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Gavula, 28, who is known as Lee, was until recently a second vice president at the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father, a senior vice president at Chase, is the global institutional banking executive.


Feasts and Festivals, Candles and Silence
The varieties of religious experience in New York are reflected in the panoply of holiday observances around the city in the coming weeks.
Here is an eclectic sampling of celebrations, traditional and otherwise.
HANUKKAH  TODAY  (The first of eight nights of the holiday, which is not generally observed with special religious services.) LATKE-EATING CONTEST , Kings Bay Y.M. &amp; Y.W.H.A., 3495 Nostrand Avenue in Brooklyn.
Driedel spin, Israeli folk dancing and a Hanukkah play.
Noon; children $4, adults $5, families $8.
HOLIDAY WORKSHOP , Riverdale Y.M. &amp; Y.W.H.A., 5625 Arlington Avenue, the Bronx.
Menorah, dreidel and latke making, book fair and Hanukkah boutique.
Volunteers can also bring wrapped gifts for needy children.
Doors open at 10 a.m., the workshop begins at 1 p.m.; $3.
WEDNESDAY  MENORAH LIGHTINGS , Grand Army Plaza in Brooklyn, and at 59th Street and Fifth Avenue in Manhattan.
Sponsor: the Lubavitch Youth Organization.
In Brooklyn, Dec. 8, 4 P.M.; Dec. 9, 4 P.M.; Dec. 10, 3:30 P.M., Dec. 11 at 6:30 P.M., and Dec. 12-15, 4 P.M.
In Manhattan, Dec. 8-10, 5:30 P.M.; Dec. 11, 8 P.M., and Dec. 12-15, 5:30 P.M.
THURSDAY  PARTY FOR GAY MEN AND LESBIANS , sponsored by the Jewish Community Center of the Upper West Side, 6:30 P.M.; (212) 580-0099.
SATURDAY  HUMAN RIGHTS LECTURE , Park East Synagogue, 163 East 67th Street.
Rabbi Arthur Schneier, who will visit Moscow next week to act as a foreign observer to the Russian parlimentary elections, will speak on the holiday's importance in relation to human rights in the former Soviet Union.
The speech will be followed by a light lunch; (212) 737-6900.
DEC. 12  HANUKKAH FESTIVAL , Queens Theater on the Park, Flushing Meadows Park, by the ice-skating rink.
"The Gift of Life," a play featuring a 45-foot menorah and dancing dreidels, is the highlight of the annual festival.
Folk dancing, traditional music and crafts projects.
Noon; $12 in advance, $15 at the door; (718) 268-5011.
HOLIDAY CARNIVAL , Bronx House, 990 Pelham Parkway, 11:30 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Games, booths, music and dancing; $1 for adults, 50 cents for children.
CHRISTMAS  DEC. 12  BICENTENNIAL , Cathedral of the Holy Virgin Protection, 59 East Second Street.
A celebration of the introduction of Orthodox Christianity to America.
The history of St.
Herman of Alaska, a Russian missionary, will be chronicled in a liturgy at 9:30 A.M.
The service and the meal afterward are free.
DEC. 15  DISCUSSION , Trinity Church, Broadway at Wall Street.
The author Madeline L'Engle, the Rev.
Susan Harris and the Rev.
Barbara Crafton will discuss the gospel and their own work, 8:30 P.M.
MISA DE GALLO , a traditional Filipino service, St.
Agatha's Church, 702 49th Street, near Seventh Avenue, in Brooklyn, 7 P.M., and at the Philippine Consulate, 556 Fifth Avenue, at various times, Dec. 15-23; (718) 424-5400 or (212) 764-1330, ext. 329.
DEC. 17  ADVENT RETREAT .
Father Thomas P. Brislin will lead a silent Advent retreat for men and women, Dec. 17-19; $100; (718) 549-6500.
DEC. 24  TRILINGUAL MASS , St.
Nicholas of Tollentyne Church, 2145 University Avenue, the Bronx.
Mass and carols in English, Spanish and Vietnamese; (718) 295-6800.
NATIVITY AND CAROLS , Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, 4 P.M.
In "A Service of Six Lessons and Carols," carols are sung while actors bring the Nativity to life.
MINI-OPERA FOR CHILDREN , Trinity Church, Broadway at Wall Street.
"Winter Star," 4 P.M.
CAROL SINGING , Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church, at 73d Street, 5 P.M.
MIDNIGHT MASS , Cathedral of St.
James, Tillary and Jay Streets, Brooklyn.
Open to the public with carols beginning at 11:15 P.M.
MIDNIGHT MASS , St.
Patrick's Cathedral, Fifth Avenue at 51st Street, 11 P.M.
Admission by ticket only; (212) 753-2261.
JAN. 1  NEW YEAR'S FESTIVAL , Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 3:30 P.M. and 7:30 P.M.
Jugglers, mimes, and pipers will fill the cathedral during "The Boar's Head and Yulelog Festival," a performance that celebrates the closing of the Christmas holidays.
Also on Jan. 2 at 3:30 P.M.; $12, $18, $35 (reserved seats).
KWANZAA  (Kwanzaa, a seven-day celebration of African-American heritage and culture, is celebrated from December 26 to Jan 1.)
DEC. 17  HOLIDAY EXPO '93 , Jacob Javits Convention Center, 11th Avenue at West 35th Street, through Dec. 20, Noon to 10 P.M.
The nation's largest Kwanzaa celebration; (718) 992-9933; $8 for adults, $3 for children and seniors.
DEC. 24  KWANZAA CEREMONY , Emmanuel Baptist Church, 279 Lafyette Avenue, Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, 5:30 P.M.
Remembrance of those who have died, the lighting of Kwanzaa candles and gift exchange; (718) 622-1107.
DEC. 26  MARKETPLACE AND FEAST , City College of New York, Aaron Davis Hall, 134th Street and Convent Avenue.
Market begins at noon, feast at 6 p.m.
Also a after-dinner concert; $10 adults, $5 children.
DEC. 28  MARKET AND CELEBRATION , Roy Wilkens Park, 119th Avenue and Merrick Boulevard, St.
Albans, Queens.
Vendor market and entertainment.
Also Dec. 29, 30.
Noon to 8 P.M.; free; (718) 276-4630.
DEC. 29  CELEBRATION , P.S. 153, 146th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, 4 P.M. to 8 P.M.; $5 for adults, $3 children.
African foods, games, and storytelling; (212) 234-1660.
DEC. 30  KWANZAA GALA , Sheraton New York Hotel, Towers Imperial Ballroom, 7th Avenue and 42d Street. 7 P.M. to midnight.
Traditional feast in elegant surroundings; $125; (212) 222-3438.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Asoria/Astoria Heights; Sewer Renovation, Part II
The last time the city tried to repair the sewer system along Hoyt Avenue, sidewalks cracked, houses rattled and residents sued.
The project was halted.
Last week, nearly a year later, the work crews were back, but with a new plan intended to complete the upgrading of 10 blocks of sewers and water mains without the earlier disruption of the neighborhood.


Ban on Wall Street Gifts Hurts McCall Campaign
The October decision by Wall Street's leading bond underwriters to ban political contributions was widely hailed as a significant move toward cleaner government.
But the timing could not have been worse for the new State Comptroller, H. Carl McCall, who is trying to bankroll what will clearly be an expensive campaign in 1994.
Mr.
McCall, who wants to become the first black person to win statewide elective office in New York, estimates that the decision will cost him $2 million in campaign contributions.
He based that on the amount that his predecessor, Edward V. Regan, typically received from the bond houses.


For Foreign Films, the Rules For an Oscar Are Set in Sand
When the Academy Award nominations for best foreign language film are announced in February, it is already certain there will be one conspicuous absence.
"Blue," a film by the Polish director Krzysztof Kieslowski about a French woman mourning her dead husband and daughter, has not been accepted for competition, even though it shared the Golden Lion with "Short Cuts" at the Venice Film Festival.
The film opens today in New York.
The snub continues something of a tradition for the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, whose rules for submitting foreign films have been criticized as arbitrary.
In fact, the submission process -- which ended last month -- often gets more attention than the nominations and winners.


POSTINGS: Change in Belle Harbor; Failed Condo Project Reborn in New Form
The Belle Harbor section of Queens is providing yet another example of the turn back to traditional housing forms in low-rise residential neighborhoods of New York City.
What began as the "Sea Breeze Condominium" in the hands of one developer a few years ago is now on the market as "Ocean View Homes" in the hands of another.
The condominiums -- in seven attached and semi-attached two-story houses on Beach 129th Street -- were partially sold but never occupied after they were completed three years ago.


'Two Rooms': A Story Of a Doomed Love
IN one room, Michael, blindfolded and hand bound, is composing love letters to his wife, Lanie.
In another room, which Lanie has stripped bare and is allowing no air or sunshine in, she finds a way to share by suffering through her husband's captivity.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-29  MULTICULTURE?
FRANCE SAYS NO  In a dispute over head coverings worn by Muslim schoolgirls in France, the eight-month-old Government signaled that it would no longer tolerate multiculturalism.  1  The French may know more about the Holocaust than others do.  14


Italian Elections Today Worry Nation's Jews
Along the walls of the ancient quarter that Romans call the ghetto, the doubts and worries have begun to intrude, scrawled in black on white sheeting.
"Jews do not forget the past," said one message written by a Jewish protester.
In the newspapers, too, leaders of Jewish organizations have struck the same theme, urging Italians not to return to their Fascist history.


ABOUT BOOKS
APOCRYPHAL or not, it makes a good story that the Oscar, the annual Academy Award, found its name after a film official said about the statuette, "It looks like my uncle Oscar."
This time it's Jerry's turn.
At least that was the intention of the New Jersey Reading Association, an affiliate of the International Reading Association , when it recently decided to name a book award the Jerry, in honor of Dr.
M.
Jerry Weiss of Monclair, the distinguished service professor of communication at Jersey City State College.
The award is intended to encourage children to read.


Gambling, Pariah No More, Is Booming Across America
The newest venture in the booming national industry of legalized gambling is now open for business: futuristic virtual-reality rides to soothe the losers' souls, just up the theme-park escalator from acres of the latest video slot machines.
Here in the desert where Bugsy Siegel started it all six decades ago as a limited-audience, amoral escapade for high rollers, legalized gambling is displaying its growing mass-entertainment role in grand fashion.
Three huge new casinos costing a total of $2 billion are opening with a new kind of Hollywood star power, a tie-in emphasis on special-effects theme-park entertainment.


Giuliani Suggests Style Will Be Close to the Vest
When Rudolph W. Giuliani assumes office next month, he will be an anomaly, the first New York mayor in modern politics who has not held a previous elective post.
And so whatever his governing style will be, it will have to be worked out in the crucible of one of the nation's most visible, high-pressure offices.
The first few weeks of Mr.
Giuliani's transition offered few clues about how he will govern, beyond his awareness that he had to begin healing the city after a racially polarized vote.


FORBIDDEN SUN, AND SIN, COMMUNIST STYLE
Your author comments on Ernest Hemingway's prodigious consumption of daiquiris in Old Havana's Floridita bar, and wonders "how anyone, even a Nobel Prize-winning boozer, could down that much sugar in a sitting." Hemingway himself provided the answer, in the Cuba chapter of "Islands in the Stream," much of which takes place in the Floridita.
"Sin azucar," says Thomas Hudson, the author's alter ego, "I love it. . . . Drinking these double frozens without sugar." FRANCIS A. WOOD Montclair, N.J.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
HUMAN RIGHTS DAY
Terry A. Anderson, the Middle East correspondent for the Associated Press who spent seven years as a hostage in Lebanon, and Giandomenico Picco, special envoy of the United Nations Secretary General, who negotiated his release, will speak today at 2 P.M. at the Scarsdale Public Library, at Olmstead and White Plains Post Roads.


Cutting It, Coast to Coast
He has styled the hair of Barbara Bush, Julio Iglesias and Jamie Lee Curtis.
But Cristophe, barber to the stars, says, "When it comes to names, I have amnesia."
His fame reigned mainly on the West Coast until fate intervened last spring in the form of a tarmac job for one William Jefferson Clinton of Washington.
Now, ensconced in his new little salon five blocks from the White House, Cristophe, 36, is nationally famous.


INSIDE
North Korea Offer Is Faulted
After studying an offer by North Korea on giving international inspectors wider access to its nuclear sites, American specialists said the plan had serious deficiencies.
Page 27.
Iran-Contra Details Reported
The final report on the Iran arms case says Ronald Reagan "set the stage" for illegal acts and George Bush did not tell the truth, The Associated Press reported.
Page 31.
Kidnapped Girl's Body Found
Police found the body of a 12-year-old California girl kidnapped from a slumber party, ending a search that attracted national attention.
Page 30.
GATT Gains Momentum
Compromises on several trade and agriculture issues may be near between the United States and the European Community.
Page 26.
Van Driver Shot in Brooklyn
The driver of an illegal livery van was shot to death in what the police said was the first killing involving the increasingly popular vans.
Page 49.


At 90, Still Swimming in the Fast Lane
LAP after lap, the powerfully built man with the strong, fluid strokes knifes through the water in the pool at the McCann Natatorium on the campus of Milford Academy.
First, the freestyle, then, after a brief rest, the breast stroke, the backstroke and the butterfly; all swum rhythmically and with little apparent effort.
A dozen others are swimming laps at the McCann Natatorium on a recent weekday morning.
According to John McCann, the manager, the husky man in Lane 1 of the six-lane pool is an inspiration to many of them.


Editorial Notebook; Time to Retire a Cliche
The logician and philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce was maddeningly precise in his use of language.
Peirce founded the American school of philosophy known as pragmatism and introduced the term into English.
But that was 1878.
By 1905, the word pragmatism had been so well popularized -- and, in Peirce's view, so corrupted -- that the philosopher disowned his word.
When an idea becomes a hindrance to clarity, Peirce said -- even when the idea is one's own -- it's best to pat it on the head and send it away.
That's good advice, especially for people who write about politics.
The cliches are subtly invasive and, ultimately, blinding.
Today's political discourse is thick with notions that meet Peirce's test for expulsion.


Never Mind Bicycles: What About the Cars?
To the Editor:
Why are we trying to find better ways to live with bicyclists?
I don't think they should be allowed to exist -- and not just the messengers.
Fast-food delivery people and even recreational cyclists have begun to pick up the bad habits of the messengers.


Slouching Toward Utopia in the South Bronx
From the classical colonnades of the Greek Revival to the heavy metal wrappers of Frank Gehry, American architects have found many ways to tell the story of modern democracy.
But if architecture's version of that story is to be more than a fairy tale, architects must learn to do more than tell it.
They must also try to live it.
Louis Sullivan once said that for him architecture was not an art but a religion -- "part of the greater religion of democracy." He had a good sense of priorities.
It is fine for architects to focus on symbolic forms and images.
But if their symbols are disconnected from social reality, their buildings may end up mocking the values they represent.
For the past year, residents of the South Bronx have been working to create a solidly democratic content for architectural form.
Rather than sit back and wait for architects and planners to tell them how to improve the prospects for their legendarily troubled borough, they have joined with architects and planners to renegotiate the social contract between citizens and builders.
Bronx Center, as the heartening project for this area is called, is becoming a national model for community-based planning, though that dull term scarcely conveys the excitement of an undertaking that promises to change the way people think about urban design.


The Looking-Glass Cure
It's no secret that some women hate their bodies, no matter how toned their thighs, how tight their buttocks.
Yo-yo dieting, cosmetic surgery, liposuction and "exercise bulimia" are just a few of the extremes they go through to conform to a younger, thinner, more socially acceptable ideal.
Now there's a new weapon in the beauty arsenal, perhaps the most powerful of all: self-acceptance.
Which, for certain women, means an appointment with a beauty shrink.
Though you can't find them in the Yellow Pages -- yet -- the ranks of specialists now treating image disorders are growing.
Their patients are not necessarily anorexic or bulimic, but women who are simply overwhelmed by the aging process or convinced they are fat or unattractive -- a perception problem that seems to dog about 85 percent of the female population according to a well-publicized study conducted last year by Debbie Then, a psychologist who lectures at Stanford University.


INTO THE PIT
Unless you have experienced it yourself, it is hard to put into words what the controlled anarchy of the mosh pit feels like.
Everyone in the pit looks out for one another, and if you look like you are in trouble, there are at least 10 pairs of hands within two feet willing to help you out.


Academics and Their Prose
To the Editor:
My high school girlfriend (wherever she may be) would probably testify that I was a great dancer.
My wife says I'm still pretty good, at least for a middle-aged academic.
So the next time I see Patty Limerick at some professorial gathering or other, I hope she'll have her good shoes with her: I'm going to ask her to dance.
GREGORY NOBLES  Atlanta


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Lieut. Lawrence L. Irvine; Confronting Gang Violence in Hartford
A STUDENT is shot on the steps of New Britain High School.
A cache of guns is seized in Hartford.
A Sunday morning brawl at a homecoming party at Wesleyan University in Middletown leaves three police officers injured.
In all these cases, the police say street gangs were behind the trouble.
Last month, legislative leaders announced a $5 million anti-gang proposal that would pay for police overtime in the state's five largest cities and other communities.
In addition, the plan would assign four state's attorneys to gang-related prosecutions.


Nancy Baskin And Jorge Plutzky
Nancy Fenn Baskin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold M. Baskin of North Haven, Conn., was married last evening to Dr.
Jorge Plutzky, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Max Plutzky of Gainesville, Fla.
Rabbi Charles D. Lippman performed the ceremony at the University Club in Manhattan.
Ms.
Baskin, who is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and received a law degree from New York University.
She is an associate at Lee, Levine &amp; Bowser, a law firm in Boston.
Her father is a urologist in New Haven and an assistant clinical professor of surgery at Yale University there.


Remember to Water
Order some carnivorous plants for Christmas.
Keep watering evergreens, especially broadleafed types like rhododendrons and azaleas, until the ground freezes.
Since evergreens don't lose their leaves, they continue to lose moisture through transpiration.
If there's no water for roots to draw on, or if the ground freezes more than a few inches, leaves will get that scorched look.


Jets, Unlike Their Fans, Are Not Looking Past the Colts
To the fans, the Jets are in the midst of the dog days of their schedule.
Their last three opponents have had more bark than bite and the next two, starting with the Colts at Giants Stadium this afternoon, have rolled over and aren't just playing dead.
With an opportunity to extend their winning streak to six games and with an eye on the playoffs, Jet players say it won't be so hard for them to stay focused on the Colts (3-8) this afternoon.


Try Time Sharing Air Over the Grand Canyon
To the Editor:
Further on "Parks Are for People, Not Planes" (editorial, Nov. 17; letter, Nov. 28): Planes are people!
As you report, 800,000 people chose to see the Grand Canyon that way in 1992.
I don't know what proportion of all Canyon sightseers this number represents, but I presume it is significant.
I also presume that there are good reasons why so many people prefer to see the Canyon this way.
I don't question them.


AIDS REPORT LEADS TO WORRY OF PANIC
Health officials and child-care experts expressed concern yesterday that reports of two children contracting the AIDS virus from other children, apparently through broken skin, would cause unnecessary panic among parents.
Scientists have detected two cases in which H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, has been transmitted from one child and one adolescent to others, apparently when infected blood from one entered the other through cuts or disease that broke the skin.
In both cases, the children were living in the same household.


Girls at Play
The Girl Scout Council honors Oscar de la Renta at the St. Regis Hotel, Dec. 2.


For Contrarians, Commodities Are Looking Up
THE American bond market is shaking because it sees signs of economic strength.
European stock markets are zooming as evidence mounts that the continental slowdown is ending.
And yet there is consensus that commodity prices will stay low.
The assumption is that demand, no matter how strong, will not overtake supply.
It is a supreme insult these days to dismiss something as a "commodity business."


Soul Central
Moving as silently as dawn's approach, Art Manley walked over dew-dampened grass one morning recently to an old, concrete fountain at the center of an acre of municipal park land.
The 31-year-old jazz musician took a long look out over the slumbering neighborhood that stretched before him in blocks of neat, pastel-colored houses, European-village-style shops and towering cypress, cedar and palm trees.
Only then, as he had for months of mornings, did Mr.
Manley plant his snakeskin loafers in the sod, square his shoulders, close his eyes and lift his trumpet to his expertly pursed lips.


Wall Street; It May All Sound Great, but Consider the Sources
WHEN analysts recently turned bullish on three companies, it was just the tonic the stocks needed.
But investors were forgetting a cardinal rule: always discount bullish reports from analysts who work for a company's investment bank.
Strong earnings lifted shares of Barnes &amp; Noble 25 cents on Nov. 23, but it took a buy recommendation a day later from Morgan Stanley, which underwrote the bookseller's initial public offering in September, to send the shares up $2.50, to $27.375.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Flatbush; Neighborhood Wants to Join Parking Experiment
After lobbying by Community Board 14, the Sanitation Department is considering expanding an experiment that cuts in half the hours that car parking is forbidden under alternate-side-of-the-street regulations.
The community board began asking to join the yearlong pilot program, which reduces the usual three-hour wait, after it was instituted in Community Board 1, which covers Dyker Heights, Bay Ridge and Fort Hamilton.


More Leeway Proposed On Airport Security
The Federal Aviation Administration has proposed rules that would give airports more flexibility in handling security.
In some cases, the changes would ease the security requirements in certain areas during terrorist alerts.
The proposal, which is still being reviewed, suggests changes such as replacing police officers with private guards to patrol ticket counters and baggage areas during alerts.
An official from the F.A.A., which does not publicize its security policies in detail, stressed that the proposal would not result in less security.
Rather, he said, it would give security supervisors more flexibility in reassigning police officers as they see fit.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Upper Wesrt Side; Battle of the Crosstown Bus: Will a Busy Intersection Get Even Busier?
A Transit Authority plan to shift the route of the 96th Street crosstown bus has raised the possibility that one of the Upper West Side's busiest intersections -- 96th Street and Central Park West -- will get busier.
"I am nervous enough crossing this street now," said JoEllen White, who with her two dogs joined about 20 people gathered along the intersection to protest the plan on Tuesday morning.
"If you've got a bus here, it's going to be impossible."


When Nuclear Weapons Author Is Mental Patient
To editors and readers of the Army journal Military Review, the article on "portable nukes" had the ring of authority, a treatise on the growing peril of hand-held nuclear weapons that terrorists could deliver in a backpack.
The author, after all, was identified as a commercial pilot with a science degree, a member of the Mensa Society and "a freelance researcher for the Pentagon and the U.S. Department of Energy."
But what was omitted from the credentials of the author, 47-year-old Charles T. Harrison, was perhaps more interesting.
For the last nine years he has been confined in the Middle Tennessee Mental Health Institute in Nashville, where he was committed as a paranoid schizophrenic after killing his mother in 1984 and being ruled not guilty by reason of insanity.


Shawn Edelen, Noel Brennan
Marian de Chantel Edelen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Edelen of Ruxton, Md., was married yesterday to Noel Edward McKenzie Brennan, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward N. Brennan of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Charles Riepe performed the ceremony at Corpus Christi Roman Catholic Church in Baltimore.


For the Honorees
Three organizations feted a number of their favorite people at dinners last week.


Even the Most Dedicated Need More Help to Help the Neediest; In 'Double Recovery' and Sharing His Story
By his own reckoning, Raymond Lopez should not be alive today, looking trim at the age of 52 and sporting a persistent smile beneath the tweed cap that rarely leaves his head.
From the time he was a teen-ager growing up in the South Bronx, Mr.
Lopez had already begun a slide into alcoholism.
Most of his days were consumed with playing cards or betting on the horses or organizing neighborhood gangs.
When he did not have a gun, his weapons of choice were an ice pick or a hatchet, which he concealed beneath his coat.


Romancing the Root
Squash and carrots, turnips and parsnips, celery root and yams are too dowdy to be coy and too assertive to possess nuance, surprise or mystery.
Their mealy texture and stalwart flavor render the vegetables incapable of teasing the senses.
They are fated, instead, to offer solace and, when pureed, a mashed-potato kind of comfort.
Hence, the accord between winter's vegetables and the season's appetite.
Pureed, the root vegetables of late fall and early winter are a soothing, sturdy panacea for the chilly emptiness brought on by wet winds and fallen leaves.
Like a favorite sweater, a puree warms and comforts.
It provides an uncomplicated pleasure, and one that's been underexplored.


LOOK WHO'S WIRING THE HOME NOW
Steven R. Rivkin's vision of electric utilities entering the telecommunications business provides an important new means to reduce air pollution and slow global warming, while also providing a less expensive on-ramp to the information superhighway ("Look Who's Wiring the Home Now," Sept. 26).
Cutting peak power demand by communicating and cooperating with consumers via new digital technologies will reduce the use of coal-fired power plants, and create a growth market for electric utilities that build the new telecommunications facilities.
President Clinton would be wise to encourage their efforts, which can provide enormous economic and environmental benefits for the nation.
CHRISTOPHER FLAVIN Vice President for Research Worldwatch Institute Washington


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Red Hook; Work to Begin On a Car Pound
Construction is set to begin on a 2,200-car impoundment center on 20 acres of waterfront property next month, in spite of community protests that it will block the already-limited access to New York Harbor.
The City Council approved the proposal three weeks ago for a 20-year lease on the property, which is at the old Columbia Street pier along the Erie Basin Breakwater in Red Hook, at an annual cost of $400,000.
The city will spend $21 million building the center, developing a walkway and bike path along the waterfront and repairing Columbia Street and the pier's bulkhead.


HARD SELL
Keaton does not mention that Handy's sales trainees were mostly lower- and middle-class Americans who were trying desperately to make a living.
These were the same guys who staggered to adulthood in the Depression and went to war in the 1940's, with the notion that this time they could really put an end to war.


Academics and Their Prose
To the Editor:
I agree thoroughly with Patricia Nelson Limerick's sentiments about academic prose, but there are simpler, less character-impugning explanations for the use of technical language and jargon.


Free-Market Misery for Latin America
To the Editor:
"Latin America Finds Harmony in Convergence" (The Week in Review, Nov. 21) suggests that opening markets and pursuing economic austerity offers reformers in Latin America the best hope for raising living standards among the masses and in turn creating a politically stable future.
Recent trends in Latin America confirm just the opposite, showing that living standards for the vast majority of the region's peasants and workers have plunged precipitously at the very time that free-market reformers have been opening markets to foreign producers, privatizing state companies and reducing public spending.


Man Slain in Church Lot
A 30-year-old man was found shot to death early yesterday in a church parking lot in Hempstead, L.I., the police said.
The man, identified as Juan Pablo Rios of Hempstead, was discovered lying in the lot on the east side of the First Baptist Church, at Washington Street and Jackson Avenue.
The police said they found the man after reports of shots fired about 4:30 A.M.


Academics and Their Prose
To the Editor:
Patricia Nelson Limerick understated the problem.
I have been recording for the blind for the past 20 years at a place that specializes in textbooks.
Sentences that cannot be read aloud because they have no form, no rhythm and, hence, no sense are the norm.
Thought lines that drift, wander, escape and sometimes never return to the subject appear all too frequently.
The academic practice of "criticism" of one another's research results in so much equivocation, to avoid an attackable stance, that few clear statements ever result.
CAROLYN Q. WILSON  Princeton, N.J.


The West End Sparkles Again
TWO, three, four centuries ago, London playhouses used to burn down with alarming regularity.
Indeed, you could almost say it was redevelopment by act of God -- an essential prelude to securing a bigger, better theater on the same site.
In the summer of 1613, the Globe itself was razed after gunfire ignited its thatch during a performance of Shakespeare's "Henry VII." In 1809, the dramatist, politician and theater owner Richard Brinsley Sheridan watched the destruction of his Drury Lane from a nearby pub , and remarked, "Cannot a man take a glass of wine by his own fireside?" when friends commented on his sang-froid.
Yet only three years later, the actor Edmund Kean made a sensational London debut in the replacement playhouse that has stood on the same site to this day.
Thanks to ever-tougher safety regulations, the fire gods have left London theaters alone in recent years.
Yet, in the early hours of a Monday morning in February 1990 the improbable happened.
For reasons still unclear, a fire broke out in the back stalls of the Savoy Theater in the Strand.
Soon 50-foot flames were leaping from the roof and, fanned by a high wind, began to menace the famous hotel next door.
By morning, little or nothing was left of what had been the finest Art Deco auditorium in England.
The elegant gold-and-silver paneling, sculptured in 1929 by Gilbert Seale, who was given a fairly free hand by the interior designer Basil Ionides, was blistered and scarred beyond recognition.


FORBIDDEN SUN, AND SIN, COMMUNIST STYLE
Passell's article shows the absurdity of the continued United States travel ban on Cuba.
Europeans and Canadians flock to Cuba in as normal a fashion as Americans do to the Bahamas.
Passell points out that Americans are going there anyway, either by slipping surreptitiously through Canada or Mexico or by claiming that they are journalists or researchers.
He assures readers that as long as you go quietly, "the chance of getting caught is roughly equal to the risk of being abducted by aliens." Well, our group of 175 people who traveled to Cuba in October did not go quietly, and we refused to lie.
We said that we were ordinary citizens who wanted to visit Cuba and who felt we had the constitutional right to do so.


Nynex After the Wake-Up Call
IT is a tartly cool October morning in Manhattan.
Three salesmen from the Nynex Corporation are in a conference room, listening to a big customer tell them why Nynex is such a lousy phone company.
The customer in the catbird seat is Robert M. Murphy, vice president-telecommunications for the RMJ Securities Corporation, a big broker of Government bonds.
It is the sixth meeting since May between Nynex and RMJ.
The salesmen want Mr.
Murphy, a compact and affably pugnacious man, to sign up for a long-term contract.


NOV. 28-DEC. 4: Crimes in California; A Pattern of Molestation By Clergymen Revealed
Over two decades, an independent investigation reported last week, 11 Franciscan friars at St.
Anthony's Seminary in Santa Barbara, Calif., sexually molested dozens of students, teen-aged and younger, in one of the largest cases of abuse by clergy ever disclosed.
In an inquiry commissioned by the Franciscan Order of the Roman Catholic Church, one monk was found to be responsible for molesting 18 of the 34 victims who have come forward.
A second was accused of abusing seven.
The school closed in 1987 for financial reasons.


RECORD BRIEFS
'Tangazo': Music of Latin America New World Symphony conducted by Michael Tilson Thomas.
Argo 436 737-2; CD.


Photography
AMONG the most interesting books of photography this year, good things come in big packages, as publishers have spared few trees and no expense to capture outsize subjects (Sebastiao Salgado's "Workers") and outsize reputations (Richard Avedon's, most prominently).
The net result is a bonanza for the coffee table and a nightmare for the lap.
There are a few smaller volumes of substantial charm, such as William Wegman's shaggy-dog retelling of the Little Red Riding Hood story (Hyperion); as well as some notable misfires, including "Ansel Adams in Color" (Little, Brown), a posthumous production that reveals the much-admired landscape photographer's scenic tendencies, and "Native Nations" (Bulfinch/ Little, Brown), an uncritical appraisal of Edward S. Curtis's fabricated portraits of the "vanishing" North American Indian.
"Native Nations" is remarkable not only for its blithe assessment of Curtis's ethnography but also for its reproductions, which are products of a new computer screen-making technology for the printing of photographs that may soon replace the venerable half-tone process.
WALKER EVANS: The Hungry Eye.
By Gilles Mora and John T. Hill. (Abrams, $60.) Walker Evans is fast replacing Paul Strand, Alfred Stieglitz and Edward Weston as the most influential photographer of the 20th century.
"The Hungry Eye" shows why.
Evans used reticence and restraint as rhetorical devices, taking straightforward, seemingly dispassionate pictures of American life that brim with intelligence and, in the aggregate, emotional and political fervor.
The book's title, taken from an Evans remark about himself, is flagrantly ironic: there is little about Evans's style to suggest an indiscriminate consumer, and yet his work offers a feast of visual pleasures.


Berliners Prepare Plaza For Return to Its Glory
AS dusk was falling here on a recent Sunday, thousands of people gathered along streets near Philharmonic Hall, gazing across a vast empty lot at the long-abandoned Bellevue Tower, a former student residence.
Suddenly came the explosion for which they had been waiting, a blast so powerful it shook the earth beneath them.
The Bellevue Tower collapsed into dust and rubble, and with it the last remnant of the glory that once was Potsdamer Platz.
The next day, Mayor Eberhard Diepgen of Berlin and other dignitaries assembled to turn the ceremonial first spade of earth forthe giant project of rebuilding Potsdamer Platz, a 17-acre plaza that was once the throbbing heart of Berlin.
"With this act, Berlin's center begins to take its future shape," the Mayor declared.


Scent of a Reindeer
The unlikely pairing of a trip to Santa Claus Village in Lapland and a Finnish tango party is the highlight of a two-day excursion offered by Euro Cruises, to be tacked on to the company's other tours.
For those who are not ready to emulate Al Pacino, the party, at a hotel in Rovaniemi, will include other kinds of dancing.
The excursion is $395 a person, double occupancy; it can be added to a tour like the Finland Dollar Stretcher, which starts at $799 for seven days in Helsinki and Stockholm.
Call (800) 688-3876.


Michele Collier, David Kaufman
Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Collier Jr. of Stamford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Michele Anne Collier, to David Richard Kaufman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard N. Kaufman of Rowayton, Conn.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Collier graduated from Catholic University of America.
She is a district manager in Stamford and Greenwich, Conn., for New York/New England Video, a franchise of the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation.


What's Giving?
Brooke Astor received Town &amp; Country magazine's Generous American Award, at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Dec. 1.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Lower Manhattan; Wanted: Good Home for Barges. Well Maintained. Very Secure.
Since the city moored two jail barges in lower Manhattan in the 1980's, they have been sore points to nearby residents.
Even after the barges were vacated last year, local officials demanded they be moved, calling them a blight on the waterfront.
Now Rudolph W. Giuliani's campaign vow to arrest more drug dealers has provoked neighborhood concerns that the barges will reopen.
The barges -- elephantine gray boxes -- are the Resolution, moored at Pier 35 on the East River just north of the Manhattan Bridge, and the Venture, at Pier 40 on the Hudson just north of Canal Street.
Each can house 380 prisoners.


Mariella Schiano, Scott P. Nelson
Mariella Schiano, a daughter of Mrs.
Anne Schiano of Mamaroneck, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Alfredo Schiano, was married yesterday to Scott Palmer Nelson, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence B. Nelson of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
The Rev.
Polly Vance performed the ceremony at the Rye Presbyterian Church in Rye, N.Y.
Mrs.
Nelson, 26, is an accounts receivable specialist at the Bayway Refining Company, an oil concern in Linden, N.J., where Mr.
Nelson is a credit manager.
She graduated magna cum laude from Hobart and William Smith Colleges, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father was a radiologist at Phelps Memorial Hospital in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Notable Books of the Year 1993
This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas Books issue of December 1992.
The list suggests only high points in the main fields of reader interest, and it does not include titles chosen by the editors of the Book Review as the Best Books of 1993.
Books are arranged alphabetically under subject headings.
Art, Music &amp; Popular Culture
THE ART OF CELEBRATION: Twentieth-Century Painting, Literature, Sculpture, Photography, and Jazz.
By Alfred Appel Jr. (Knopf, $35.) Modern times aren't all Eliot and Kafka, the author cheerfully argues; there's also Matisse, Astaire, Chaplin, Teddy Wilson and a whole raft of dedicated life affirmers.


New Travel Service For Moscow Visitors
After decades of being led around by Intourist guides, tourists can finally roam Russia as they please.
Still, many independent travelers have been reluctant to venture off the tour group circuit in Russia, where reserving a room or buying a train ticket is often a bureaucratic hassle.
Now there is a travel service in Moscow geared to helping individual tourists, especially those on a shoestring budget.
The Travelers Guest House, which was opened in March by Jan Passoff, an American, and Boris Samaryanov, a Russian, is an inexpensive hostel and travel agency rolled into one floor of a student dormitory building on 50 Bolshaya Pereyaslavskaya Street in central Moscow.


A la Carte; Wood-Burning Ovens
REMEMBER the paint store that used the slogan, "It ain't just paint"?
That theme, substituting pizza for paint, can now be applied to wood-burning pizza ovens.
And what can be done with a pizza oven other than using it to cook pizza?
Everything.
That is being proved nightly at La Viola in Cedarhurst, where everything from breads and appetizers to desserts is prepared in the pizza oven.


Betsy Berger, Michael Moreno
Betsy Berger, a daughter of Leonard Berger of New York and Edie Shane of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Michael P. Moreno, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ramiro Moreno of North Miami Beach, Fla.
Louis Fusco Jr., a former justice of the State Supreme Court in the Bronx, officiated at the Town Club in New York.


Consumers Respond to Promotions
To the Editor:
Adam Bryant managed only anecdotal evidence to support the premise that consumers are becoming "fed up" with promotions ("Those Mind-Boggling Promotions," Nov. 14).
The only facts cited, a study of marketing spending patterns, suggest otherwise: promotions continue to claim larger percentages of marketing budgets.


Gospel Choir Pins Wings to Song And Glides to a Secular World
EVERY Sunday morning, a joyous wave of song seems to lift a white clapboard church on the corner of Church and Main Streets here right off its foundation.
Worshipers at the Antioch Baptist Church -- which attracts a congregation that loves to sing -- say they can't remember a time when the chancel choir wasn't at the heart of a service, nor when Earl Brown, the church's music director for the last 35 years, wasn't leading hymns of praise from the organ.
Visitors to the church, which will celebrate its 100th anniversary next year, are made to feel at home and are welcomed individually during services, which are led by the Rev.
Rufus A. Strother Jr., the senior minister.
So, the story goes, no fuss at all was made when a famous neighbor came by about a year ago to attend the service he said he had heard so much about.


POSTINGS: 23-Karat Gold Leaf; Dome of Armenian Cathedral Is Regilded
The glow is back on the 3,000-square-foot gold dome of St.
Vartan Armenian Cathedral, this time in 23-karat gold leaf.
The original 14-karat leaf was so unsuitable for outside use that pieces popped off, exposing the dull metal below.
The regilding is part of a $2.5 million renovation coinciding with the 25th anniversary of the consecration of the limestone cathedral, which is the center of an Armenian cultural and religious complex between 34th and 35th Streets on Second Avenue.
The complex is also the site of the headquarters of the Diocese of the Armenian Church of America.


THERE'S NO SIMPLE SUICIDE
What is the real point of assisting people who are going to die in a few weeks anyway to kill themselves?
To exempt us from dealing with the unpleasantness of seeing "lovely human beings . . .  die in such a decimated state," to use Ralph Mero's own words?
Having watched my own son die of a brain tumor, I am reminded of an incident that occurred after he had slipped into an unconscious state during his final days.
I had left him with my brother and returned to witness one of the most beautiful scenes I have experienced.
My brother, sitting by the bed, and my son were both asleep, their heads leaning toward one another, as a baseball game droned on the television.
The boy's hand clenched his uncle's hand as they slept with smiles on their faces, sharing some dream that encompassed the days they had shared -- Little League ball games, hot dogs, summers.


Benefits
Performance Space
MONDAY -- The Jones Twins, sisters who sing and act, will be the hosts of an evening of performance art by, among others, Everett Quinton, Ann Carlson and David Cale to raise money for Dixon Place, which provides the setting for works in progress as well as finished works.
The program begins at 7 P.M. at the Ridiculous Theatrical Company, 1 Sheridan Square (at West Fourth and Barrow streets).
Tickets, $40, from (212) 219-3088.
Help for Homeless Women
MONDAY -- Women for the Homeless is sponsoring an Italian feast at the Michelangelo Hotel, 125 West 51st Street, to raise funds for Urban Pathways, which provides services to mentally ill homeless women.
The evening, from 6:30 to 10:30, includes wine, hors d'oeuvres, dinner and musical entertainment.
Trips to Italy and Mexico, restaurant dinners and sports tickets, among other items, will be auctioned.
Tickets, $90, from (212) 502-2301 or (212) 289-4933 or $100 at the door.
Tickets are $75 for those under 35.
Toy Drive Party
MONDAY -- The Young Leadership division of the U.J.A.-Federation will hold its annual Hanukkah toy drive party at 7 P.M. at the organization's headquarters, 130 East 59th Street.
Guests are asked to bring a toy to the event, which includes a light dinner and holiday entertainment.
Tickets, $30, from (212) 836-1169.
Storefront School
MONDAY -- Bobby Short will perform at an 8 P.M. concert to raise funds for the Children's Storefront, a tuition-free independent school in Harlem.
The event, at the Racquet and Tennis Club, 370 Park Avenue at 53d Street, will be preceded by cocktails and followed by dinner.
Tickets, $110, from (212) 427-8525.
Playwrights Horizons
MONDAY -- The world premiere of "A Cheever Evening," a play by A. R. Gurney based on stories by John Cheever, will benefit Playwrights Horizons.
The 8 P.M. performance will be followed by a Champagne reception with the actors.
A second performance will take place on Dec. 13.
The events are at the Anne G. Wilder Theater, 416 West 42d Street.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 564-1235.
Cancer Research
MONDAY -- Evelyn H. Lauder will be among those honored by the American-Italian Foundation for Cancer Research at a dinner-dance and auction beginning at 6:30 P.M. at the Pierre.
Items to be auctioned include a trip to Milan, Italy.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 628-9090.
St. Luke's School Benefit
TUESDAY -- Gregory Hines, the actor and dancer, will discuss "My Life and Times" at St.
Luke's School, 487 Hudson Street at Grove Street.
The event will raise money for the school's financial aid fund.
The program begins at 7:30 P.M. and will be followed by a reception.
Tickets, $30, at the door; (212) 924-5960.
Citizens Union
TUESDAY -- A tribute to Robert F. Wagner Jr., the chairman of the Citizens Union of the City of New York until his death last month, will be held at the advocacy group's 96th-anniversary dinner at the Pierre.
Harry P. Kamen, the chairman and chief executive of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, and Michael I. Sovern, the president emeritus of Columbia University, will also be honored.
Tickets, $375, from (212) 227-0342.
Teaching Entrepreneurship
TUESDAY -- Mayor David N. Dinkins and the actor Edward James Olmos will participate in an evening to benefit the National Foundation for Teaching Entrepreneurship to Handicapped and Disadvantaged Youth.
The event, at the Manhattan Center, 311 West 34th Street, begins at 6 P.M. with a reception.
A youth trade show, dinner and entertainment by members of the National Dance Institute follow.
Five business leaders will be honored, along with graduates of the organization's programs.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 233-1777.
Make a Wish
WEDNESDAY -- A compact disk signed by Barbra Streisand and an appearance on the television show "Murphy Brown" are among the items to be auctioned to raise money for the Make-a-Wish Foundation of Metro New York.
The event, starting at 6 P.M. at the Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street (at Houston Street), includes hors d'oeurves and an open bar.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 505-9474.
Aid for Cerebral Palsy
WEDNESDAY -- Art Buchwald will present awards to Katharine Graham, the chairman of the executive committee of The Washington Post Company, and Gen.
Norman Schwarzkopf on behalf of United Cerebral Palsy of New York.
The awards dinner at the New York Hilton begins at 6:30 P.M. with a cocktail reception.
Tickets, $750, from (212) 683-6700.
Buddhist Review
WEDNESDAY -- Ellen Burstyn, David Byrne and Peter Matthiessen are among those who will read from Jack Kerouac's "Wake Up," an unpublished work on the life of Buddha being serialized in Tricycle: The Buddhist Review.
The reading, at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, will raise funds for the journal.
It will be preceded by cocktails and dinner beginning at 6:30 P.M.
After the reading, there will be a drawing for works by Roy Lichtenstein, Elizabeth Murray and Robert Rauschenberg.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 645-1143.
Korean Culture
THURSDAY -- The Korea Society will raise funds at a dinner honoring Winston Lord, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific affairs.
The evening at the New York Hilton begins with a reception at 6 followed by dinner and a speech by Mr.
Lord.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 759-7525.
Cystic Fibrosis
THURSDAY -- The Junior Committee of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation will sponsor a buffet dinner and dancing on the east balcony of Grand Central Terminal to raise money for research on the disease.
The evening, beginning at 8, includes a raffle.
Guests are asked to bring a toy for a child with cystic fibrosis.
Tickets, $55, from (212) 986-8783, or $65 at the door.
Performers Fund
FRIDAY -- The Players Club, 16 Gramercy Park, will be the setting for a cabaret evening to benefit the AGMA Emergency Relief Fund for Opera and Dance.
The fund provides financial assistance to performers.
The evening begins with cocktails at 6:30.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 265-3687.
Providing Free Concerts
DEC. 13 -- The soprano Aprile Millo and the baritone Thomas Hampson will be among the performers at a benefit for Horizon Concerts, which gives free classical concerts at nursing homes, homeless shelters, AIDS hospices and schools.
The event begins with a 6 P.M. reception, followed by the program and a buffet dinner.
It is at the Colonial Dames of America, 417 East 61st Street.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 297-6195.


Cabbies From Subcontinent Handle English Just Fine
To the Editor:
I wholeheartedly agree with William Mersey's essay, "Hungry and Full of Hope: In Defense of the Immigrant Cabby" (Nov. 21), except for one thing: his assumption that most cabbies who hail from the Indian subcontinent are deficient in English language skills.


Jagr's Breakaway Goal Ruins Hartford's Rally
Penguins 7, Whalers 6
Jaromir Jagr came out of the penalty box and scored on a breakaway 2 minutes 4 seconds into overtime, giving Pittsburgh a 7-6 victory over host Hartford last night.


Geronimo, Still With a Few Rough Edges
"Did they show him hanging little girls on meat hooks?" The question was especially startling, coming from the writer of the initial script for "Geronimo: An American Legend." The film, opening on Friday, portrays the legendary Apache's violent bolt from reservation life in 1885 and the Army campaign to hunt him down.
But others had reworked John Milius's screenplay, and when he spoke he had not seen the finished movie.
To Mr.
Milius's evident disappointment, the answer to his question was no.
Best known as the co-screenwriter of "Apocalypse Now," Mr.
Milius said he had been anxious to reveal Geronimo in his totality -- valor and cruelty alike: "I like Geronimo just as he was, a human predator."


Holidays or Not, It's Much Easier to Be Fat Than Fit
MY sister's friend has a diet posted on her refrigerator.
It goes something like this: Breakfast, one slice of dry toast, one-half grapefruit.
Lunch, three ounces of chicken breast, one-half cup of green beans, one Oreo cookie.
Afternoon snack, the rest of the box of Oreo cookies.
Those who get the joke know exactly how a carefully planned diet can disintegrate, especially in those dangerous weeks between Thanksgiving and Christmas.


Teresa L. Muench And Ned Russell
Teresa Louise Muench, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Muench of Carefree, Ariz., was married there yesterday to Harris Edward Russell 2d, a son of Harris Russell and Stephaine S. DeForest, both of Southport, Conn.
The Rev.
David Philips performed the ceremony at the Desert Hills Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Russell, 30, is an account supervisor at Lintas, an advertising agency, in New York.
She graduated from the University of Hartford.
Her father, now retired, was an engineering manager with Saudi Aramco in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.


ASTRONAUTS SNARE HUBBLE TELESCOPE FOR VITAL REPAIRS
Arriving today for a house call 357 miles above Earth, the astronauts of the space shuttle Endeavour reached out with a mechanical grappling arm and easily snared the Hubble space telescope as they prepared to treat the crippled instrument in five days of the most complex orbital repairs yet attempted.
"Houston, Endeavour has a firm handshake with Mr. Hubble's telescope," Col.
Richard O. Covey of the Air Force, the shuttle commander, radioed to Mission Control here after the robotic arm had grasped the $1.6 billion telescope.


Students Dissent On Football Article
I am writing this letter because I do not think what you wrote about Division Avenue parents is fair.


Overpopulation: No Space in Space
I am disappointed in the article on Jerry Grey  [ "Where the Bay Meets the Sea, Thoughts of a Life in Space," Nov. 14 ] .
Population scientists, ecologists, economists and futurists have all damned the concept of living in space as a solution to overpopulation here on Earth.
By shifting the focus away from the perils of overpopulation to the infeasible notion of sustaining a large population in space, it ignores the inevitable problems associated with overpopulation, detracts from the imperative that population programs be sufficiently funded, and once again implies that technology can solve our societal and ecological problems.


The Executive Computer; Another Move Toward Coexistence in the PC World
APPLE COMPUTER INC. is developing a new Macintosh that includes an Intel 486SX microprocessor, giving the computer the ability to run DOS and Windows software along with Macintosh software.
One would think such a machine would create a stir because it represents something close to the Holy Grail of personal computing: a computer that runs all the popular programs, including DOS, Windows and Macintosh.
It also represents the most tangible evidence yet of big changes at Apple under its new chief, Michael Spindler.


Best in the League? Rangers State Their Case in Toronto
The Rangers trailed in the first period.
They trailed in the second period.
They trailed at the start of the third.
They flung shot after shot at Felix Potvin, and he made the Maple Leafs goal look about as big as a mail slot.
Much to Potvin's chagrin, though, the Rangers never gave up.
And so when Mike Gartner deflected a pass from Mark Messier with 5 minutes 31 seconds left in tonight's game, Potvin might as well have thrown up his gloves in disgust.
This one, it appears, was destined to be won by the Rangers.


The Baltics Can Afford to Live a Little
THE first snow squalls are already slanting off the Baltic Sea, and darkness settles over the city each afternoon by four o'clock.
But these days, beneath the ancient pitched roofs and gabled churches of Tallinn's old town, the cobbled alleyways are suffused, here and there, with the warmth of the Baltics' new glow.
Behind the steamy storefronts where socialism once showed its shabby wares, there are now sleek coffee shops and boutiques, brightly lit art galleries and snug taverns, including a replica of an Irish pub that could just as easily be in Dublin.


Burmese Rebel Army Seeks End to 40-Year War
The largest of the ethnic rebel armies along the borders of Myanmar, the nation formerly known as Burma, is seeking peace with the central Government.
After battling the Government for more than four decades, the rebels, the Kachin, have been calling in the last few weeks for their allies in the opposition movement to join them in peace talks with the Government and to agree to a cease-fire.


Sports of The Times; Rudy T.'s X-Rays And O's
QUIETLY, quickly, Rudy Tomjanovich walked off the Madison Square Garden court after the Houston Rockets had dominated the Knicks, 94-85, on Thursday night.
But now, as his players in their red-and-gold uniforms disappeared into the dressing room, the square-jawed coach known as Rudy T. stood outside in the gloomy gray corridor and shouted:
"What a defensive team! What a defensive team!"


Patricia A. Faison, Jay A. Hewlin
Patricia Ann Faison, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Faison of Laurelton, Queens, was married yesterday to Jay Allen Hewlin, the son of William Hewlin of Springfield Gardens, Queens, and the late Ruth Hewlin.
The Rev.
A.
R.
Bernard Sr., pastor of the New York Christian Life Center, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Huntington Town House, a catering establishment in Huntington, L.I.
Mrs.
Hewlin, 25, is a management associate in retail banking at Citibank in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Mr.
Hewlin, 28, is a producer of radio commercials and special broadcasts at WQXR-FM and a musician, both in New York.
He graduated from Boston University.


A Quilt Maker's Art Tells Stories of Childhood and Family
LONG before Faith Ringgold wrote "Tar Beach," the acclaimed children's book, in 1991, she was accentuating the positive while rewriting history in her distinctive story quilts.
Her paintings on canvas are bordered with quilted textiles and handwritten strips of white fabric that tell fanciful stories, embroidering on the truth.
In one, she writes that her father told her, "the George Washington Bridge is the longest and most beautiful bridge in the world." She adds proudly that "it opened in 1931 on the very day that I was born." Her father hoisted cables during its construction.


Even Stephen
To the Editor:
If Tony Kushner is true to his collectivist principles, he should divide up his royalty payments equally among anyone who ever made so much as a suggestion about "Angels in America" and relinquish ownership of the play's copyright, since a primary aim of collectivism is, after all, the abolishment of property rights.
Mr.
Kushner believes it is a myth that "artistic accomplishment is exclusively the provenance of individual talents," so he should not have the exclusive, monopolistic right to distribute the wealth created by the play's production, a right that belongs to the play's contributors.
ERIC KUTTNER  Astoria, N. Y.


This Shorter Is Rather Long
The New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary is almost a dietary supplement in comparison with its 20-volume senior.
But in its 14-pound, two-volume compression, it is still a glutton-sized meal.
It offers a half million words for definition and consumes 7.5 million words in defining them.
The New Shorter, in its second new edition since it first appeared in 1933, is not a mere sampling of the O.E.D.; it is, according to its editor and chief, Lesley Brown, its own distinctive update of the English language.
"Most questions are about new words that went into the dictionary, but that's really not what we are about," Ms.
Brown said, referring to the stress inquirers put on new-word features at the expense of the general outlook of the book.
A new version of the first Shorter appeared in 1944 and though passed off as official, Ms.
Brown says she rather discounts its claims to being "new." Pride of primacy is not limited to the playing fields of Eton.


The Municipal Navy
THE Statue of Liberty makes William J. Church nervous.
Terrorist threats have intensified since the Persian Gulf war and the World Trade Center bombing.
So when he caught sight of a small black boat bobbing in the water close to the statue, he instantly pushed hard on the throttle of his blue-and-white police launch.


Public &amp; Private; Mom Quixote
Day three of my search for Mighty Morphin Power Ranger toys, and I grow weary.
Sneering clerks in three stores behave as though I've asked for gold bullion when I inquire whether they have these items in stock.
Driving home, I wonder who to blame: retailers, manufacturers or the child who waited until November to articulate a need more profound than the need for food or water.
Every Christmas there is one plaything everyone desires and no one can get.
Sort of like the Hope Diamond.
I will persevere.


In Hartford: Moving From The Firehouse To City Hall
THE past month was a grand and glorious time for Hartford firefighter Michael P. Peters.
People hailed him on the street or ran up to pump his hand.
He was invited to the Hartford Civic Center to take part in a ceremony for basketball legend Larry Bird.
He flipped the coin to start the annual Thanksgiving Day football game between Hartford Public and Weaver High Schools.


Airline Luggage
To the Editor: While visiting in Atlanta recently, we read an article (Travel Advisory, Oct. 17) telling of a 43 percent increase in baggage thefts at Kennedy Airport and of the improved means of security being planned and some plans that have already been implemented.
On Oct. 19, we flew back to La Guardia Airport from Atlanta on T.W.A.
We retrieved our luggage and walked out the terminal exit, as did the other passengers from our plane, with no one to stop us.


Fixing Doorbells and Chimes to Ring in the Holiday Season
THE holidays are high season for doorbells and chimes, and so now is the time to fix them.
Bells and chimes operate on very low current -- 6 to 24 volts, depending on the model -- and because shock from such a small charge is virtually imperceptible, most repairs can be made without turning off the power.
But do not perform tests or make repairs with the power on if wearing a pacemaker, as contact with even small amounts of electricity can disrupt it.


ON THE WEST BANK, UNEASE GRIPS P.L.O.
Since it opened here several weeks ago, the local office of Al Fatah, Yasir Arafat's mainstream group in the Palestine Liberation Organization, has been taking on the trappings of a government bureau.
On a recent morning, a Fatah official sitting at a desk received visitors who were asking for financial assistance.
Office workers processed applications to the Palestinian police force, which is supposed to take up duties in the occupied territories over the next few months.


Police Find Body of Girl Kidnapped in California
The dimpled 12-year-old girl who was snatched from her bedroom during a slumber party more than two months ago was found dead today in a wooded area 80 miles north of here and about 30 miles from her home in Petaluma.
Law enforcement officials found the youngster's body at a site just south of the town of Cloverdale, where they were directed by Richard Allen Davis, a 39-year-old convicted kidnapper, whose palm print was found on a wall in Polly's bedroom and who has been held in custody for nearly a week on a drunk-driving charge.


60th Street Pavilion
To the Editor:
Your report of the near completion of the East 60th Street Pavilion ("An Open-Air Pavilion at the East River," Nov. 7, 1993) does not mention that the site, originally slated for an 18-story hotel, would not have become an extraordinary public space without advocacy by the Parks Council, support from the Greenacre Foundation and creative design work by Quennell Rothschild Associates.


In the End, Emptiness Embraces a Shaken Team
It was hard to believe there could be any emotion left.
The last time Army and Navy passed this way, in 1989, there was Alton Grizzard taking over at the end, running for 7 yards on a third-and-9 situation in the final drive, then 2 yards -- barely -- on fourth down, then a 10-yard run that led to Frank Schenk's game-winning field goal.
The game was back, but Grizzard was gone, a victim of a murder-suicide shooting last Wednesday in San Diego.
There were 27 Navy seniors on the 1993 team that either played or practiced with Grizzard in 1990, when the quarterback completed his college career by setting a school record for total offense with 5,666 yards.
He visited the team earlier this season.
Now, suddenly, he was remembered on the backs of Navy's new blue helmets, worn instead of the normal gold for the first time since the 1958 Army game.


WBLS-FM to Stop Playing Violent Songs
A popular radio station in New York City, WBLS-FM, plans to stop playing songs with lyrics advocating violence or expressing hatred of women in a new policy aimed particularly at the hard-core forms of rap music that have stirred criticism from some black leaders in recent years.
The station's owner, Inner City Broadcasting Corporation, which also operates a talk-radio station, WLIB-AM, will begin screening the lyrics of all the songs it plays, a spokesman, Joseph J. Carella, said yesterday.


Making the Case for PBS (And It's Not So Easy)
"Is it time to pull the plug on public TV?" asks a teaser for a polemic by Lewis H. Lapham in the December issue of Harper's, the magazine he edits.
His answer is in the emphatic affirmative.
Addressing himself to what the headline calls "the terminal irrelevance of public television," Mr.
Lapham has great fun shredding a report issued last summer by the Twentieth Century Fund Task Force on Public Television and recounting his own ordeal in trying to find support for "Bookmark," a weekly half-hour PBS program that ran from 1989 to 1991.
Mr.
Lapham's is a zesty piece that allows for a show of spleen and disdain for institutional hot air. (He notes that the preamble to the Twentieth Century Fund report called for "excellence, creativity, tolerance, generosity, responsibility, community, diversity, concern for others and intellectual achievement." How could they have missed piety, humility and low-fat yogurt? )


Jeanne-Marie McEntee, James Schott
Jeanne-Marie Elizabeth McEntee, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Thomas McEntee of Port Washington, L.I., was married yesterday to James Allen Schott, a son of Carol Markham of Cincinnati.
The Rev.
Stan Moseley performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.


Ways to Fix Fennel While It's at Its Best
FENNEL looks rather like a bulbous head of celery, but it has a faint taste of anise.
It is at its peak at the holiday season, when it is delicious served raw with grainy slivers of Parmesan cheese, goat's cheese or prosciutto, or dipped into lemon juice and extra-virgin olive oil.
Fennel also goes well with meat and fish and can be cooked the same way as celery.
Matthew Kenney, chef at the recently opened Matthew's Restaurant on the Upper East Side in Manhattan, tosses diced fennel in a lemon coriander vinaigrette made with walnut oil.
He serves this as a first course with a tuna tartar and a tapenade of green olives, which he accompanies with toast flavored with caraway seeds.


Did Time. Fought Flood. Willing to Work.
"What are you looking for?" the woman behind the desk at the job placement agency in downtown Chicago said to the broad-shouldered young man standing before her.
"Anything," he said, clutching his cap nervously. "Anything."


An Italianate Concert
WHAT may well be the busiest concert week of the year begins today at 2 P.M. as I Giullari di Piazza (Jesters of the Square), a costumed troupe in the style of the old Italian commedia dell'arte, presents a family Christmas program at Caramoor in Katonah.
"La Cantata dei Pastori" ("The Cantata of the Shepherds"), complete with giant puppets, ancient instruments and an Italian-style Santa Claus, will be repeated at 5 P.M. today and again at 2 and 5 P.M. next Sunday.
The number to call for more information is 232-1252.
Among other programs suitable for children are three productions of "The Nutcracker": the Mid-Atlantic Ballet Company stages the Tchaikovsky favorite today at 2:15 P.M. at the Tarrytown Music Hall; the Mount Kisco Concert Association presents a staging by Ballet Long Island today at 3 P.M. at the Fox Lane High School in Bedford, and the Empire State Ballet's production comes to the Paramount Center in Peekskill Friday at 8 P.M.
The phone numbers to call for more information are 631-3390 in Tarrytown, 666-9181 in Bedford and 739-2333 in Peekskill.


Mutual Funds; Presents for the Investor to Ponder
THE boom in mutual funds has created a boomlet in mutual fund investing books.
Shelves are crammed with new books from writers that include the former superstar manager Peter Lynch; the chairman of the Vanguard Group, John C. Bogle, and others with advice for novices and experts.
For the perfect holiday gift for your favorite fund investor (or yourself), read on.
Here's a guide to the latest crop:


Conversations/Ilka Tanya Payan; An Actress Openly Faces AIDS And Receives an Audience's Ovation
ILKA TANYA PAYAN was unequivocal about one thing when she revealed her H.I.V. infection, a seven-year secret, at a recent press conference.
"I'm not Magic Johnson or Arthur Ashe," Ms.
Payan said.
"As a public person, I won't devote myself to being an official spokesperson in the struggle for dignity for people with H.I.V. or AIDS."


Art
BOOKS about art are getting larger and more beautiful.
Does this mean that they are turning into luxurious inanities?
Well, every season has some of those.
Like the funeral caskets of gangland, they put a flamboyant face on something that will soon be forgotten.
But there are also new art books that will hold our affection for a lifetime.
In them, fine paper, exemplary design and glorious images are allied to clarity of thought and mastery of a rich and complicated subject about which the last word will never be said.
These books cannot be cheap (reproduction rights alone see to that).
It would be easy, this winter, to walk into an art bookstore and spend $1,000 in a quarter of an hour.
Even great libraries have trouble keeping up.
But, just now and then, as will be seen here, something truly worth having is priced in the low, low two figures.


Aileen T. O'Shea, Mark B. Anderson
Aileen Therese O'Shea, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles J. O'Shea of Point Lookout, L.I., was married yesterday in New York to Dr.
Mark Berger Anderson, the son of the Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert B. Anderson of New York.
The bridegroom's father officiated at the Brick Presbyterian Church, where he is the senior pastor.
The Rev.
Joseph A. O'Hare, a Roman Catholic priest and the president of Fordham University, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Anderson, 29, graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father owns funeral homes bearing his name in East Meadow and Wantagh, L.I.
Her mother, Eugenia O'Shea, is a member of the Zoning Appeals Board of the Town of Hempstead, L.I.


Poor Steinbrenner: Plenty of Money, No Plans to Spend It
The other owners aren't getting George Steinbrenner's money, but neither are free agents or other talented players.
In that regard, Richard Ravitch's effort of more than a year to get a new revenue-sharing plan among the owners has not gone for naught.
Steinbrenner, while successfully fending off the forces that would raid his coffers, has clearly been intimidated by the desire of nearly 20 clubs to share a significantly greater percentage of his team's and the other wealthy clubs' local revenues.


A New Twist: A 'Snake Bite' Appetizer
RATTLESNAKE JONES is hard to pin down.
Diners entering this new restaurant on in Merrick see a hostess in cowboy hat, spot the cattle skull over the bar and think Western.
Yet, a glance at the menu reveals Dixie chicken and biscuits with gravy, which turn thoughts south.
Pennsylvania shoofly pie brings the culinary trip to our doorstep.
And that ubiquitous staple, chicken- fried steak, hails from just about everywhere but here.


On Sunday; Son of Joe Hill: Quiet, Patient, Alive as Ever
THERE was a distant time when this was more of a union city and the working class had a legion of labor organizers, many of whom knew the lyrics to "Joe Hill," the leftist ballad of the ghostly union idealist who finally did expire, it seems, sometime after the 1960's.
Nowadays the city seems to have a greater number of illiberal polemicists on union-dead newspapers than it does labor organizers.
Which only makes more encouraging the arrival of Francisco Chang upon Gotham's fabric heart in the mid-Manhattan garment district.
He is a 28-year-old, Korean-born, Spanish-speaking sweatshop organizer in behalf of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union and its new experimental strategy of shop-by-shop confidence building instead of confrontational, hit-the-bricks tactics of the past generations of Eastern European sweatshop workers.
This means Mr.
Chang, speaking in Korean to the newer owners and Spanish to the newer workers, tends to respond in quiet ombudsman fashion to the specific shop complaints about lost wages, denied overtime pay and missing fringe benefits that have long been the bane of each immigrant wave of sweatshop workers as they tend toward meekness in their new land.


Beth Melkmann, Jeffrey Pellegrino
Beth Anne Melkmann, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin Melkmann of New York, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Joseph Pellegrino, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Pellegrino of Manhasset, L.I.
The Rev.
John Gerhard performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Red Hook; Community Court Planned
A community-based court, the city's latest approach to coping with misdemeanor cases, will arrive in Red Hook next spring, and it will be tailored to the particular needs of this fading waterfront community.
The first community court was set up in Manhattan eight weeks ago and deals mainly with transient criminals in the Times Square area.
The Brooklyn version is also a three-year pilot project, but it is geared to hometown criminals, especially to those in and around the Red Hook Houses.
Fear, drugs and guns have long been part of the landscape of these apartments.


Profile: Bernie Feiwus; A Successful Match: Quirky Catalogue, Offbeat Executive
A NEW black-and-gold flag snaps in the wind that blows more or less constantly across the Trinity River basin outside Dallas, home base for NM Direct, Neiman Marcus's mail-order division.
The flag is a fitting symbol of NM Direct and its chief executive, B. D. (Bernie) Feiwus.
"It's kind of like the flag of a pirate ship," he said.


Car of the Wild
Campers who rent a specially equipped car from Budget in New Zealand can sleep above it all -- in a tent that unfolds from a rack on the roof.
It can be erected or dismantled by two people in three minutes, the company says, and is reached by climbing a short ladder.
The tent is part of an Adventure Pack that also includes cooking supplies, a camping table, two chairs and bedding, and costs $28 a day, with a three-day minimum; car rentals start at about $40 a day.
Reserve well ahead from October to March.
Cars must be picked up and returned in Auckland.
Call (800) 527-0700.


A Vendors Mall To Reclaim a Park
The playground swings at Sara Delano Roosevelt Park are usually empty.
The homeless and drug abusers commandeer benches surrounded by broken liquor bottles, used syringes, sodden blankets and refuse.
On nearby Grand Street, local officials say, pedestrians and vehicles are blocked by peddlers, who fight over turf and leave behind trash of their own.


Grass-Roots Workshop
THE Citizens Committee for New York City, a community action group that trains neighborhood associations, is offering a series of workshops through the City University of New York and the Borough of Manhattan Community College.
Founded by Jacob Javits, the Citizens Committee has supported grass-roots groups since 1975 through small grants, "how to" publications and free or low-cost training programs.


Leigh A. Greeven, Clifford K. Chiu
Leigh Alison Greeven, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alton E. Greeven Jr. of Austin, Tex., was married there yesterday to Clifford King Chiu, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cheng C. Chiu of New York.
The Rev.
Barry Fulton performed the ceremony at the Tarrytown United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Chiu, 28, is an account executive at Liz Claiborne Inc., the women's clothing and accessories manufacturer, in New York.
She graduated from the University of Alabama.
Her father is a consulting architectural engineer in Austin.


Jill R. Bergerman, Steven J. Wishnew
Jill Rachel Bergerman, the assistant to the vice president of operations at ABC News, was married last evening to Steven Jon Wishnew, the owner and president of the E M Jay Sales Company, a costume jewelry manufacturers' representative.
Both work in New York.
Cantor Louis Davidson officiated at the Grand Summit Hotel in Summit, N.J.
Mrs.
Wishnew, 26, graduated from George Washington University.
She is the daughter of Hermine and Samuel Bergerman of Livingston, N.J.


Grace M. Gardner, A. L. Schoelkopf
Grace Manson Gardner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
M.
Dozier Gardner of Brookline, Mass., was married yesterday to Andrew Lawrence Schoelkopf, a son of Mrs.
Robert Schoelkopf of New York and the late Mr.
Schoelkopf.
The Rev.
Stephen H. Wade performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church in Boston.
Mrs.
Schoelkopf, 27, is an account executive at the Gillian Group, a dress manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father is the president of the Eaton Vance Corporation, a mutual-fund management company in Boston.


SUNDAY, December 5, 1993; In a League of Their Own
Americans don't seem to like journalists.
A recent poll puts the profession near the bottom in terms of public respect (second most despised).
The soft baseball story may suggest why.
Dr.
David Janda is an orthopedic surgeon and the head of the nonprofit Institute for Preventative Sports Medicine in Madison, Wis.
When he's not operating, he and his colleagues spend a fair amount of time firing baseballs at crash dummies.
The reason is that each year a small number of children die from baseball injuries.
This is not a national crisis.
There were 51 such deaths from 1973 to 1983, according to the Consumer Product Safety Commission).


FORBIDDEN SUN, AND SIN, COMMUNIST STYLE
While having such a delightful time in Havana's uncluttered streets, Passell apparently missed the squads of Government-sponsored goons known as Rapid Response Brigades.
Saying that Fidel Castro is no Kim Il Sung is like saying that Muammar el-Qaddafi is no Saddam Hussein.
PEDRO A. FREYRE Miami


Academics and Their Prose
To the Editor:
Patricia Nelson Limerick is correct: many academics write wretched prose.
But as the Faber &amp; Faber editor T. S. Eliot responded when an angry author suggested that most editors are failed writers, "That may be true, but so are most writers." The fact is that a great number of books, everything from novels to travel guides, are poorly written.
DAVID GALEF  University, Miss.


Scientists Report Unusual Transmissions of H.I.V.
Scientists have detected two cases in which the AIDS virus has been transmitted from one child and one adolescent to others but apparently not by the usual routes.
The most likely cause is believed to be that infected blood from one entered the other through a cut or disease that broke the skin.
Although the cases can be expected to raise questions about the current policy of admitting infected children to schools and day-care centers, experts familiar with the two cases say they strongly believe that such transmission is so rare that there is no reason to change public policy.


When an Iguana and a Snake Go to School
LESA SCHEIFELE was getting everyone ready for the morning program.
"Oh, Artimus, food all over your face," she murmured.
She wiped gently; Artimus looked blue.
"When an iguana's happy, his head turns blue," Mrs.
Scheifele said.
She put Artimus, a green iguana, in his traveling case.
She had already put Achilles, a 12-foot python, into a pillowcase and then into his traveling container.
The pillowcase would keep Achilles occupied during travel.
"He can explore the nooks and crannies," she said.


Academics and Their Prose
To the Editor:
As a professor and academic writer, I found Patricia Nelson Limerick's essay enlightening and sadly accurate.


Brothers Get Own Miracle On Ice
Peter and Chris Ferraro were a pair of 7-year-olds back then, when the United States Olympic hockey team scored its landmark victory over the Soviet Union.
The twins knew what they wanted.
So did their mother, Diane.
She is still watching out for them.
She has chased and cajoled them from home in Sound Beach, L.I., to Massachusetts to Iowa.
And she was in the stands today, as the American Olympic squad faced the Russians in Game 2 of their seven-game exhibition series.


Making Towers Less Massive
How high is too high?
That question, at the heart of a long, heated public debate over the East Side's soaring residential towers, may soon be answered.
Last week, the City Planning Commission heard testimony on two proposed zoning amendments that would effectively reduce the height of new towers and encourage tower-on-a-base, wedding-cake buildings as opposed to tall, thin towers.
The commissioners are scheduled to vote on the amendments on Dec. 20.
If approved, the measures will go before City Council.
PROPOSAL 1
Co-sponsored by Manhattan Borough President and Community Board 8, this amendment rezones 143 blocks between 59th and 96th Streets and between East End and Third Avenues to conform with the zoning pattern in the rest of the city.
It would reduce the permissible depth of lots along avenues from 125 feet to 100 feet.
Because the size of a building's bases determines the height allowed, this would have the effect of reducing the building's height.
PROPOSAL 2


Peace Is Topic, but Doubts Are the Issue in Ulster
In Dublin and London, the talk these days is about peace, and the best hope yet for a settlement to end the years of bloodshed in Northern Ireland.
But down at Brown's appliance store, on the Protestant side of Dungannon's business district, Ralph Brown stood alongside the blinking displays of Christmas lights Friday and shook his head in a gesture of utter disbelief.
Like a lot of Protestants in the province, Mr.
Brown does not see peace coming.
Only the day before, less than 20 miles south of Dungannon, an I.R.A. sniper shot to death a British soldier on the streets of Keady.
Outside the windows of shops here, even as Mr.
Brown spoke, a team of police officers, wearing flak vests and carrying rifles, could be seen threading a nervous patrol among the early Christmas shoppers.


Fault Line Between Center Democrats and Clinton
One day after President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore appealed for harmony with an organization of centrist Democrats, the group's new chairman vowed today to take on those in the Administration "who would water down our agenda."
The comments to the Democratic Leadership Council by its new chairman, Representative Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma, were the most visible sign of strain between the Administration and the council, which Mr.
Clinton headed before he ran for President.


SURFACING
MARKETING  Nixon by mail order: The catalogue from the gift shop at the former President's Library and Birthplace in Yorba Linda, Calif., includes Americana, copies of White House china and even a T-shirt that says: "Nixon in '96. Tan, Rested &amp; Ready!"  PEEVES  Garbled phone numbers: Answering machines' exasperated owners are recording outgoing messages telling callers to say their phone numbers s-l-o-w-l-y.
NETWORKING  Kiddie chain letters: The goal is fun.
The currency is goofy stickers for children.
The perpetrators are a group of New York City parents who have agreed to mail one another's children a chain letter that begins: "This is not a chain letter. This is a sticker club."


'Sight Unseen' Explores An Artist's Inspiration
"ART isn't easy," goes a Stephen Sondheim lyric.
"Putting it together -- that's what counts."
In "Sight Unseen," a very good play with a lot to say about the consumption of art and the inspiration of the artist, the way the playwright Donald Margulies's disjointed elements are put together affects the play's sense of balance.
The focus of John Tillinger's disappointingly cast production at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven narrowly accommodates the playwright's concerns, but where it works, it works.


Even the Most Dedicated Need More Help to Help the Neediest; Her Mother Lost to AIDS, She Wears a Face of Hope
As Jasmine O., 9 years old, marches down a Bronx street in her red flowered parka, chattering about her promotion to lunchroom monitor and the stray puppy she found, no one watching would guess that her mother died only a few months ago.
It is partly the resilience of childhood, and partly a carefully observed silence.
"I never talk about it, because then I don't miss her," Jasmine explains in a shy whisper.


Editor's Choice
THE Christmas spirit is once again triumphant in the roster of books chosen by the editors of the Book Review as the best of the year: volumes of both fiction and nonfiction filled with collapsed empires, disappearing species, civil wars, guerrilla wars, homelessness, imprisonment, exile, moral decay, narcotics, random violence, an acutely discomforting villain -- and very large animals, some of which may slam you around because they've silently decided they just don't like you.
Anyone listening to the grumbling arguments in weekly meetings for more than three months would hardly have accused the editors of charity, at least toward one another, but they ended up choosing more than half again as many books as they did the year before, from a pool of nominees of the same size.


New Jersey Welfare's Give and Take; Mothers Get College Aid, but No Extra Cash for Newborns
Carrie Young's daughter came into the world 10 months after New Jersey's revamped welfare plan was enacted.
Had she been born on her due date in late July, her mother might have received $64 more a month.
As it was, Ms.
Young's family has become one of 470 on welfare that have grown in size but not in income since the state's get-tough policy went into effect on Aug. 1.
Her daughter was born on Aug. 5, one of the first babies affected by a a provision that denies additional cash benefits to mothers who have children while on welfare.


The Stately Soil of England
HIGHGROVE An Experiment in Organic Gardening and Farming.
By H.R.H. the Prince of Wales and Charles Clover.
Illustrated. 288 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $50.
ROYAL GARDENS By Roy Strong.
Illustrated. 168 pp.
New York: Pocket Books. $40.


Colombia's Goalie Caught Beyond the Law
In a country where soccer, drug trafficking and kidnapping are linked like beads on a necklace, Colombia's flamboyant goalkeeper, Rene Higuita, finds himself not in net but in jail as his team prepares for the World Cup next summer in the United States.
Known for his bold forays from the goal mouth, Higuita has been accused of straying beyond the legal bounds of Colombia's controversial 1993 statute intended to stem the wave of kidnappings in a country where the privileged and the infamous insulate themselves with personal bodyguards the way American football coaches parade off the field behind a picket fence of state troopers.


NOV. 28-DEC. 4: Bloodshed in Israel; Nearing Change, Israelis And Palestinians Skirmish
It looked like anything but peace last week in Israeli-occupied territories, where a shift of authority to the Palestinians is to begin a week from tomorrow.
In the Gaza Strip, a teen-ager was killed and 70 other people were wounded Tuesday as Israeli soldiers fought battles with stone-throwing Palestinian youths.
In the West Bank the next day, four Israelis were shot -- two died -- in a drive-by attack by Palestinians.
The violence did nothing to improve waning public enthusiasm for the outline agreement on Palestinian self-rule signed by Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Marketing Meat in the Age of Tofu
IT is 9:30 A.M., and most of New York is lurching into a normal business morning, but the meat market district, after another busy all-nighter, is just winding down.
James Ortenzio -- known as Mr.
Meat on the bustling cobblestone streets just below West 14th Street -- is holding court in his office, eager to explain the intricacies of this little world, which struggles daily to fill regular and rush orders from dining rooms, hospital kitchens, school cafeterias, grocery stores and butchers' shops across the city.
"Every day is a different surprise," he said as he flipped through orders from Gallagher's steak house, the Four Seasons Hotel, Brooklyn Hospital, the Federal Reserve and the Manhattan Chili Company.
"Today's surprises included a guy who wanted a large quantity of veal tenderloin we didn't expect. Somebody else didn't ship turkey because a truck broke down, so we had to go around the corner. Another place wanted venison saddle; all we had was venison rack."


Students Dissent On Football Article
This problem with profanity and fighting on the playing field is happening all over the United States.
It is not just Levittown.
The fans who curse are wrong and should keep their opinions to themselves.
These parents who curse at officials and yell at the other teams are not right.
But you cannot just blame us.
These are parents who take sports too seriously.
ROBERT MILLER


How to Protect Your Plants From Deer
DEER continue to be a problem in suburbia as the density of the herds increases.
Gardeners relate many stories of damage to their plants by indiscriminate deer nibbling.
A few growers have become so discouraged they have almost given up.
It seems that when deer are hungry, they dine on almost anything, much to a planter's heartbreak.
What to do?
This perennial question has no easy answers.
The increase in deer population without the natural predators for control and the invasion of their once wild habitat for development exacerbate the problems.
This provides more opportunities for many deer-human conflicts.


THE SOUND OF COSSACK THUNDER
I have spent much of the last four years working in the former Soviet Union, and spent many months of that time traveling in the traditionally Cossack regions of South Russia and the Ukraine, living in some of the remaining Cossack communities of these areas, including the settlements of my own parents ("The Sound of Cossack Thunder," photographs by Ellen Binder, text by Kyle Crichton, Oct. 31).
What you've presented as historical fact and current reality with regard to Cossack past and present is the equivalent of someone focusing on skinheads in Germany, settler fanatics in Israel or the Aryan Nation in our own country -- and presenting them as being somehow representative of their respective people.


Students Dissent On Football Article
I want to tell you "For These Parents, Winning is Everything"  [ About Long Island, Oct. 24 ]  was totally unfair.
First of all, your article had nothing to do with the title.
It was mostly about Levittown parents and their actions at the game.
Why did you constantly use Levittown?
All towns are like that.
You made our parents sound horrible, loud-mouthed and obnoxious.


Spread of Religion
To the Editor:
C.
G.
Jung's 1959 letter to Ruth Topping (Op-Ed, Nov. 19) contained assertions that all primitive societies have always had religions.
This probably has not been the case.
In "The Origin of Civilization and the Primitive Condition of Man" (1870), Sir John Lubbock gives numerous examples of societies having no religion whatsoever.
This includes no belief in gods, spirits or an afterlife, nor religious ritual of any variety.
These same phenomena are also mentioned in "Force and Matter" (1918) by L. Bucher and "Three Men of the Beagle" (1991) by Richard Marks.


Clothes Divested of Figures in Rituals of Sex and Culture
AT the Neuberger Museum, on the State University of New York campus here, are two displays that have nothing in common bar the same closing date, Jan. 2, but that fit together like yin and yang.
Yin is represented by the installations of two Korean artists, Jin Soo Kim and Choong-Sup Lim -- with the art critic and historian Eleanor Heartney acting as guest curator -- yang by the group show "Empty Dress: Clothing as Surrogate in Recent Art."
Both Ms.
Kim and Mr.
Lim received an education in Korea before emigrating to the United States about 20 years ago, and both attempt to reconcile East and West in their art.
But the similarity ends there, not least because, of the two, Ms.
Kim seems the more intent on reconciliation.
As explained by Ms.
Heartney in the show's brochure, the artist, upon settling in the United States, was amazed at the "disposable mentality encouraged by the abundance of affluence."


N.F.L. Expansion Follows Simple Philosophy: Safety First
The National Football League insists that it gave an expansion franchise to Jacksonville last week for all the right reasons: It is a growing city in a growing area, with an enthusiastic public, solid ownership group, completely rebuilt stadium, and could provide a big payout to visiting teams, etc., etc.
But is that really why Jacksonville won and St.
Louis, Baltimore and Memphis did not?
Or was it that if St.
Louis or Baltimore won, lawsuits could have followed, and the N.F.L. has had enough of them?
Jacksonville was a safe, no-problem choice.


But How Do You Stop?


When the Going Gets Tough, the Brokers Get Going
AN iron bar booby-trap, a near-naked brother-in-law, nine-hour closings and endless wrangling over fees and furniture are among the obstacles real estate agents have overcome of late in their struggle to sell residential properties in New York City.
Each year, the most outrageous and inventive of the successful deals, the "deals from hell" as one broker put it, are submitted to a committee of the Real Estate Board of New York to judge the three best -- or worst, depending on how it's looked at.


Wall Street; The I.P.O. Market: Slippery When Hot
IT MAY not be the tulip craze of 17th century Holland, but the initial public offering market has gorged itself on a record amount of capital this year, nourished by an ever-growing number of investors who seem to have caught the I-gotta-get-a-piece-of-this bug.
I.P.O.'s -- new stock usually issued by small companies, often to raise money for expansion -- pulled in $35.77 billion in the United States during the first 11 months of 1993, compared with $24.03 billion for all of last year.
The craving has been stimulated by strong price increases in recent new issues from companies whose names are now dreamily repeated on Wall Street like mantras: Boston Chicken, Discovery Zone, Vermont Teddy Bear, Talbots.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Melrose; Melrose Commons Nearer Start
Plans for Melrose Commons, a 30-square-block development, came closer to reality when the City Planning Department certified it recently.
That decision has opened the way for a final review by residents and elected officials.
Although the review process sometimes becomes a forum for enormous opposition, the plan for Melrose Commons may have already met its toughest challenge: an early public outcry that forced a major revision of the initial proposal.


Ways to Fix Fennel While It's at Its Best
FENNEL looks rather like a bulbous head of celery, but it has a faint taste of anise.
It is at its peak at the holiday season, when it is delicious served raw with grainy slivers of Parmesan cheese, goat's cheese or prosciutto, or dipped into lemon juice and extra-virgin olive oil.
Fennel also goes well with meat and fish and can be cooked the same way as celery.
Matthew Kenney, chef at the recently opened Matthew's Restaurant on the Upper East Side in Manhattan, tosses diced fennel in a lemon coriander vinaigrette made with walnut oil.
He serves this as a first course with a tuna tartar and a tapenade of green olives, which he accompanies with toast flavored with caraway seeds.


Clinton Hill: The Past Serving the Present
THE Clinton Hill neighborhood in west central Brooklyn is a late-19th-century treasure trove of mansions and brownstones, wide, tree-lined boulevards with broad vistas and a few smaller, charming side streets.
A pedestrian roaming its avenues can marvel at fluted and banded Doric and Tuscan columns, bay windows and flower-bedecked balconies, bearded titans in the facades and pretend Loire Valley chateaus capped by conical towers.
On Nov. 10, 1981, a section of the neighborhood, part of the borough's brownstone belt, was declared a historic district, one of 61 such districts created by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.


Living Dolls
Lolita seems to be a comeback kid.
Granted, it's not every woman's look, but lots of designers in Paris, New York and Milan are betting that by next spring more than a few women past the age of puberty will want to dress up like little girls.
And if they do, these are some of the duds they may choose.


Trying to Breach the Walls of Hatred
AT the Vietnam peace talks, the first argument was over the shape of the table.
If "talks about talks" ever get under way on Northern Ireland, there will probably be fights not just about the shape of the table but about what it's made of, whether it's level, where it should be and of course who should sit at it.
In the 25 years of sectarian warfare in the six provinces of Ulster there has not been such a push for peace as now.
Everything seems to conspire in favor of it: a new pragmatism on the part of the Irish Republican Army, a vague despair from the Protestant Unionists, and an all-around war weariness from the British soldiers and politicians who do the policing and the governing.
What's more, the global winds are propitious for settling long-time conflicts, from the Middle East to South Africa.


Rookie of the Year
THERE are some things you don't learn at Harvard.
John Bartlett is learning that the hard way.


Fixing Doorbells and Chimes to Ring in the Holiday Season
THE holidays are high season for doorbells and chimes, and so now is the time to fix them.
Bells and chimes operate on very low current -- 6 to 24 volts, depending on the model -- and because shock from such a small charge is virtually imperceptible, most repairs can be made without turning off the power.
But do not perform tests or make repairs with the power on if wearing a pacemaker, as contact with even small amounts of electricity can disrupt it.


SUNDAY, December 5, 1993; Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow
In case you were wondering, Jan. 5 is St.
Agatha's Day (she appeared as a cat and summoned storms).
On May 17, 1954, the Supreme Court ruled school segregation unconstitutional.
And the three days of Idul-Adha next year are May 20-22.
This information is culled from "Cat Lovers Against the Bomb," "The Words of Martin Luther King Jr." and the "New York City Alternate Side of the Street Parking Calendar," just a small sampling of the 141 calendars displayed at one Manhattan bookstore.
Others feature the usual cars, trains, cats and Irish landscapes.


Ways to Fix Fennel While It's at Its Best
FENNEL looks rather like a bulbous head of celery, but it has a faint taste of anise.
It is at its peak at the holiday season, when it is delicious served raw with grainy slivers of Parmesan cheese, goat's cheese or prosciutto, or dipped into lemon juice and extra-virgin olive oil.
Fennel also goes well with meat and fish and can be cooked the same way as celery.
Matthew Kenney, chef at the recently opened Matthew's Restaurant on the Upper East Side in Manhattan, tosses diced fennel in a lemon coriander vinaigrette made with walnut oil.
He serves this as a first course with a tuna tartar and a tapenade of green olives, which he accompanies with toast flavored with caraway seeds.


Command Performance, From Coney Island
THE Coney Island Circus Sideshow is wintering at Here, a recently opened multistage performance space in SoHo.
The performers include Albino Pythons From Beneath the Berlin Wall (starring Christine Hell, a German snake charmer), the Human Blockhead (he drives a spike into his head), the Neon Sword Swallower (he illuminates his ribcage with two feet of neon tubing) and the Illustrated Man.
Not to mention Jennifer Miller, the bearded lady, who also juggles machetes.
The sideshow is billed as a "royal command performance for the SoHo art world," and Dick Zigun, the show's director, likes the sound of that.
"It's fun for us to be treated as fine art instead of sleazy Coney Island," he said.
The sideshow will appear weekends through March and then reopen on Easter Sunday at the old stand, the Coney Island boardwalk.


Separate Classes for Girls Aren't the Answer; Dig Up the Regents
To the Editor:
As a mathematics educator, I read with interest of the California "experiment" in using all-girl classes to teach mathematics (front page, Nov. 24).
When I went to public school, back in the 30's or thereabouts, all schools in Manhattan -- in my part of it, anyway -- were segregated by sex.
Moreover, all high school students on the so-called academic track took uniform Regents examinations in a host of subjects, including algebra and geometry.
The results of these examinations, by school if not by individual, may well be available today.


France, Reversing Course, Fights Immigrants' Refusal to Be French
Four years ago, when head coverings worn by Muslim girls first tested the secular tradition of France's public school system, the Government allowed school principals to set their own rules, and in practice, most chose flexibility over confrontation with local Muslims.
But early last month, when two Turkish and two Moroccan girls obeyed the orders of their parents and showed up for classes wearing head scarves, they were promptly suspended by the principal of their primary school at Nantua in eastern France until they abandoned the religious custom.


Even the Most Dedicated Need More Help to Help the Neediest; The 82d Appeal/Remember the Neediest
The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund was established in 1911 by Adolph S. Ochs, then the publisher of The Times.
That year 117 donors gave $3,630.88, which was distributed by three social-service agencies.
Since then, the number of agencies has grown to seven and the fund has raised millions of dollars to help tens of thousands of people in the metropolitan region.


In Defense of Audio Aids in Theaters
To the Editor:
As a severely hard-of-hearing person and an audiologist, I was pleased to read Glenn Rifkin's article about the development of new captioning devices to help deaf people understand movies ("Courting a Deaf Movie Audience With Caption Devices," Technology, Nov. 21).


A Code Of Correctness?
To the Editor:
In searching for the roots of New York's architectural malaise  [ "Fear, Hope and the Changing of the Guard," Nov. 14 ] , Herbert Muschamp decries that "it has apparently been decided . . . that every new building should look like the Art Deco apartment buildings of the 1930's. Every street should be lighted by bishop's-crook lampposts. Every park should look like an Olmsted park."


The Importance of Being Santa Claus
THIS year the Garden State Plaza Mall in Paramus will have a naturally bearded Santa, replacing a roster of Santas hired in previous years who worked in shifts.
Debi Gilson, the mall's marketing manager, said: "Finding the right Santa and putting him in the proper setting is an important responsibility. Even with breaks, Santa works a 14-hour day. The six- to eight-week holiday stint is a grueling one. Santa is dressed in all that clothing and the mall can be warm.


Washington's Biggest Special Interest Is Still Itself
MARVIN DAVIS, the billionaire oil and real estate mogul who once owned 20th Century Fox, likes to hobnob with people of influence.
In 1984, when Gary Hart was winning raves in Hollywood as a possible Democratic Presidential nominee, Mr.
Davis gave a lavish backlot banquet in his honor.
Four years later, he donated $100,000 apiece to the Republican and Democratic parties.
So it was hardly a surprise that Mr.
Davis invited President Clinton to his Beverly Hills mansion last night as the star attraction of an intimate dinner party, at a cost of $25,000 to $100,000 per couple (proceeds go to the Democratic National Committee).


Academics and Their Prose
To the Editor:
I loved Patricia Nelson Limerick's essay.
I showed it to my wife, who started reading it but never finished.
"Too long," she said.


Russia Is Pressed on Nuclear Waste Dumping
Three weeks after 37 countries approved a legally binding ban on dumping low-level radioactive waste at sea, Russia is coming under increasing diplomatic pressure to pledge a permanent end to the practice, especially in the Arctic.
Although Britain, France, China and Belgium joined Russia in abstaining from voting on the ban and may decide to defy it, the effectiveness of the newly strengthened treaty -- known as the London Convention -- will hinge mainly on Russia's actions, diplomats and environmental experts agree.


NOV. 28-DEC. 4: New Rules on Breast X-Rays; F.D.A. Raises Standard For Mammography Clinics
As concern about breast cancer continues to rise, mammography has become a booming business in this country.
But some of the business has been too good, studies have shown, leading to an overabundance of clinics, high prices and poor x-rays.
Last week the Food and Drug Administration, under pressure from Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, announced stricter standards on breast x-rays.
The new rules require that the country's 12,000 clinics pass inspection and be accredited, use up-to-date equipment and trained technicians, keep complete records and undergo annual audits.
The rules take effect Oct. 1, 1994, but clinics are expected to start upgrading now.


Devils Make Their Point but Not Their Shots
Stephane Richer, with the game inside three minutes, fired from the crease.
Claude Lemieux, with a shot pure and powerful and the clock fading, unloaded from the right face-off circle.
John MacLean, with 15 seconds left in regulation, cranked a wrist rocket from the top of the slot.
Corey Millen, a minute into overtime, was sent in alone.
All blanks, and thus all unable to alter a draw.
The Devils, sworn to their style of defense and opportunism, wound up even with the Blackhawks at 2-2 after 65 minutes at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


What's Cooking?
Julia Child was the star as Channel 13 held its yearly fund-raiser, Dec. 2.


How to Protect Your Plants From Deer
DEER continue to be a problem in suburbia as the density of the herds increases.
Gardeners relate many stories of damage to their plants by indiscriminate deer nibbling.
A few growers have become so discouraged they have almost given up.
It seems that when deer are hungry, they dine on almost anything, much to a planter's heartbreak.
What to do?
This perennial question has no easy answers.
The increase in deer population without the natural predators for control and the invasion of their once wild habitat for development exacerbate the problems.
This provides more opportunities for many deer-human conflicts.


Even the Most Dedicated Need More Help to Help the Neediest; An Opportunity to Start Over in a New Land
It is almost two years since Yakov Borisevich Alesker declared himself a political refugee at the United States Embassy in Moscow and immigrated to New York with his wife and daughters.
At the age of 54, when he could have been basking in the accumulated glory of a long career at a prestigious Soviet engineering institute, he now finds himself near the bottom of the ladder at a Brooklyn vinyl-manufacturing plant.
As an expert in polymers, Mr.
Alesker received 40 patents in construction techniques and published dozens of books and scientific papers in the former Soviet Union.
He won praise from the Communist Party, and even a shiny red automobile in recognition of his accomplishments.
But as a Jew, he said, his life was haunted by a growing anti-Semitism that finally became unbearable.


Report Says Colleges Are Failing to Educate
Blaming higher education for a failure to produce highly skilled workers, a report by a group of 16 leading educators, business leaders, foundation executives and others says that undergraduate education in the United States is too often "little more than secondary school material -- warmed over and reoffered at much higher expense."
Sponsored by four nonprofit foundations, the report, "An American Imperative: Higher Expectations for Higher Education," says the system produces a surplus of "unskilled applicants scrambling to earn a precarious living." It is scheduled for release tomorrow.


Hollywood Postcard
Barbara Davis is the Los Angeles socialite who has become the city's undisputed Cecilia B. DeMille of charity balls.
"It's just so nice to see all my friends," Mrs.
Davis said at the Shubert Theater in Century City on Tuesday, where she was running another of her epic fund-raisers for diabetes -- a preview of Andrew Lloyd Webber's musical "Sunset Boulevard," starring Glenn Close, which was followed by a dinner-dance.
Mrs.
Davis's daughter Dana has diabetes.
"I was in the south of France three years ago," Mrs.
Davis said during intermission in a happy tone of voice that complimented her glittering red Oscar de la Renta jacket and light-catching pouf of blond hair.
"And Andrew asked me if I would give this party. His first wife was diabetic." Being on a first-name basis with him, as she is with Dudley, Dinah, Clint, Merv, Sylvester and so many others, Mrs.
Davis didn't refer to the composer as Sir Andrew, although he was knighted last year.


Laura Zaccaro and Joshua Lee
Geraldine A. Ferraro and John A. Zaccaro of Forest Hills, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter Laura Anne Zaccaro to Joshua Samuel Lee, a son of Madeline R. Lee of New York and Todd G. Lee of Boston.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Zaccaro, 27, graduated from Brown University and is a medical student at the University of Chicago.
Her mother, the former Congresswoman and Vice-Presidential candidate, has been nominated as the United States representative to the United Nations Human Rights Commission; she is a partner in New York in the Chicago law firm of Keck, Mahin &amp; Cate.
The future bride's father is the president of the P. Zaccaro Company, a real-estate and development concern in New York.


If You're Thinking of Living In/East Midtown; A Strong Urban Stamp, a History of Flux
A RUSH-HOUR stream of headlights drifts north into East Midtown, passing bars and restaurants along First Avenue in a lemming-like march toward the Queensboro Bridge.
The traffic passes the historic school-turned-homeless shelter at 51st Street, and cars rush off the bridge onto streets of mixed architecture that reflect a century and a half of social and municipal change.


Parlor Tricks
Like charismatic people, certain homes immediately overwhelm you with their character.
The Italianate town house typical of the 1840's, with its irresistibly gaudy moldings, mandatory crystal chandeliers, imperiously tall mirrors and double parlors, is a prime example.
Unless care is taken, the house tends to dictate a formal treatment, exquisite in its own time but hardly livable by modern standards.
The architects Carey Maloney and Hermes Mallea of M (Group) of Manhattan, along with the owners of this Chelsea town house, have refused to succumb to period drag.
The double-parlor floor and the garden level have become a self-contained duplex for the owners.
The furnishings are anything but historically correct: Stripped, gilded, polished and generally taken out of context (a mirrored vanity is now a bar), once common pieces are now head-turners.
A subtly subversive color scheme -- apricot living-room walls, a deep shrimp-pink sofa -- tones down the imposing grandeur.
In place of predictable symmetry, the architects used large-scale furniture.
And, of course, touches of faux leopard are sure signs of bravura, too.


Rowan Moves to Title Game
Ed Hesson threw three touchdown passes, two of them within 20 seconds in the second quarter, as Rowan advanced to the Amos Alonzo Stagg Bowl, the championship game of the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III playoffs, with 23-16 semifinal victory over previously undefeated Washington and Jefferson this afternoon in a steady rain at College Field.


Marion Grover, Jonathan Radin
Marion Anthony Grover, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot B. Grover of Kennett Square, Pa., was married last evening to Jonathan Michael Radin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Radin of Sunset Hill, S.I.
The Rev.
George Master, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Mayer Selekman officiated at the Greenville Country Club in Centerville, Del.
Mrs.
Radin, 31, is a senior business analyst for Metropolitan Life Insurance in Troy, N.Y.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is the president of Business Concepts International, a management consulting concern in Kennett Square.
Her mother, Martha S. Grover, is a sculptor.


A Golden Trove, Long Scattered, Shines Once More
A HOARD OF ANCIENT GOLD jewelry from a tomb on the Nile is back together after a 150-year separation.
Worn in the first century B.C. by Queen Amanishakheto (pronounced ah-MAH-nee-shah-KHAY-toe) of Nubia, in what is now the Sudan, the 200 glowing ornaments were discovered in 1834, bundled in white cloth at the top of her pyramid.
Found by Giuseppe Ferlini, an Italian physician and amateur archeologist, the jewelry was sold a decade later -- half to King Ludwig I of Bavaria and the rest to King Friedrich Wilhelm IV of Prussia.
The Nubian treasure ended up in two German museums: Ludwig's at the State Collection of Egyptian Art in Munich and Friedrich Wilhelm's at the Egyptian Museum in Berlin.
After the reunification of Germany in 1990, the two museums organized "The Gold of Meroe," an exhibition that opened in Berlin a year ago and is now at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, through April 3.
The delicate, exquisitely decorated rings, bracelets and necklaces are rich in images of deities, sacred animals and emblems, all part of the exotic culture that flourished from 270 B.C. to A.D. 350 in the Nubian capital of Meroe (MER-oh-ay).


Academics and Their Prose
To the Editor:
I was troubled by Patricia Nelson Limerick's attribution that poor writing is a result of the academic's attitude that readers are "unsophisticated and untrained." Yes, I often feel compelled to use pretentious language to make ideas that I think are too simple seem more impressive.
Others use difficult and therefore intimidating language to protect what they have from those who want a share of it.
When I use language in these manners (as Ms. Limerick suggests), I will write bad papers.


Loverly Memories of 'My Fair Lady'
In the pantheon of American Musicals, "My Fair Lady" occupies a special place.
The show, with book and lyrics by Alan Jay Lerner and music by Frederick Loewe, was originally directed by Moss Hart and starred Rex Harrison and Julie Andrews.
The production, mounted at a cost of $360,000, opened at the Mark Hellinger Theater on March 15, 1956, and ran for six and a half years.


Students Dissent On Football Article
I feel that the article opened a lot of eyes to a problem of pressure from parents on students.
It is one thing to want your child to do well but another thing to expect violence in a game.
A sport should be enjoyable.
If a child feels too much pressure from home he or she might hurt himself and not play any longer.
If a child is pushed too much, the results can be disastrous.
I'm happy that someone finally wrote about the problem.


At Work; Job Hunting Isn't Always Goodbye
AMONG corporate managers, it may be those in the middle who are writhing like sinners in a Hieronymus Bosch triptych over at their future prospects, but the senior levels are not going placidly amid the downsizing and restructuring.
Their dissatisfaction with the current roiling managerial environment is evident in the results of a survey released late last month.
Three quarters of chief executives are looking for new jobs, half have received offers in the last year and, in general, everyone would rather be working less and playing more.
According to one of the survey's sponsors, the results indicate not so much that senior people are actually moving but that they are positioning themselves to make lemonade out of the lemons that pass as opportunities in corporate life today.


BEST SELLERS: December 5, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
2
2
69
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
3
8
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
4
4
15
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
5
6
4
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery writer's happy family life is threatened by a madman determined to kill him and take his place.
6
5
10
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
7
1
THE TRUCE AT BAKURA, by Kathy Tyers. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The "Star Wars" Rebel Alliance responds to a call for help from a threatened outpost.
8
7
7
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in Victorian England's high society.
9
10
34
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
10
8
6
DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) An architect-engineer gets caught between the warring factions of a clan that owns an English racecourse.
11
13
38
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
12
16
2
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Talese/Doubleday, $23.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly reappears in their lives.
13
11
10
SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics and murder.
14
12
13
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Concluding the "Griffin &amp; Sabine" trilogy, about an artist and his secret admirer.
15
9
6
THE FIRES OF HEAVEN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $24.95.) The fifth volume of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
2
2
7
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
3
3
15
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
4
4
13
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
5
5
30
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
6
6
9
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
7
1
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
8
7
4
THE DOWNING STREET YEARS, by Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins, $30.) The former British Prime Minister recalls her 11 1/2 years in power.
9
8
9
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of marriage.
10
9
7
STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski. (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played Capt.
James Tiberius Kirk.
11
1
THE BEST CAT EVER, by Cleveland Amory. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A third volume about the trials and tribulations of the feline Polar Bear and his owner.
12
12
69
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
13
10
9
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
14*
11
21
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
15
15
3
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $50.) Photographs of and observations by the retired basketball superstar.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
29
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
2
1
8
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
3
3
3
AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes from the golf instructor.
4
4
19
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 20, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
AND BEAR IN MIND THE BOOK OF NIGHTS, by Sylvie Germain. (Verba Mundi/Godine, $22.95.) In this work of magic realism by a French philosopher living in Prague, the protean world of the Brothers Grimm meets Nazi Germany.
CASE CLOSED: Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of JFK, by Gerald Posner. (Random House, $25.) For the 30th anniversary of the assassination, a lucid, durable account laying out the overwhelming evidence that Oswald murdered the President all by himself.
THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER, edited by Mark Tucker. (Oxford University, $30.) A fascinating anthology of 70 years' worth of writing about (and occasionally by) Ellington, who clearly inspired powerful emotions in even the most sober minds.
EXIT INTO HISTORY: A Journey Through the New Eastern Europe, by Eva Hoffman. (Viking, $23.) Seeking out the ordinary, a Polish-born writer with a touch of American objectivity makes a tour of Mitteleuropa, returning with subtle insights about a world in transition.
EXTRA INNINGS: A Memoir, by Doris Grumbach. (Norton, $22.) Well into her 70's, Ms.
Grumbach says she is trying to "learn to sit still" and mining what she calls her "mental compost heap." GENET: A Biography, by Edmund White. (Knopf, $35.) A monumental biography, meticulously researched, that places Genet's literary vision squarely in his homosexuality and confronts the mystery of how a man who left school at 12 became a great master of the French language.
GHOSTS, by John Banville. (Knopf, $21.) Rattling around in this Irish writer's witty, startling and nearly plotless novel are echoes of "The Tempest," entrancing visual elements, an obscure and intricate mystery, violence and a houseful of threatening oddballs.
A HISTORY OF WARFARE, by John Keegan. (Knopf, $27.50.) Mr.
Keegan, the most readable and original of military historians, argues that war is an omnipresent cultural ritual of mankind, from which the ruthless modern notion of disciplined total war was an aberration.
NEVER STOP RUNNING: Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American Liberalism, by William H. Chafe. (Basic Books, $28.) A historian captures the rootlessness and personal insecurity of an aggressive reform politician from New York who could accomplish almost anything except getting himself elected.
RETURN TO PARADISE, by Breyten Breytenbach. (Harcourt Brace, $22.95.) A bleak, beautiful, subjective collage of reminiscences, political rants and prose poems about this Afrikaner poet's troubled sojourns in South Africa.
THAT'S THE WAY I SEE IT, by David Hockney.
Edited by Nikos Stangos. (Chronicle Books, $35.) The second volume of the artist's recollections, taken from the tape recorder of Mr.
Stangos, is a long, perky monologue -- autobiography alternating with ruminations on vision and the reproduction of images.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
UPPER WEST SIDE For Young Readers, a Visit With the Home Companion
Garrison Keillor, host of the "Prairie Home Companion" radio show, will read from his new book, "The Book of Guys," and answer questions as part of the Young Readers and Writers Introduce series sponsored by the West Side Y.M.C.A.
The event will be held at the Universalist Church.
As usual, a high school student will prepare and deliver the introduction -- in this case, a student from Manhattan Village Academy.


Fit To Be Tied
Getting mail used to be fun.
Just watch "The Age of Innocence." All those love-to-have-you's and sorry-to-have-missed-you's.
You don't get letters like that anymore.
You get phone calls.
The mailbox, meanwhile, bulges with catalogues you never look at and envelopes swearing you're a finalist in the next million-dollar giveaway.
So who wouldn't welcome an engraved time-to-get-dressed-up party invitation?
Men, that's who.
The phrase "black tie" has always been a license for women to look drop dead, while males think "monkey suit" and start kicking imaginary sand.
And this is progress, considering how it used to be damned monkey suit.
But the 80's relentless desire to show off, combined with the 90's I-really-am-a-good-person need to turn every bake sale into a big-scale fund-raiser, increased the frequency of those honey-where-are-my-studs? type evenings.
Formal attire started to register a marked increase in retail sales.
And there were even unconfirmed reports that a few men were actually learning to tie a tie.
And then it happened.
Someone changed the dress code.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Union Square; Bradlees Is Setting Its Sights on 14th Street
Fourteenth Street, once one of Manhattan's major retail strips, where Macy's began and Klein's later flourished, has not had a leading department store since J. W. Mays closed in 1988.
Now, the Bradlees discount chain has announced plans to renovate that building and open a branch by mid-1995.
"Metropolitan New York is an expansion market for us," said Coleman Nee, a spokesman at Bradlees headquarters in Braintree, Mass.
It recently started a branch in Yonkers and plans to open its first New York City outlet, in downtown Brooklyn, in about a year.


Carole J. Tomko, Rex W. Recka
Carole Jane Tomko, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Tomko of Lancaster, Pa., was married yesterday to Rex William Recka, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph E. Recka of Ellicott City, Md.
The Rev.
Dr.
Francis Wade performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Alban's Church in Washington.


Foes Take to the Grass Roots On Clinton Health Proposal
Republicans took the debate over President Clinton's health plan to the grass roots yesterday, holding a series of forums around the country that presaged the fierce political struggle to come.
Republicans in the House scheduled more than 50 "town meetings" in 24 states this weekend, all focused on the issue of health care.
Visits to six of the meetings indicated that the turnout was good.


Burglar-Alarm Installer Is Accused of Thievery
On his busiest days, law-enforcement authorities said, Marc Del Toro installed new burglar alarms or serviced existing systems in up to five homes.
His work took him throughout northern New Jersey and beyond, from Bergen and Hudson Counties westward to Warren and Sussex Counties on the Delaware River, and occasionally into Pennsylvania.
Mr.
Del Toro's career in the alarm business lasted about two years.
Late Thursday night, he was arrested.
The authorities said that after putting in new alarm systems in two houses recently, Mr.
Del Toro walked away with more than his tool kit.


Help for the Disabled On Italian Railways
Travelers with disabilities who are visiting Italy may get help from the Italian State Railways.
The free services, which were first offered in 25 stations in 1989, and are now available in 126 stations, include assistance in getting on and off the train; in purchasing tickets, and in making reservations at the stations.
Many train stations have free wheelchairs that can be used in the station and on the train.
Folding wheelchairs are allowed on all Italian trains, but motorized or rigid wheelchairs may only be taken aboard trains equipped with special rail cars.
Not all trains have these cars but a list of those that do is available in specially designated reception areas.
Individuals who are traveling with non-folding wheelchairs must inform personnel in the reception area.


Ellen W. Curtis, Phillip Boiselle
Dr. and Mrs.
John P. Curtis of Millerton, N.Y., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Ellen Wade Curtis and Dr.
Phillip Michael Boiselle, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Phillip R. Boiselle of Fayetteville, N.C.
Miss Curtis, 26, is a doctoral candidate in American studies at Yale University.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in elementary education from Columbia University.


Mad, Mad, Mad City: Wisconsin Is Reborn
It has been awhile since Bucky Badger received so much attention.
After all, when was the last time the little black-and-white burrowing badger, the Wisconsin mascot, was associated with athletic success?
But Bucky's time has come, because the University of Wisconsin is nationally ranked in both football and basketball for the first time in more than a decade.


100 Points Times 2: The New Connection For U.S.C. Women
Cheryl Miller, who now goes by "Coach," was playing cards on Thursday night with her Southern California players.
"You know, Coach, I met you once before," said one of them, 6-foot-5-inch Lisa Leslie, a preseason all-America selection.


A Fall Sport Thrives in the Hothouse
THE conceit of football fanatics in Northern latitudes is that the game has more uplift, in nearly mystical ways, when it is played in conditions that provide frost on the field in the morning, a chill rain at kickoff and an epidemic of runny noses by the fourth quarter.
Without this environment, some of the meaning is bled from the spectacle for them, as for Roman Catholics raised before Vatican II who yearn for the Latin Mass.


French Top Americans in Poll On Knowledge of Holocaust
Often accused of trying to ignore France's role in the deportation of Jews during World War II, the French are much more knowledgeable about the Holocaust than Americans and Britons, according to a poll carried out for the American Jewish Committee.
The results of the poll, released here on Thursday, also show that while a majority of the French are aware of the movement to deny the existence of the Holocaust, 94 percent of them -- compared with 84 percent of Britons and 62 percent of Americans -- believe that mass killings of Jews did take place.


Moscow-Beijing Pact to Avoid Conflict Seen
Russia and China plan to sign an agreement next year aimed at preventing inadvertent or dangerous military confrontations between their forces, a diplomat familiar with the plans said.
A Chinese commitment to go ahead with the agreement was given to Defense Minister Pavel S. Grachev of Russia during his visit to the Chinese capital last month, the diplomat said, and marks a further reduction in tensions between the former Communist rivals.


On Breast Exams
In a marked shift of policy, the National Cancer Institute has joined an emerging consensus among experts and changed its formal guidelines for breast cancer screening, dropping the recommendation that women under 50 should have regular mammograms.
Article, page 30.


THERE'S NO SIMPLE SUICIDE
After reading your article, I know how to end my life with pills and make sure I get it right.
I know what drugs to take and how many.
I know to eat first so I don't throw up.
I know that alcohol speeds the process.


U.S. SEES PROBLEMS IN NUCLEAR OFFER
North Korea's new offer to allow greater access to its nuclear sites restricts international inspectors at the two most critical installations, leaving the Clinton Administration divided over how to respond, Administration officials said today.
The Administration has scheduled a Cabinet-level "principals" meeting for Monday to try to fashion a response, officials said.


Outings for School Break
The week when children are out of school between Christmas and New Year's provides an opportunity for excursions that bridge the gap between the resolutely educational and the totally frivolous.
Mystic Seaport in Connecticut, 120 miles from New York by car or train, and Historic Richmondtown on Staten Island offer special programs for this time.
At Mystic, Kids After Christmas runs from Dec. 26 to Jan. 2.
The adult admission of $15 is waived and everyone pays the $7.50 child's fee.
For an extra $2 each, visitors can join one of the guided tours through the museum grounds and buildings that depart whenever 15 people are ready to go.


HARD SELL
In "Hard Sell" (Nov. 7), Diane Keaton holds Jamison Handy's photographs "responsible for the mess of our lives." To my eye, these photos seem to be instructions on how to perform a job -- the job of selling -- a little better, and not, as Keaton asserts, a "rule book on how to lose your soul." GARY H. FORMAN New York, N.Y.


Art Exhibitions From Denmark and Portugal
Denmark and Portugal have sent two exhibitions to the United States that focus on particularly rich artistic periods in their respective histories.
"The Age of the Baroque in Portugal," an exhibition of some 120 objects from the 18th century, opened earlier this month at the National Gallery of Art in Washington and will run until Feb. 6.
It includes "View of Lisbon," a 66-foot, blue-and-white hand-painted tile frieze depicting the Lisbon skyline as it was in the early 18th century, from the Museu Nacional do Azulejo, and an elaborately carved gilded coach created for an ambassadorial procession in Rome in 1716.


Byars Gives Lessons in Physical Science
Fullback Keith Byars remembers that when he was in Philadelphia and the Eagles would see the Miami Dolphins on their schedule, they would lick their chops.
The Eagles always thought they could push the Dolphins around the field as if they were lightweights and the Eagles were George Foreman.
"We respected the Dolphins when I was in Philly, but we knew if we got in a physical game with them we would win," said Byars, who left Philadelphia to join the Dolphins as a free agent this past off season.
"They were a finesse team, and we didn't lose to finesse teams. We would take our nine or 10 victories and stack them against their 12 or 13 any time because we played in the toughest division."


No Headline
"In the 1970's and 1980's, we promoted multiculturalism. We had a day of couscous, a day of paella; it was 'vive la difference' much of the time. Now the pendulum is going the other way." -- BERNARD DUATTIS, who runs a school crowded with immigrant children in a Paris suburb.  [ 14:1. ]


Separate Classes for Girls Aren't the Answer; Lower Expectations
To the Editor:
"To Help Girls Keep Up: Math Class Without Boys" (front page, Nov. 24) perpetuates a myth that boys excel beyond girls in academic ability.
While boys tend to outperform girls in math and science, girls excel in language and analytical skills from the primary grades through higher education.
Headlines and articles have a damaging effect on girls' self-esteem and give boys an unfounded sense of superiority.
Such articles also encourage parents and teachers to expect different achievement based on gender.


Young Time Travelers Talk to People of 2000
As part of a time capsule project in East Harlem, elementary school students were asked to write letters that future students will open in the year 2000.
The hopes expressed in these letters, written by students at P.S. 101 on East 111th Street, reflect the fears and dangers they, and children around New York City, have learned to live with.
Dear Children of the Future,


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Consumer credit, Oct., change, billions
$6.7
$6.0
Wednesday
Wholesale sales, Oct., percent change
0.6
0.7
Nonfarm productivity, 3d qtr., pct. change
3.9
3.5
Thursday
Producer prices, Nov., percent change
-0.2
0.1
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
321
335
Friday
Consumer prices, Nov., percent change
0.4
0.2
Tuesday
Japan to announce tax cuts
Wednesday
Federal Reserve to release beige book


2 for 3 With 0:00 Isn't Enough for Hoyas
Villanova 76, Georgetown 75
Villanova hung on in overtime to beat No. 25 Georgetown in Landover, Md., yesterday when the Hoyas' Eric Micoud missed a foul shot after time expired.


Old Age Catches Up With the Oil Patch
ROBERT SPILLER started calling around a few months ago to sell the 38 old, nearly dried-out oil wells his mother inherited when his father died.
His younger brother, Jay, an oilman, was on his list.
"Jay, the price of oil is low, and I don't know if I'm doing you right by calling," he told his brother.
In the last year, Robert had finished selling off all of his own oil wells.
Jay, always stoic, said he would think about it.
The oil from those wells, a relatively low grade, was selling then for about $14 a barrel.
Jay figured he could produce for $13 a barrel, and counted on prices going back up.
And he wanted to keep his father's wells in the family.


Academics and Their Prose
To the Editor:
Kudos to Patricia Nelson Limerick for telling it like it is.
As a graduate student at the State University of New York, Albany, enrolled in Obfuscation 101 (a required course), I thought her words resonated as only the truth does.
This essay should be required reading for all professors.
D.
L.
JACKSON  Woodstock, N.Y.


Amid Hardship, Gifts of Hope
In Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, a political refugee is starting life over; in the Bronx, a young girl struggles to cope with the loss of her mother to AIDS.
A middle-aged man fights alcoholism and mental illness, and a teen-age boy dreams of breaking free of violence and poverty.
Around these faces bend others, all seeking hope from the charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
For the 82d year, the holiday appeal that has helped tens of thousands of people in the metropolitan area is under way.
Articles, page 61.


London
For most Londoners, the Christmas season is a time of well-practiced inertia, when offices run at something less than half speed and many people go off on vacation or hide away quietly at home.
Beyond the brightly lighted shopping districts of central London and Knightsbridge, chockablock as always with holiday throngs, museums and theaters are often less crowded than usual.
London is a city that reveres its traditions.
In the capital's quiet residential corners, wreaths adorn the lacquered doors of row houses, and on street corners everywhere, there is the smoky aroma of hot chestnuts, roasted over open fires and dispensed in warm, steamy paper packets.
In Leicester Square and Covent Garden, from mid-December to early January, amusement rides and sideshow barkers offer summertime diversion in the heart of winter.


Captioning Already Is an Effective Tool
To the Editor:
Regarding Glenn Rifkin's article about caption devices, I'd like to point out that the Tripod Captioned Film project has already shown 19 first-run, open-captioned films and is currently drawing thousands of deaf and hard-of-hearing viewers in more than 40 American cities.
Unpaid advertising and grassroots promotions for the open-captioned screening of "Jurassic Park" this summer brought in more than 1,000 viewers in the Los Angeles area.
Despite the assertion by Allen R. Cooper of the Motion Picture Association of America that captioning "will not happen," our experience has been dramatically proved otherwise.
BARBARA MONTAN  Burbank, Calif., Nov. 13  The writer is co-director of Tripod Captioned Films, a private, nonprofit corporation based in Burbank, Calif., which helps families with deaf and hard-of-hearing children.


Timberland Message
To the Editor:
I am an African-American woman 64 years of age.
The message that I received from "Out of the Woods" (Nov. 7), and particularly from Jeffrey Swartz, Timberland's executive vice president, is that because African-Americans are buying its products and promoting a fashion, it will cheapen the Timberland brand name.


Data Bank/December 5, 1993


FORBIDDEN SUN, AND SIN, COMMUNIST STYLE
Surely, the Castro regime has found the perfect tourist in Peter Passell: Prostitutes!
No rush-hour traffic! ("Forbidden Sun, and Sin, Communist Style," Nov. 7).


Where Vegetarianism Is Turned on Its Ear
There really is a plant that sucks in its prey, including fish, and another that has been known to eat rats.
These plants are cultivated not only because of their strangeness but because of their beauty.
Many people have seen the Venus' flytrap, known to botanists as Dionaea, after the Roman goddess Diana, a beauty as well as a killer.
But other, less familiar carnivorous plants are even better looking.


HARD SELL
Jamison Handy was the quintessential salesman.
The one time I interviewed for a position at the Jam Handy Organization, I learned that Handy had neither an official desk nor an office.
He be lieved that time not spent selling his company's services was time wasted.
Aren't these "spores" of philosophy valuable today?
C.E.O.'s should learn this lesson before they drag down what's left of American industry.
ROSALIND NESTER ELLIS Baltimore


Technology; Gutenberg Goes Digital
THE computer, which in the last decade has created a whole new industry -- desktop publishing -- is now fixing its digital gaze on the venerable printing press.
Ever since Gutenberg, printing large volumes of documents has meant creating a metal plate for each page.
Even in today's high-speed, four-color offset printing presses, each page requires its own metal plate.
And because making and adjusting these plates is expensive and time-consuming, it is cost-effective to use sophisticated presses for full-color jobs only when making thousands of copies of each page.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 William J. Church is an officer in New York's own navy.
His mission: rescues, drug raids -- "anything on the water." NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 How has the Greenwich Village meat market survived in an age of recession and tofu?
Consider "the lambette." PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 17 A Coney Island sideshow in SoHo; Zimbabwean sculpture in Park Slope.
MOVIE CLOCK 18 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 20 Primavera, Petaluma, Primola, Parioli, Romanissimo: a glossary of Italian gastronomy on the Upper East Side.
SOAPBOX 25 Photographer's journal: 178th Street and Vyse Avenue, the South Bronx, 1980-93.
Plus, letters and "Eye of the Beholder."


Gardening News
Cuttings, the weekly gardening column, has moved to this section. Today, page 63.


Robinson Paces Spurs
Spurs 90, 76ers 82
David Robinson had 37 points, 14 rebounds and 7 blocked shots, lifting the San Antonio Spurs to their eighth consecutive victory, 90-82, over the 76ers last night in Philadelphia.


New Effort To Restrict Civil Suits Is Started
IN an effort to repair what it calls "a system totally out of whack," a newly formed coalition of corporations, small businesses, professionals and private citizens pledged this week to press for sweeping legislative changes to cure what it describes as an epidemic of "lawsuit abuse" in the state.
The organization, called the New Jersey Citizens Against Lawsuit Abuse, is mounting an intensive public relations drive with the aim of passing several bills that would radically alter the way civil lawsuits are handled by the courts.
The legislation, which is scheduled for hearings before the Assembly Insurance Committee tomorrow, would have two major effects: make it harder for individuals to sue companies and to financially punish the losers of civil suits.


Sur, a Russian Ice Dancer, Is Pursuing U.S. Citizenship
When he defected on Jan. 24, 1990, Gorsha Sur, the Russian ice dancer, made a bargain-basement escape, taking an unfurnished apartment in Brooklyn and outfitting his modest refuge in a style of urban discard.
He found a couch in a trash heap on the corner, salvaged a bed from another rubbish pile and anchored a three-legged cot with a rusty golf club.
Just before Sur's money ran out, serendipity seemed to write a blank check.
He found a coaching job in Detroit that came with a house and car.
Next, he found a dance partner in Renee Roca of Colorado Springs.
By early 1993, skating in a sensual style more European than American, Roca and Sur became national ice-dancing champions.
He seemed to have a surfeit of good fortune as the 1994 Winter Olympics approached, a new life, a new partner, a successful career.
But there is one thing that Sur doesn't yet have -- United States citizenship -- and without it, he will be unable to compete in the Winter Games in Lillehammer, Norway.
Race Against Time
His problem is this: Sur has been in the country fewer than four years and the residency requirement for citizenship is five years.
Representative Joel Hefley, Republican of Colorado, and Senator Ben Nighthorse Campbell, Democrat of Colorado, where Sur now lives, have attempted to speed up his naturalization process in Congress.
On Nov. 18, the House judiciary subcommittee on immigration voted unanimously to forward Sur's case to the full judiciary committee.
If approved, the bill must go before the full House and Senate.
Time is not in Sur's favor.
Congress is in recess until Jan. 25, and the Olympics begin on Feb. 12.
It is rare to grant accelerated American citizenship for strictly athletic reasons.
Sur has said that he realized his chances were "slim" in light of the fact exceptions weren't made for the tennis star Ivan Lendl and the world marathon champion Mark Plaatjes.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
BATTERY PARK CITY  $745,000
21 South End Avenue  (Regatta)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,511-sq.-ft. condominium in a 4-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, jacuzzi, N.Y.
Harbor view; common charge $966, taxes $5,460, listed at $785,000, 24 weeks on market (Broker: Regatta New York Realty)  KIPPS BAY  $249,000
630 First Avenue (36th St.)  (Manhattan Plaza)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. condominium in a 9-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, marble baths, health club; common charge $497, taxes $4,620, listed at $259,000, 1 year on market (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $665,000
25 East End Avenue (80th St.)  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; maid's room, dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, East River view; maintenance $2,772, 35% tax-deductible, listed at $750,000, 1 year on market (Broker: David Day Realty)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $2.58 million
77 East 77th Street  3-bedroom, 5-bath, 2-story prewar town house; library overlooking dining area, eat-in kitchen, double height living room, 2 fireplaces, roof deck; taxes $24,924, listed at $3.775 million, 1 1/2 years on market (Brokers: Sotheby's International Realty; Douglas Elliman)  UPPER WEST SIDE  $735,000
180 Riverside Drive (91st St.)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, 2 maids' rooms, dining room, 3 exposures, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,793, 44% tax-deductible, listed at $850,000, 6 weeks on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)  BRONX
RIVERDALE  $57,000
3135 Johnson Avenue  (Edmond Lee)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 900-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, terrace, pool; maintenance $535, 55% tax-deductible, listed at $75,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Trebach Realty)  WAKEFIELD  $192,500
2136 Pitman Avenue  2-family, 68-year-old frame house; 2 baths in upper unit; 2 baths, den in other; 3 bedrooms, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; 2-car garage; taxes $1,684 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  BROOKLYN
LEFFERTS GARDENS  $160,000
188 Lefferts Avenue  2-family attached limestone house; 3 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath in each; taxes $1,350, listed at $175,000, 24 weeks on market (Brokers: Helmar Brokerage Ltd.; ERA/Peshin Realty)  PARK SLOPE  $550,000
208 Garfield Place  2-family, 4-story brownstone; 6 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, deck in owner's triplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, dining area in simplex; taxes $1,600, listed at $575,000, 2 weeks on market (Brokers: Aguayo &amp; Knox; Susan N. Breen)  QUEENS
FOREST HILLS  $400,000
69-50 Harrow Street  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 55-year-old, 3-story detached house; maid's room, dining room, breakfast room, family room, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $2,250, listed at $475,000, 4 months on market (Broker: Terrace Realty)  FOREST HILLS GARDENS  $300,000
408 Burns Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 70-year-old attached brick town house; dining room, c/a, 2-car garage; taxes $1,500, listed at $389,000, 36 weeks on market (Broker: Sarah Jones Realty)  STATEN ISLAND
CASTLETON CORNERS  $145,000
1 Hodges Place  2-family, 45-year-old, semi-attached brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; taxes $1,700, listed at $185,000, 16 weeks on market (Broker: Vitali-Sunshine Realty)  NEW DORP  $120,000
251 Finley Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 7-year-old town house; dining room, pool, end unit; taxes $1,250, listed at $124,900, 14 weeks on market (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)  NEW JERSEY
ALLENDALE  $430,000
32 Sheri Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; family room, c/a, fireplace, updated kitchen; taxes $6,226, listed at $440,000, 8 1/2 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert Realtors)
FAIR LAWN  $272,000
356 Owen Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; 1-car garage, fireplace, screened porch; taxes $4,815, listed at $269,900, 11 1/2 weeks on market (Broker: T.P. Mabey Realtors)  LOWER TOWNSHIP  $73,500
220 Florida Avenue East  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 21-year-old ranch; eat-in-kitchen, 1-car garage, h/w floors, patio, porch; taxes $1,498, listed at $77,900, 11 weeks on market (Broker: DeMusz Real Estate)  MANALAPAN  $390,000
14 Regency Way  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 4-year-old colonial; 3-car garage, 2-zone a/c and heat, circular driveway, Jacuzzi; taxes $6,539, listed at $399,900, 15 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential New Jersey Realty)
LONG ISLAND
EAST MEADOW  $168,000
1718 Lenox Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, dining room, finished basement; taxes $4,800, listed at $178,000, 15 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker Sammis)
FARMINGDALE  $190,000
9 Paine Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old ranch; dining room, den, finished basement, attached 1-car garage; taxes $4,100, listed at $209,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: A-1 Realty Network of Homes)  GLEN COVE  $418,500
3 Hickory Lane, 5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, pool, carriage house; taxes $7,800, listed at $429,000, 12 weeks on market (Brokers: Harmonious Homes; Prudential Long Island Realty)  LATTINGTOWN  $375,000
25 Wood Lane  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 46-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, den, deck, 1-car garage; taxes $5,600, listed at $435,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Douglas Elliman-Jane Hayes)
CONNECTICUT
FAIRFIELD  $194,900
1636 Melville Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 71-year-old, colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage, 100- by 192-ft. lot; taxes $2,562, listed at $187,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21/Coastal Real Estate)  NORWALK  $240,000
21 East Rocks Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old colonial; dining room, family room, fireplace, rear deck, 2-car garage, 0.29-acre lot; taxes $4,186, listed at $242,500, 7 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Connecticut Realty; William Pitt Real Estate)  WESTPORT  $530,000
4 Woods End Lane  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 41-year-old contemporary; entry hall, dining room, playroom, marble bath, 2 fireplaces, 13 skylights, totally remodeled, 2-car garage, 2 acre lot; taxes $3,538, listed at $570,000, 20 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Coldwell Banker/Schlott Realtors)  WESTON  $750,000
8 Patchen Lane  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 2-car garage, 1-acre lot; taxes $7,970, listed at $795,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Preferred Properties)  WESTCHESTER  MOUNT VERNON  $273,000
141 Douglas Place  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 65-year-old Tudor; breakfast room, fireplace, den, porch; taxes $6,773, listed at $289,000, two weeks on market (brokers: Lindsey Real Estate; Deed Real Estate).
NEW ROCHELLE  $434,500
85 Rosehill Avenue 4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 66-year-old Tudor; den, terrace, playroom, deck; taxes $8,068, listed at $439,500, 14 weeks on market (broker: The Wykagyl Agency).
PELHAM MANOR  $868,250
16 Mount Tom Road  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 69-year-old colonial; library, breakfast room, darkroom, two terraces; taxes $20,041, listed at $999,000, 51 weeks on market (broker: McClellan &amp; Company).
YONKERS  $195,000
52 Lefferts Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 81-year-old colonial; center hall, dining room, deck, attic; taxes $3,550, listed at $208,000, 15 weeks on market (broker: Hayduk &amp; Parkis Realty).


Sex Abuse: The Coil of Truth and Memory
GINNY COOK SMITH, incest survivor, could have been a guest on "Oprah" or "Geraldo" if Jane Smiley had not made her up.
In her Pulitzer prize-winning novel, "A Thousand Acres," Ms.
Smiley tells this story: the adult Ginny stretches out on her childhood bed and suddenly images cascade forth.
Her father's bald spot.
What it looked like when his head was buried in her breasts.
Her body trembles as the teen-aged memories of his rapes rush back to her.


Forgotten Credits
To the Editor:
After reading Karen Schoemer's article on Harvey Keitel  [ "Harvey Keitel Tries a Little Tenderness," Nov. 7 ]  I couldn't help but wonder: Why does everybody seem to forget two of the film actor's best roles?
In Paul Schrader's 1978 "Blue Collar" and Tony Richardson's 1982 "Border" Mr.
Keitel delivers excellent character portrayals.
Scarcely a year goes by in which I can resist grabbing at these two at the video store.
LAWRENCE SISKIND  Seattle


New Yorkers &amp; Co.
European-Style Market Comes to Grand Central A London-based company that specializes in creating and operating European-style markets has set up its first American enterprise -- in the main waiting room at Grand Central Station.
The market, offering items ranging from books to candlesticks, will be open through Dec. 24.


Statue Of Liberty Inspires A Menorah
IN this season of symbols, few images are more universal than a candle's flame burning with hope and remembrance.
Fusing the ideas of light and freedom, Jeffrey Schrier, an artist who is known for projects rich in symbolism, has fashioned a 16-foot-wide Hanukkah menorah -- or hanukkiah -- using imagery based on the Statue of Liberty.
In commemoration of Hanukkah, which begins Wednesday at sundown, the Metro-North Commuter Railroad invited Mr.
Schrier, an artist who lives and works in a hilltop home here, to install the multimedia assemblage -- composed of color laser prints, metallic acrylic paint, diamond dust, glitter and found objects -- in a recently restored area called the Incoming Train Room at Grand Central Terminal in Manhattan.
The assemblage, called "Golden Lamp/ Golden Land," can be seen near Tracks 39 through 42 from now until at least Jan. 4.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Stuyvesant Square; Going Home, Going Home, Dvorak Is Going Home
Corroded and coated with a heavy green patina, a bronze statue of the Czech composer Antonin Dvorak has been relegated to the roof of Avery Fisher Hall for three decades.
But in honor of the centenary of Dvorak's three-year stay in this city, where he composed the New World Symphony, the New York Philharmonic has agreed to give the statue to the Dvorak American Heritage Association.


To the Victor -- and Her Relatives -- Go the Prizes
GIFTS flow from Janice Strell this time of year.
She just doesn't know what she is giving or which relatives are receiving.
Except for the new car she bought for her son Jeff and his wife, Debra.
"They'll be picking that up any day now," she said.
Her other gifts to loved ones -- the trips to the Super Bowl and the Mets training camp, the $5,000 watch, the computer and the CD players -- all arrived unexpectedly.
As did the 52 jars of Francesco Rinaldi Spaghetti Sauce.
"I handed them out at the family seder," she said.
Mrs.
Strell, of Jericho, is as surprised as her relatives with her gifts because she doesn't buy them.
She wins them.
An obsessive sweepstakes enterer, she spends her spare time filling out forms and mailing them out.
But instead of putting her name on the entry blanks, she puts relatives' names.
"I look at the prize and decide who would like it," she said.
"The other day she asked me if I'd rather have a Lincoln Continental or a Town Car," Mrs.
Strell's husband, Hyman, said.
After his wife won a Chevrolet last month for their daughter-in-law, Mr.
Strell takes this kind of question seriously.
"I decided on a Town Car," he said. 'Don't Know Who's Getting What'
With a philosophy of "it's better to give than to receive," Mrs.
Strell enters contests for others.
Which makes for interesting gift giving.
"I don't know who's getting what, when," she said.
Her sweepstakes passion started about 15 years ago.
"My kids had started college," she said, "and I had sent away for a sweepstakes newsletter. I started filling out entries in the children's names. I did it to keep in touch with them, and get them some crazy things."
Before that, the Strells had led a normal existence with the post offices of Nassau County.
Married 39 years, they have lived in their split-level for 32.
They raised three children, Jeff, Barbara and Martin.
Mr.
Strell was an engineer at Sperry.
In his spare time he obtained a doctorate.
Now retired from one career, he has begun another, as a substitute mathematics teacher.
He tries to work that into his schedule, between mailing his wife's entries at different post offices and buying her stamps.
"I do it for her," he said.
"I'm a statistician. I know what the chances of winning sweepstakes are."
Yet his wife defies those odds.
With her long brown ponytail and engaging giggle, Mrs.
Strell seems the high school cheerleader frozen in a middle-age body.
Perhaps her positive attitude produces her winning ways.
She was a laboratory technician before her sweepstakes career began and appropriately enough now works for a bank.
Before the entry blank and 3 X 5-card filling, her spare time had been spent "volunteering for everything," she said, "the P.T.A., the temple sisterhood, the Girl Scouts, the Boy Scouts."
Then came the day when The Readers Digest and the Publishers Clearing House sweepstakes took on new meaning.
"If they send to me, I'll send it back," she said.
Not satisfied to wait for the mail, she began seeking out sweepstakes entries.
"I started with skill contests," she said.
"I never won a thing. Oh, I did win honorable mention once. I used a quote from Dr. Seuss for something. I won a piggy bank."
It was like lining up the three cherries on the slot machine and hearing the coins drop out.
"I really enjoyed getting something in the mail," she said.
Then she realized that she could receive even more enjoyment if her relatives' mailboxes filled up, thanks to her.
The problem with that is the relatives don't always know the prizes are from her.
"I went to my brother-in-law's 70th birthday," she said, "and his grandson walked in wearing a Mets uniform. My niece said, 'Oh, Justin must have entered something.' He was the Mets batboy for a day, and he got the uniform." Mrs.
Strell was crestfallen.
"I said: 'Justin didn't enter that contest. I did. For him.' "
It may be better to give than to receive, but it's also nice to know that you gave.
With Mrs.
Strell's hobby, that is not always the case.
So sometimes when a sweepstakes offers a prize like 365 coupons for M &amp; M candies, she enters in her own name.
Then when she wins -- she always seems to win something -- she can hand out the M &amp; M's.
Or the other assorted merchandise that she has won and stored in her house.
The new gas grill may go to a son.
But other relatives be advised.
These are some gifts you may receive this holiday season.
Sharing the couch with Mrs.
Strell one recent evening were a Miller Beer fanny pack, a "Beverly Hills 90210" calendar, a King Cobra Beer black jacket, a Boca West black baseball cap and twin baby dolls from Mattel.
Her husband may get the deluxe coffee pot.
"I have no idea where I won it," she said.
"I don't keep records of what I enter. Things just arrive in the mail." And not because she sends out hundreds of entries for each contest.
"I only allocate $2 of postage per sweepstake," she said.
"That's seven envelopes or 11 post cards. You have to budget. I spend about $2,000 a year. But I figure I come out even in prizes." At least family members do.
The sweepstakes expert has advice for those who wish to follow her unconventional trail of gift giving.
"It's important to scatter the mailings over the life of the sweepstakes," she said.
And scatter the entries over various post offices.
"That way they don't arrive in the same mailbag," she said.
It also might help to have a semiretired mate who can take care of the mailings and buy the commemorative stamps.
Do unusual stamps help?
"They can't hurt," Mrs.
Strell said.
The statistician, Mr.
Strell, said there were no statistics on whether interesting stamps or colorful envelopes helped win sweepstakes.
But his wife said: "Why not put on stamps that pretty up an envelope? I think it helps with the local contests." It may be hard to resist those stamps and Mrs.
Strell's neat little handwriting.
"Oh, you must write the envelopes by hand," she said.
"The rules say don't type, and you must follow the rules. You have to read them very carefully. Some are limited to age, sex, location." None of which matter to Mrs.
Strell, because she has sufficient relatives to meet every age, sex and location requirement.
"Want to see my mailing for tomorrow?" she asked.
For those whose sweepstakes knowledge is limited to Irish racehorses it is a revelation.
Out come 30 envelopes, all neatly addressed.
There is the Les Paul Giveaway, the North Shore Animal League sweepstakes and giveaways from liquor and soap companies.
"You have to keep plugging away," Mrs.
Strell said.
But novices beware.
"A legitimate sweepstakes never asks for money," she said.
Finding legitimate sweepstakes forms is easy.
"They're everywhere, once you know where to look," she said.
Her son Jeff, of Mineola, looked in a record shop.
"He's a guitarist," she said.
"He saw this TDK sweepstakes entry blank to win a car and he brought it to me. Everybody in the family looks for sweepstakes and brings them back to mother."
Why not fill them out themselves?
"Because nobody is as crazy as mother," Mr.
Strell said.
"Jeff gives me the entries with one hand and laughs with the other," Mrs.
Strell said.
"So I put the car-entry blank in his wife's name. Then it won. So now it's her car." Mrs.
Strell had the last sweepstakes laugh on that one.
As well as the time that her husband picked up the telephone, and a man from Traffic Magazine asked for Mrs.
Strell.
"I told him, 'My wife isn't interested in Traffic Magazine,' " Mr.
Strell recalled.
"And he said: "That's funny.
She was interested enough to enter one of our sweepstakes.
I'm calling to tell her she won a CD player.' "
"I won a watch for my sister," Mrs.
Strell said.
"It was a man's watch. So my sister said maybe she should give it to her daughter's boyfriend. But before she did she called up the company to find out how much the watch was worth. Then she called me. She said: 'I'm keeping the watch. They are only 11 of them in existence. It's worth $5,000!' "
Mrs.
Strell has "given" her nephew a bicycle, her niece a computer and her sons trips to the Mets camp in Port St.
Lucie, Fla., and the Super Bowl in Miami.
Recently she got her husband a miniature television set.
"Or maybe you won that," she said to him.
"No, you won it at the bank," he replied. "Wasn't it a second-chance drawing?"
"Well, it doesn't matter," she said. "We won two. I gave the other to my son."
To be a true sweepstake winner, Mrs.
Strell said, "you have to win a trip, a car and money."
"We're still waiting for the money," she said.
A purist, she doesn't count a $25 gift certificate from Pathmark.
It would be wonderful, she said, if the money arrived in a relative's mailbox this holiday season.
If not, she can always send some of the prize T-shirts she keeps piled in the spare bedroom.
The Perrier and Ronzoni one is especially appealing.
"My family has never bought a T-shirt," she said.
"We wear them as nightgowns. We use them for rags."
Perhaps the family has gotten a bit blase about all the winning.
"Perhaps," Mrs.
Strell said.
"They win a T-shirt, they don't call."


A Solution for Noise: A Machine That Hums
To the Editor:
I have a solution to the problem raised in your Nov. 14 article, "Turn Down the Volume!" Some years ago, overwhelmed by street noises and noisy tenants, I bought one of those machines that hums and keeps out noise while it lulls you into sleep.
It changed my life.


In Hartford: Moving From The Firehouse To City Hall
THE past month was a grand and glorious time for Hartford firefighter Michael P. Peters.
People hailed him on the street or ran up to pump his hand.
He was invited to the Hartford Civic Center to take part in a ceremony for basketball legend Larry Bird.
He flipped the coin to start the annual Thanksgiving Day football game between Hartford Public and Weaver High Schools.


Fresh Food, Fresh Ideas at a Market
On Jan. 2, an old meat-packing plant in a stretch of old warehouses along the Hudson River at 125th Street will get a new tenant: an enormous discount fresh-food market called By Choice.
Sandwiched between the river and the abandoned and partly dismantled West Side Highway, the store is the first arrival in an area that has been the focus of a long-delayed development plan called Harlem-on-the-Hudson.


Security System Is Failing Tests In High Schools
At a time of growing concern about violence and weapons in schools, the New York City Board of Education has spent at least $38 million on a high-tech security system that, school and union officials say, is a year overdue, susceptible to vandalism and too complex for many school employees to operate.
The system, ordered for some troubled New York City high schools in the days after the hallway murder of two students at Thomas Jefferson High last year, consists of a complex system of automatically locking doors and computerized alarms in 42 high schools.


In America; A Philadelphia Story
Phyllis Lawrence knew something was up when the kids started clamoring for Time magazine.
These were high school youngsters in Philadelphia who had been used to hanging on street corners and being cool, gossiping night and day about who was having whose baby and the latest casualties of neighborhood combat.
They were not much interested in school, were even less interested in reading, and generally ignored the proposition that there was a future for which they should be prepared.


Ways to Fix Fennel While It's at Its Best
FENNEL looks rather like a bulbous head of celery, but it has a faint taste of anise.
It is at its peak at the holiday season, when it is delicious served raw with grainy slivers of Parmesan cheese, goat's cheese or prosciutto, or dipped into lemon juice and extra-virgin olive oil.
Fennel also goes well with meat and fish and can be cooked the same way as celery.
Matthew Kenney, chef at the recently opened Matthew's Restaurant on the Upper East Side in Manhattan, tosses diced fennel in a lemon coriander vinaigrette made with walnut oil.
He serves this as a first course with a tuna tartar and a tapenade of green olives, which he accompanies with toast flavored with caraway seeds.


HARD SELL
Photos from early filmstrips may provide a good hook for disenchanted commentary.
However, having been privileged as a young man to work with Jamison Handy, I can tell you that he and his colleagues stressed consultative selling, product knowledge, consumer satisfaction and high principles of conduct.
WILLIAM H. SANDY Troy, Mich.


In Haiti, a Growing Disillusionment With Clinton
People in this sleepy seaside town celebrated the election of Bill Clinton last year.
Like Haitians throughout this country, they saw the election as presaging the quick restoration of democracy here and the return of the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Braving beatings by soldiers who pursued those who dared speak to outsiders visiting this town, people continued to praise Mr.
Clinton even after he broke a campaign vow not to return Haitian refugees fleeing their country.
The most common explanation for Mr.
Clinton's continued popularity was that if Washington would bring democracy back to Haiti, as it had pledged, little else mattered.


Q and A
Fees and Reviews For a Sublease Q. We are the owners of a co-op apartment and we have had the same tenant subleasing the apartment for three years.
We followed all of the rules and regulations of the building sublet policy by filing all necessary papers and paying $100 each year.
We also pay $25 monthly along with our maintenance for the privilege of having a tenant.


Susan B. Klein, David Berkowitz
Susan Barrie Klein, a daughter of Dr.
David E. Klein of Shaker Heights, Ohio, and Joanne M. Klein of Beachwood, Ohio, and David Benjamin Berkowitz, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome Berkowitz of New York, were married last evening.
Cantor Sarah J. Sager officiated at Fairmount Temple in Beachwood.
The bride, 31, is the vice president of human resources for the global finance technology division of Citibank in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master's degree in industrial and labor relations from Cornell University.
Her father is the director of the urology division at St.
Luke's Medical Center in Cleveland.
Her mother is a consultant at Jensen Travel, a travel agency in Shaker Heights.


Soviet Space Papers Going on Sale
An auction next month of the more prized technological remains of the Soviet Union will include once-secret notebooks and diaries of space officials that historians say should provide insights into early Soviet successes and failures on the new space frontier.
In another reverberation of the Soviet Union's collapse and the end of the cold war, the documents are among dozens of artifacts being offered for sale by former Russian officials, engineers and astronauts and also by financially pressed government agencies.
The sale is being held on Dec. 11 at Sotheby's, the international auction house, in Manhattan.


On Language; Only the Factoids
"What on earth is a factoid?" demands Jane Duggan, M.D., of Atlanta.
"I have seen this word on CNN as a heading for a few lines of quasi-truthful information. I cannot locate it in my computer's spell-checker. Does a factoid resemble a fact as a deltoid resembles a delt, or as a sesmoid (a bone in the wrist) resembles a sesm?"
Barry Osborne gets a bone in the wrist about this word, too: "CNN Headline News from time to time prints factoid on the top of the screen," he writes from Santa Barbara, Calif., "followed by some bit of arcane trivia. I think they mean factlet, 'a brief fact,' because the ending -oid implies only 'similar to' or 'like' the foregoing element." He adds ominously: "Psychology Today used to similarly misuse factoid. I wrote 'em about it, and shortly after, they went bust."


Stunned Students Mourn 2 Who Died, Apparently in Suicide
Students at Ward Melville High School gathered at memorial services to mourn two classmates who apparently committed suicide on Thursday.
The bodies of Ellen Liu, 16 years old, and Mili Subudhi, 15, were cremated this morning, less than two days after they lay on the tracks of the Long Island Rail Road and were hit by a train.


Terriers' Perfect Season Succumbs in Idaho, 21-14
The University of Idaho had a healthy quarterback for the complete game in Doug Nussmeier, while Boston University went through three different signal-callers in the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I-AA quarterfinal playoffs yesterday afternoon at Kibbie Dome in Moscow, Idaho.
The Idaho Vandals, ranked 11th in the country, beat the No. 6 and previously undefeated Terriers, 21-14, to advance to next Saturday's semifinals.


Venezuela Votes Today, Cautioned by Clinton
Buffeted by two military coup attempts, a presidential resignation and plummeting economic performance in the last two years, Venezuela's voters are to choose a new President on Sunday.
For the United States, political volatility in South America's oldest democracy is a matter of concern.
Venezuela controls the largest oil reserves outside the Persian Gulf and is the United States' largest source of imported oil after Saudi Arabia.


Students Dissent On Football Article
I feel that the article about Division Avenue parents being loudmouths is wrong.
I don't know what game you were watching, but I thought that the game was fine and that the crowd was not rowdy.


Reading Made Easy
The battery-operated Star Case Lite-A-Mag makes it possible to read a map in the car at night or decipher a railway timetable in minuscule print.
The case, slightly larger than palm-size, has two buttons on either side; push once and a 2-inch square magnifying glass pops out; push again, and a light goes on.
It's $9.95 plus $3.75 shipping from Traveller's Bookstore, 22 West 52d Street, New York, N.Y. 10019; or call (800) 755-8728.


Gardening
CAN it be that publishers have finally done some weeding, and are now producing more garden books that are truly useful?
Certainly it's a pleasure this holiday season to find such a praiseworthy harvest, with something for nearly every gardening passion.
Those whose shelf space is limited, but who yearn for a single-volume reference book, will rejoice at THE AMERICAN HORTICULTURAL SOCIETY ENCYCLOPEDIA OF GARDENING (Dorling Kindersley, $59.95), edited by Christopher Brickell.
While no garden book should claim (as this one does) to be the "definitive" guide, Mr.
Brickell's extremely thorough, two-inch-thick, densely packed tome comes remarkably close.
What it lacks in lilting prose is more than compensated for in clarity, with much straightforward advice on a multitude of subjects.
The first 16 chapters cover the creation of a garden, from early planning through learning about shrubs, perennials, topiary, water and rock gardens.
The last eight chapters delve into the dirt, with notes on soils, fertilizers and tools, as well as entries on plant problems and the elements of basic botany.
Many of the several thousand photographs illustrate step-by-step instructions: planting a moss-lined hanging basket, for example, or laying random paving for a path.
Although this ambitious book originated in England, the publishers have successfully Americanized it.


How Much Cap'n Crunch Can One Man Eat?
Blue Man Group took on the art world in late 1991 when the three satirists opened in "Tubes," at the Astor Place Theater.


Playing Close to the Bone in 'Six Degrees'
Donald Sutherland has played sinister villains, off-the-wall oddballs and anguished heroes, but rarely in his 63 film performances has he played a character so uncomfortably like himself.
In "Six Degrees of Separation," the film version of the 1990 John Guare play about a young man who cons an Upper East Side couple, he is Flan Kittredge, a high-class art dealer who has turned his love of painting into commerce.
Mr.
Sutherland, a serious actor, hawks Volvos in voice-overs for television advertisements.


An Array of Concerts For the Holiday Season
WHAT could be the busiest concert week of the year begins with a pair of free programs at 2 o'clock today: members of the Connecticut Classical Guitar Society will be performing at the Connecticut Historical Society in Hartford (call 249-7041 for details); at Sprague Memorial Hall in New Haven, conducting fellows Steven Lipsitt, Hiroyuki Shimizu, Clotilde Otranto and Eric Lindholm will take turns leading the Yale Repertory Orchestra in music of Tchaikovsky, Prokofiev, Wagner and Stravinsky (432-4157).
At 4 P.M. two choral programs await: In the United Congregational Church of Bridgeport, Richard Erickson will lead the Connecticut Chamber Choir in a program featuring Benjamin Britten's "A Ceremony of Carols" and including an assortment of early sacred pieces plus modern arrangements of traditional carols (870-2312 or 438-7228).


Editors' Note
An article in The Times Magazine last Sunday about Nazi memorabilia referred incompletely to a dealer in such materials.
He is the elder Livio Cillo, of Darlington, Md.
His son Livio W. Cillo 3d, an antiques dealer in Bethedsa, Md., and Alexandria, Va., has never dealt in Nazi memorabilia.


Learning to Screen Drugged Drivers on Nassau Roads
Officer Lisa Nilsson suspected immediately that there was something wrong with the young driver who blocked traffic and made an illegal U-turn in Massapequa late Friday night.
After pulling him over, she smelled alcohol on his breath and saw that he was glassy-eyed.
His speech was slightly slurred, and he had trouble completing the "walk and turn" portion of the standard sobriety test, she said.
But back at the Nassau County Police Headquarters an hour later, a breath test measured the 17-year-old's blood alcohol at just .02 percent, less than half the level required for a charge of driving while impaired, and a far cry from being drunk.


The Dinosaur Within
'To my mind, it is likely that what we now understand as the mass media will be gone within 10 years.
Vanished without a trace."
That's the novelist Michael Crichton writing in the current issue of Wired, a magazine that hopes to usher in the digital revolution with as clean a sweep as the journal Iskra did the Russian.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CELEBRATING ANGELS
"Angels in New Canaan," a fanciful exhibition at Hastings Art Ltd. in New Canaan through Dec. 31, displays artists' interpretations of angels from the 16th through the 20th century in an infinite variety of materials.
As messengers, guides and guardians for mortals, angels have appeared in every major culture and religion, subdivided into numerous categories of angels, archangels, powers, seraphs, thrones, cherubim, splendors and so on.
Among the cultures represented in this show, in addition to the United States, are the Caribbean, Austrian, Russian, Italian, Latin American, Polish, German and French.
There is a 17th-century French Renaissance drawing of an ascending angel, a 19th-century Italian pre-Raphaelite gladiator-angel, one of William Blake's fallen angels, two of Amos Ferguson's African angels, cherubs from Connecticut's Impressionist School and angels by contemporary Russian artists reminiscent of medieval Russian iconography.


Frustrations Of Buying CD's
To the Editor:
Owen Edwards's entertaining design analysis of the compact disk case ("Cracking the Case," Nov. 21) was too limited, dealing primarily with the ease of removal.
How about trying to purchase CD's?
The manufacturers have neglected to put the name of the artist and album on top of the package for browsing, rather than on the spine.
This is especially frustrating when artists are grouped alphabetically.


NOV. 28-DEC. 4: A Gangster's Death; End of the Hunt: The King of Cocaine Goes Down Shooting
Pablo Escobar Gaviria died a South American gangster's death.
Cornered on a red-tiled rooftop in Medellin, Colombia's king of cocaine went down firing his 9-millimeter Magnum pistols at surrounding troops.
But if a movie is made, the story line will not resemble "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid."


His Troupe Dances Its Thanks to Alvin Ailey
THE ALVIN AILEY AMERICAN Dance Theater turned 35 this year.
Never one to miss a party, the troupe will open its monthlong season at City Center on Wednesday with a celebration featuring more celebrities than ever and a large complement of former Ailey dancers.
But there will also be an unusual new work on the program.
Called "Hymn," the dance was created this year by Judith Jamison, the former Ailey star who now directs the company, and Anna Deavere Smith, the actress and writer.
The heart of the new work is a libretto written by Ms.
Smith, who came to national prominence last year with "Fires in the Mirror," a vivid and sensitive examination of racial hatred based on interviews conducted with blacks and Jews in Crown Heights in Brooklyn, where riots occurred in 1991.


Susan K. Ryan, Edward C. Forst
Susan Kelly Ryan, a vice president of the Bankers Trust Company in New York, was married yesterday to Edward Codd Forst, a managing director of the bank.
The Rev.
Henry Pedzich performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
James Church in Cazenovia, N.Y.
Mrs.
Forst, 28, graduated cum laude from Yale University.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the daughter of Susan C. Ryan of Manlius, N.Y., and the late John P. Ryan.


In a Season of Uncertainty, Bonilla Hears Rumors
One season ended with Joe Carter's home run, and now a new one has begun -- the season for transactions and changes, when agents, owners and general managers shuffle players around the leagues like so many pieces on a chessboard.
So it was no surprise yesterday that when the Mets' Bobby Bonilla brought together a virtual All-Star team to participate in a bowling tournament to benefit the National Hispanic Scholarship Fund, many of the conversations were filled with varying degrees of anticipation and trepidation and, at times, resignation.


Stacy Silverman and David Chaikin
Stacy Ellen Silverman, the director of special sales for Running Press, a book publisher, was married last evening to Dr.
David Craig Chaikin, a second-year resident in urology at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.
Both work in Philadelphia.
Rabbi Ephraim Rubinger performed the ceremony at the Woodbury (L.I.) Jewish Center.


Separate Classes for Girls Aren't the Answer
To the Editor:
"To Help Girls Keep Up: Math Class Without Boys" (front page, Nov. 24) draws attention to the increasingly well-recognized problem of girls' underrepresentation in math and science in our schools.
Those of us who specialize in gender equity in education have ambivalent feelings about such segregated classes, as Sue Baily of Wellesley College noted.
On the one hand, they do work.
In these settings girls tend to be more enthusiastic and tend to continue with additional courses.
It's hard to argue with success, but on the other hand, the classes are segregated.
It's just as hard to favor segregation.


A Snowball Effect: Lights Galore. And More. And More.
EVERY city and town seems to have one. At least one.
It is the house down the street that, long before any geese start a-laying, begins a metamorphosis, changing from ordinary home to winter wonderland.
Lights start twinkling.
Plastic Santas or giant menorahs appear on the lawn.
Fake snow lines the window panes.
And, to the delight of some neighbors and the horror of others, that may be only the beginning.


Review/Music; Whim and Logic in a Risky Program
That it happened at all represents a kind of heroism.
To put on a Monteverdi opera, follow it with a major piece by John Cage and then two vastly complex ones by Varese and Morton Feldman required a large and various instrumental force, skillful conducting, lots of rehearsal time, a not inexpensive rental hall and money to pay for all of the above.
The histories of organizations like the S.E.M.
Ensemble make it clear that the path to Saturday's concert at Alice Tully Hall was not easy and the means not easily come by.
This was the Orchestra of the S.E.M.
Ensemble, a two-year-old enlargement by the composer Petr Kotik of his original smaller band.
Mr.
Kotik and his colleagues had also to fight off the weather: a fierce rain that delayed the concert for a number of minutes but could not keep away an audience of respectable size and high enthusiasm.


Herminio Traviesas; NBC Censor, 79
Herminio Traviesas, an NBC censor between 1969 and 1979, died Friday in the John F. Kennedy Hospital in Atlantis, Fla.
He was 79.
The cause of death was a stroke, said a friend, William Mehlich.


States Aren't Bound By 2d Amendment?
To the Editor:
One can sympathize with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's appeal to get guns off New York streets, but his legal reasoning is most strange (letter, Nov. 26).
He argues that the Second Amendment does not apply to the states.
And that even the 14th Amendment does not prevent states from ignoring the provision of the right to bear arms; it only prevents the Federal Government from doing so.


Times Mirrors Family Ties Fade
Management changes announced last week at the Times Mirror Company accelerated an evolution that is changing one of the largest family-dominated media empires in the country.
The company's president, David Laventhol, said he was stepping down and two senior vice presidents were given new responsibilities and titles in what was widely seen as the start of a competition over who will succeed the company's chairman, Robert F. Erburu, who is 63 and is expected to retire in two years.


Woman Sues In Rigging Of Evidence By Troopers
A woman who spent two years in jail after state police investigators fabricated evidence against her is suing New York State for wrongful arrest and conviction, according to previously undisclosed court documents.
The suit, seeking $500 million, is the first civil claim to arise from an evidence-tampering case that has rocked the New York State Police since the summer of 1992.
Three investigators have admitted fabricating fingerprint evidence in more than two dozen criminal cases, and three others are awaiting trial.


Doctors Split on Health Plan
At a meeting of the American Medical Association, criticism clashed with caution when it came to the President's proposal.
Page A14.


Ilana Hoschander and Stuart Goldberg
Ilana Ruth Hoschander, a daughter of Dr.
Fred and Aviva Hoschander of Jamaica, Queens, was married yesterday to Stuart Victor Goldberg, a son of Barbara and Hirsh Goldberg of Pikesville, Md.
Rabbi Scott Steinman, the bridegroom's brother-in-law, officiated at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The bride is an associate at Schulte Roth &amp; Zabel, a law firm in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Queens College and received her law degree from New York University.
Her father, now retired, was a physician in private practice in Massapequa, L.I.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A survey says that cause-oriented campaigns don't just make people feel good, they work, too.
CONSUMERS consider advertising and promotional campaigns that try to do well by doing good to be believable and effective, according to the results of what is thought to be the first comprehensive survey of public attitudes about this increasingly popular marketing trend.
Among the 1,981 people interviewed for the national survey, 66 percent said it was somewhat or very acceptable for companies to participate in what is known as cause-related marketing or point-of-purchase politics.
By contrast, 17 percent said it was not very, or not at all, acceptable; the remaining 17 percent said it depended or they did not know.


Television
IT is said that winning isn't everything. But try telling that to a television network.
Last week, when the November sweep came to an end, the broadcast networks practically tripped over one another in their rush to proclaim victory.
In news conferences Thursday, each offered a set of select statistics intended to show how it had triumphed while its rivals had stumbled.
Together, they offered more spin than a Tilt-a-Whirl.


Margaret Landon Is Dead at 90; Wrote of Court Life in Old Siam
Margaret Landon, whose novel "Anna and the King of Siam" was the inspiration for the Broadway musical "The King and I," died on Saturday at the Hermitage retirement home in Alexandria, Va.
She was 90.
Although Mrs.
Landon spent more than 10 years in Siam, now Thailand, it was not her story, but that of Anna Leonowens, that was the basis for Mrs.
Landon's 1944 book.
While living in Siam, Mrs.
Landon discovered the autobiographical books by Anna Leonowens, a Welsh widow who was a governess, teacher and secretary in the court of King Mongkut in the 1860's.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10 PLAN TO AVERT U.S. MISSILES
The Pentagon has drafted a plan to aim United States nuclear missiles at the open seas and is talking with Russian generals about a possible joint move to turn missiles away from their cold war targets.
A1


Finally, Giants Get Some Respect
The talk was always that the Giants were a good team, but -- wink, wink -- have you seen their schedule?
People were saying: Where are the good teams, where are the title contenders?
And you saw what happened when they did play a good team.
Blowout in Dallas.
Loss in Buffalo.
Feeling as if they needed to beat the Roman Army to get a pat on the back, the Giants had a chip on their shoulder the size of Idaho today.
So they came into this game against the Miami Dolphins looking for a little respect, and now, finally, they may get it.
The score wasn't indicative of how the Giants dominated the Dolphins in just about every phase of the game.
Thanks to a defense that bent but didn't break, great special-teams play and a new offensive scheme put in this week called "Big 00," the Giants got that respect by beating the Dolphins, 19-14, at Joe Robbie Stadium.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about Ukraine's efforts to build its own military misidentified the subject of a statue on a military base.
The statue is of Bogdan Khmelnitsky, a 17th-century Cossack leader.


Books of The Times; Religious Drama in a Political Setting
No Other Life  By Brian Moore  223 pages. Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $21.
In his latest novel, "No Other Life," the Canadian writer Brian Moore tells a story of such relevance to current political events that one can read it almost as background to yesterday's headlines.
The story traces the rise to power of Jean-Paul Cantave, a charismatic figure of lowly origins who challenges the corrupt leadership of the Caribbean island of Ganae.


New F.C.C. Chief Looks Beyond the Corporations
Reed E. Hundt got a sobering lesson in tough challenges in June.
As part of a group hiking to the 14,410-foot summit of Mount Rainier in Washington State, Mr.
Hundt found himself exhausted and gasping for oxygen at 12,800 feet.
The guide told him he had reached his "personal summit," and ordered him to sit tight while the rest of the group went on to the top.
Now Mr.
Hundt is pursuing a new "personal summit," and says he has no idea yet how far he will get.
Last Monday, he was sworn in as chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, becoming chief regulator of the nation's airwaves and a central figure in shaping the broader revolution in telecommunications.


3 Editors Go to Esquire
Executives at K-III Communications are not very happy with the former New York magazine editor Edward Kosner, who left recently to become editor in chief of Esquire.
They said they thought they had an understanding that he would not take any of his editorial staff with him, at least not for the first month or so.
But three contributing editors -- John Taylor, Jeannette Walls and Julie Baumgold -- have already jumped ship to Esquire, which is owned by Hearst Magazines.


Corrections
A map yesterday with an article about disappointment with Washington's efforts to restore democracy in Haiti mislocated the town of Leogane in some editions.
It is about 20 miles west of Port-au-Prince, not east of it.


Clinton Gently Chides Hollywood on Violence
President Clinton issued a gentle admonition to Hollywood on Saturday night to be more conscious of its influence on American society and the the dangers carried by violent entertainment.
Mr.
Clinton said repeatedly at a star-studded reception that he was not asking Hollywood to do away with violence in its films and television.
But he urged actors, film makers and executives to do more to provide positive role models for young people who lack a firm moral grounding.


Albany Lags on DNA Testing for Paternity
To the Editor:
DNA testing has won the approval of the general public as well as of government agencies and many courts.
A surprising holdout is the New York State Health Department.


2 Men Rob and Burn Video Store in Bronx
Two men robbed a video store in the Bronx yesterday and then set it on fire, apparently trying to burn a store employee to death, but he escaped, the police said.
The men set the fire after robbing about $250 from the LPH Video Club on West 182d Street in the Fordham section, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
The fire destroyed the store, but only one person was injured, he said.


Getting Over Chaos in Russia
In elections this Sunday, President Boris Yeltsin is hoping Russia's voters will support his new constitution and send his backers to Parliament.
Americans might hope for a little more: the election of new leaders to Parliament and regional councils who are determined to keep Russia on the road to democracy.
The new constitution, if adopted after full debate, could help nurture that democracy, and quiet political disorder, by setting new rules of the game.
And more backers of Mr.
Yeltsin's brand of reform could help him mightily.
But neither result can guarantee that the struggle against the old order, and the old guard that ran it, won't again spill out of the Parliament and into the streets.


Jets' Marshall Is Out for Year
Leonard Marshall, the Jets' starting defensive tackle, broke his left forearm in two places today during the Jets' 9-6 loss to the Indianapolis Colts and will likely miss the remainder of the season.
Marshall was taken to Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan, where surgery was to be performed tonight by Dr.
Elliot Hershman and Dr.
Steven Nicholas of the Jets' medical staff.


DANCE IN REVIEW
'City of God' Jeff McMahon Bessie Schonberg Theater Jeff McMahon is a funny, agile poet of a performance artist.
And the first third of his new "City of God," which opened on Thursday night, is exhilarating.


Essay; Looking Beyond Peace
"There's a story behind every one of those ornaments," said Richard Nixon, looking more robust than he has in years, showing me the Christmas tree in his home.
Lest sentiment intrude, he quickly turned to the purpose of my annual visit: a review, parts on the record, of what's ahead.
Stacked on his desk is the manuscript of his latest book.
On the 20th of next month (the 25th anniversary of his first Inaugural Address), the 37th President, who will then be 81, will bring out "Beyond Peace." The theme of this 150-pager -- likely to be his eighth nonfiction best seller, a publishing record -- is: "After peace breaks out, we usually have periods of stagnation; we must find challenges as stimulating as war."


Ann Cummings, William Kissinger
Ann Devlin Cummings, a daughter of Mrs.
Ellis Cummings of Providence, R.I., and Robert Cummings of Little Compton, R.I., was married yesterday in San Francisco to William David Kissinger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter B. Kissinger of Huntington, L.I.
Judge Marilyn H. Patel of Federal District Court in San Francisco performed the ceremony at the Palace of Fine Arts.
Ms.
Cummings, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Brown University, and she and her husband received law degrees from the University of California at Berkeley.
She is a lawyer for the Pacific Gas and Electric Company in San Francisco.
The bride's father is the president of Brown, Lisle/Cummings Inc., an investment company in Providence.


School Meals
The number of free or reduced-price lunches served in the region's schools continues to climb, and breakfast programs for pupils are expanding as part of the federal government's $4 billion-a-year National School Lunch Program.
At the same time, the number of paid lunches has fallen, in what state officials call a sign of families' economic struggles.
In total, the number of breakfasts served has jumped 35 percent in four years, propelled by heightened concerns about nutrition and educators' belief that it's hard for children to do well if they haven't had something to eat.


CHRONICLE
Every year on Christmas Day, Britons gather round their television sets to watch Queen ELIZABETH II deliver her Yuletide message, a tradition that dates to 1932 when King George V broadcast on the wireless.
Her message, which relates to events of the past year and the year to come, usually has some spiritual component.
This year she faces competition from "The Alternative Queen's Message" by QUENTIN CRISP .
Mr.
Crisp, the flamboyant writer and raconteur, who immigrated here from England in 1981, recently played the Queen's forebear, Queen Elizabeth I, in the film "Orlando."


DANCE IN REVIEW
'Night Train' Amy Sue Rosen and Derek Bernstein St. Mark's Church


Black Police Group Is Seeking More Security for Gypsy Cabs
Citing the recent series of killings of taxi drivers, the group representing black New York City police officers accused the city yesterday of failing to protect gypsy and livery-cabdrivers, and it called for improving security for both the cabs and the officers charged with protecting them.
At a news conference outside City Hall, Eric Adams, chairman of the Grand Council of Guardians, which represents the black fraternal associations for each of the city's police forces, said the attacks had gone unchecked in part because "a large percentage of the drivers are minorities and they are serving mostly minority communities."


Patents
THE immune system is usually one of the body's most efficient and essential mechanisms.
It seeks out and destroys foreign substances like bacteria.
But sometimes T-cells, the soldiers of the immune system, go haywire and turn on healthy cells, causing diseases like multiple sclerosis and diabetes.
Or they attack a transplanted organ, prompting the body to reject it.
Under those circumstances, the immune system must be surpressed.


2 Die After Boat With 23 Aboard Sinks in a Chilly Chesapeake Bay
Two passengers died today and at least one other was in critical condition after a chartered fishing boat with 23 people aboard sank in high winds in Chesapeake Bay, the authorities said.
Some passengers spent up to two hours in the chilly waters before the Coast Guard could rescue them, officials said.


Bus Ridership Is Continuing Long Decline
Although the New York City Transit Authority has managed to coax more riders onto the subways in recent years, it continues to struggle with a two-decade-long decline in bus ridership that shows no signs of ending.
From 1970 to 1992, annual ridership on the bus system, still the largest in the nation, fell by 331 million, or 42 percent to 451 million.
And by the end of this century the numbers are expected to slide even further.


Syria to Help Trace Fate of 7 Missing Israel Servicemen
In an unusual gesture of good will toward Israel, the President of Syria has agreed to help investigate the fate of seven Israeli servicemen missing in Lebanon since the 1980's, Secretary of State Warren Christopher announced tonight.
President Hafez al-Assad also pledged to issue exit visas to all remaining Syrian Jews by the end of the month, Mr.
Christopher told reporters after a nearly four-hour meeting with the Syrian leader at the presidential palace.


Cortlandt Schuyler; Former General, 92, Was NATO Officer
Gen.
Cortlandt Van Rensselaer Schuyler, who was a senior officer in the military arm of NATO and New York State's first Commissioner of General Services, died on Saturday at his home in San Antonio.
He was 92.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Lynne Strober, Jonathan Perelman
Lynne Strober, a partner in Mandelbaum, Salsburg, Gold, Lazris, Discenza &amp; Steinberg, a law firm in West Orange, N.J., and Jonathan Eric Perelman, the managing partner at Perelman, Hemmindinger &amp; Pill, an accounting firm in Morristown, N.J., were married yesterday.
Cantor Ellen Sussman officiated at the couple's home in Randolph, N.J.
Mrs.
Perelman is the daughter of Murray and Joan Strober of Passaic, N.J.
The bride graduated from Syracuse University and received her law degree from the Franklin Pierce Law Center.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


A Plan for Gates, a Call for Pickets; Bordering Newark, Maplewood Finds Proposal Causes a Rift
No wall or fence or gate stands between this pretty suburb and Newark, not yet anyway.
But the rift that seemed to develop between them last week is real and growing with each new report about a proposal to build several gates that many people thought were intended to separate Maplewood from the state's largest city.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 22 about restrictions on satellite dishes in China referred incorrectly to the Cable News Network.
It is not available on the Star TV Network in Asia.


A Reaction That Wasn't in the Script


Brown and Victory Elusive for Bills
Raiders 25, Bills 24
After letting the Los Angeles Raiders' Tim Brown catch 8 passes for 146 yards yesterday, the Buffalo Bills should have been able to locate him late in the game.
They didn't.
Brown's ninth catch went for 29 yards and a touchdown with 4 minutes 58 seconds left, giving Los Angeles a 25-24 victory at Orchard Park, N.Y.


Review/Theater; When Fantasy Meets Head On With Reality
"An Imaginary Life," which is the name of Peter Parnell's listless comedy at Playwrights Horizons, could also serve nicely as a title for Mr.
Parnell's collected works.
From the time of his first New York success in 1978 with "The Sorrows of Stephen" -- which portrayed a young man who patterned his pursuit of love after that of Goethe's Werther -- Mr.
Parnell has created a series of characters whose doggedly romantic world view is forever running up against an idealism-squashing reality.
His latest work is his most literal-minded examination of this tragi-comic clash.
The story of Matt Abelman, an Off Broadway dramatist with a potentially fatal melanoma, it portrays the writer's attempt to create a play that would exorcise the demons of both mortality and professional failure.
It too is called "An Imaginary Life." And the evening unfolds as an aspiringly Pirandellian counterpoint of reality and hopefully redemptive fantasy.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Consumer Credit . . .
Oct.
Wednesday Productivity 3d Qtr Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims Producer Prices . . .
Nov.
Friday  Consumer Prices . . .
Nov.


Short-Handed Sharpshooting: Messier Stokes Fire as Gartner Chills Devils
As a rule, the Rangers would prefer that Mark Messier not spend the final 14 minutes of a hockey game sitting in the penalty box.
That's where he was last night at Madison Square Garden, his helmet off and a towel clenched in his fists.
In what was a tense Rangers-Devils game, Messier had displayed an unusual amount of feistiness, and the referee had decided to slap him on the wrist.
Somehow, though, the captain still managed to make his teammates better, even without returning to the ice.


No Headline
She found out it was a boy last Monday.
They did a sonogram.
She was going to call it Justin Jonathan.
It was due on March 17.
When I heard the baby didn't make it. . . . -- SANDRA TORRES, whose pregnant daughter was shot by a robber as she fumbled for $2.  [ B1:3. ]


Violence by Settlers on West Bank Is Forcing Showdown With Rabin
Talal al-Bakri's living came from selling vegetables in Hebron.
His death came from traveling past this neighboring Jewish settlement.
Someone in a group of Israelis waving submachine guns here on Saturday put a bullet in his head.


Greta A. Pessin, Jay B. Ringel
Greta Anne Pessin, a daughter of Dr.
Sherman and Helen Pessin of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to Jay Bernard Ringel, the son of Clara Ringel of the Bronx and the late Emil Ringel.
Rabbi Melvin N. Sirner performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Ringel, 36, is a freelance television producer.
She graduated from the State University at Albany and received a master's degree in media from New York University.


Bond Traders Shrug Off Job Gains
With its response to the stronger- than-expected November job data reported on Friday, the bond market seemed to be saying, "O.K., we already know that the fourth quarter is going to be strong."
The increase in nonfarm payroll jobs of 208,000 was more than the consensus forecast of 180,000.
In addition, the factory workweek rose to 41.7 hours, a post-World War II high; construction jobs increased, and manufacturing jobs rose for a second month.


VOTE FRAUD FIGHT FLARING IN MEXICO
As the Government and its party seek to convince Mexicans that next year's national elections will be clean, political conflict is rising over what opposition parties say was blatant fraud in an important state vote last week.
The state election authorities announced today that the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party won by a landslide in the Nov. 28 gubernatorial race in the southeastern state of Yucatan.
On Saturday, they certified the party as having won the city hall in Merida, the state capital, by 2,341 votes out of more than 200,000 cast.


Charles Saatchi Quits Company's Board
Charles Saatchi, who with his brother, Maurice, co-founded the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. advertising empire, has resigned from the company's board and has been named to the new position of honorary president.


Stalemate Like a Victory for Sarajevo
The three-sided war in Bosnia is grinding to a stalemate on the ground, with each side weakened as winter draws on but fighting hard to gain or hold territory before maps are drawn for any possible peace settlement.
"In this war, we will have no winners," Gen.
Jovan Divjak, the Bosnian Army's deputy commander for operations, said this evening.


49ers Bump the Bengals, but Not All That Comfortably
49ers 21, Bengals 8
Ricky Watters ran for three touchdowns, two of which came after a failed fake punt by Cincinnati awakened the 49ers' offense, and San Francisco pulled out a 21-8 victory over the Bengals tonight at Candlestick Park.


Homelessness Prevented For an Immigrant Family
For five years after Gabrielli N. and her husband immigrated to the United States, New York City seemed to deliver all the golden promise it had offered when they dreamed about it in Tbilisi, Georgia.
The couple moved in with relatives, also emigres from the former Soviet Union, in Rego Park, Queens.
In what seemed like no time, Gabrielli's husband found work as a limousine driver, making enough to support both of them and their son.
They found a two-bedroom apartment, bought a television and furniture and even managed to save a little.


Finland's Opera Now Has A Home
In recent years, Finland, with composers like Aulis Sallinen, Joonas Kookonen, Einojuhani Rautavaara and Erik Bergman, has produced more operas of international distinction than any other country.
For a small nation on the northern fringes of Europe, that is a remarkable achievement.
Almost as remarkable has been the fact that up to this week, Finland has lacked a theater specifically designed for opera.
The two most prominent operatic entities in the country played in makeshift spaces: the Finnish National Opera in the 500-seat Alexander Theater, built in 1879 for the amusement of the Russian garrison stationed in Helsinki, and the Savonlinna Opera Festival in the temporarily covered courtyard of the 500-year-old Olavinlinna Castle.


Frank Zappa, Musical Iconoclast And Restless Innovator, Dies at 52
Frank Zappa, a composer, guitarist, band leader and producer who was rock's most committed iconoclast, died Saturday evening at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 52 years old.
The cause was prostate cancer, The Associated Press reported.


DANCE IN REVIEW
'Discovering the Beauty of Tokyo' Japan Folk-Dance Ensemble City Center


Henry J. Aboodi and Monica G. Marks
Monica Gail Marks and Henry Jonas Aboodi, investment bankers at Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company in New York, were married yesterday evening.
Rabbi Louis C. Gerstein officiated at the Rainbow Room in New York.
The bride, 31, is a daughter of Celia and Kalman Marks of Cleveland.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father, now retired, was a carpenter in Cleveland.


SPLIT ON STRATEGY AT A.M.A. MEETING
Top officials of the American Medical Association appealed to doctors today to show restraint in criticizing President Clinton's plan to overhaul the nation's health care system, even as members of the group vowed to seek major changes in the proposal.
At a meeting that displayed the group's divisions over tactics and strategy in the coming battle over the nation's health care system, Dr.
James S. Todd, executive vice president of the association, said, "We want to make policy, not politics."


An Arduous Climb on a Dreary Day


CHRONICLE
The other night at Judith's Room, a women's bookstore in Greenwich Village, several young women asked AMY SWERDLOW what relevance her book, "Women Strike for Peace," recently published by the University of Chicago Press, might have for them.
"I told them I wanted them to know how women once seized a historical moment and found their political voice," she said.
"I told them they don't have to reinvent the wheel."


DANCE IN REVIEW
'Night Train' Amy Sue Rosen and Derek Bernstein St. Mark's Church


Enduring Violence In a New Home
For one immigrant victim of domestic violence, the problems began as soon as she reunited with her husband in the United States last summer, nearly a year after their wedding in New Delhi.
"When I started opening my boxes, my husband said, 'You are not from a good family,' " said the woman, tears filling her eyes as she recalled the insult.
"He was expecting gold bracelets and pendants. I used to hear about dowries when I was growing up, but I never thought it would be an issue with me."


For Leading Magazines, a Newsstand Slump
Newsstand sales of leading magazines have declined sharply in the last decade, reflecting profound changes in the industry and in the way readers buy their magazines.
A report to be released this week by Vos, Gruppo &amp; Capell, investment bankers and direct-marketing consultants, found that total single-copy sales of 123 best-selling magazines had declined by more than one-third in 10 years.
In 1982, the magazines had total average newsstand sales of 70.5 million.
By 1992, sales had dropped to 46.5 million.
The decline was constant, with sales down every year from the year before.


Dividend Meetings


Stop Glossing Over Job Loss Impact
To the Editor:
Why do public policy advocates -- be it the North American Free Trade Agreement, health care reform, climate change options -- have to berate those citing obvious job losses as naysayers, even unpatriotic, when surely even if job gains in one city or state rise while others fall, there are job losses for a time and a place, and the people involved are hurt?


DANCE IN REVIEW
'City of God' Jeff McMahon Bessie Schonberg Theater Jeff McMahon is a funny, agile poet of a performance artist.
And the first third of his new "City of God," which opened on Thursday night, is exhilarating.


Women Tennis Pros Chose Cigarette Tie
To the Editor:
Billie Jean King correctly states that women tennis players who participate in events like the Virginia Slims tournament are not "being used" to promote smoking (letter, Dec. 2).


Congress Tinkers With Reform
When it finally dawned on Congress last year that its reputation was foundering on scandal, perks and gridlock, it created a special committee to propose reforms in the way it works.
The committee was to have reported by now.
It hasn't.
And, if all went according to plan, the Senate and House would have enacted a package before adjournment last month.
They didn't.
Reform is not dead, but neither is it robust.
For one thing, the committee's jointness came apart: The Senate members have one package and the House members another.
They match in some respects; for example, both recommend a two-year appropriations cycle instead of annual funding.
But that is not going to cure what's fundamentally wrong with Congress.


A Goat Becomes a Hero
Last Sunday, Shawn Jefferson of the San Diego Chargers evaded Eugene Daniel of the Indianapolis Colts and caught a pass for a 39-yard touchdown.
That started off the Chargers to a 31-0 victory, and Colts' fans, frustrated by their losing team, considered Daniel a goat.
Today, the goat became the hero.
With little more than a minute remaining in a 6-6 struggle against the Jets, Daniel intercepted Boomer Esiason's pass and set up Dean Biasucci's 38-yard field goal with one second left.
That gave the Colts a 9-6 upset victory over the Jets.


Reporter Disciplined for Reading His Co-workers' Electronic Mail
In a stunning example of growing concern over technology and privacy in the workplace, The Los Angeles Times has recalled a foreign correspondent from its Moscow bureau for snooping into the electronic mail of his colleagues.
The correspondent, Michael Hiltzik, a well-regarded journalist who joined The Times's Moscow bureau in August, is being reassigned to an undetermined position in Los Angeles as a disciplinary action, editors and reporters at the newspaper said.


Kohl's Party Suffers Big Setback In State Vote in Eastern Germany
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union suffered a major electoral setback today, adding to a sudden series of reverses for his Government.
The loss came in the eastern state of Brandenburg, the largest of five states carved out of the former East Germany.
Voters here chose municipal and regional officials in the first local election in eastern Germany since national unification three years ago.


Female Genital Mutilation Celebrates Only Male Social Power; Hardly a Joyous Event
To the Editor:
Maynard H. Merwine defends female clitoridectomy among the Kikuyu of Kenya by stressing the festivities of the initiation rite and claiming the sexual mutilation is itself a joyous occasion (letter, Nov. 24).


INSIDE
Bomb Injures Vienna Mayor
The Mayor of Vienna was wounded by a letter bomb, one of six bombs sent since Friday to Austrian advocates for refugees.
Page A3.
A Rift Between Communities
A proposal to put gates on some streets between Maplewood, N.J., and Newark has exposed the divisions between the two communities.
Page B1.
A2 Arts


At Their Peace Talks, Somalis Mostly Shout
The talks are moving about as fast as the huge tortoise munching grass outside the hotel.
The Somali factions meeting here squabble over who their spokesman is and what he should say.
Faction leaders so angered the Ethiopian President, who is trying to mediate, that he stormed out of one session, a Somali adviser said.


Inquiry Continuing in Fatal Fall Of Girl Down an Elevator Shaft
A day after an 11-year-old girl died from injuries suffered in a fall down an elevator shaft in her Harlem apartment building, the police and city Buildings Department officials had still not determined why the elevator doors suddenly opened.
Yesterday a spokesman for the Department of Buildings, the city agency responsible for enforcing the building code, which includes elevator safety standards, speculated that a contributing factor might have been a bent part on the elevator's door.


New Delhi Journal; A Students' Prayer: Let Me Join the Ruling Class
Kumar Mihir is looking a bit scruffy these days.
He hasn't shaved in a while, his shirts are rumpled, his bloodshot eyes not unlike a barroom habitue's.
He is not alone.
Across India, tens of thousands of university students are chained to their desks, preparing for the test that provides the key to a lifetime tenure in the most visible vestige of colonial rule, the elite bureaucracy of the Indian Administrative Service.


DANCE IN REVIEW
'Discovering the Beauty of Tokyo' Japan Folk-Dance Ensemble City Center


New PC Internet Software
A software developer and a small publishing company will announce today a new personal computer software package intended to lower the barriers so that nonexperts can reach Internet, an international collection of data networks used for exchanging electronic mail and retrieving on-line information.
O'Reilly &amp; Associates, a technical book publisher based in Sebastapol, Calif., and Spry Inc., a Seattle software developer, said that early next year they would begin shipping a Windows version of a program called Internet-in-a-Box.


Lotas Minard Gets Job From U.S. Shoe
The United States Shoe Corporation has selected Lotas Minard Patton McIver in New York to handle the creative portion of its $10 million to $15 million Easy Spirit division account, which Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis had handled for more than a year.
The media portion of the account remains at Media That Works in Cincinnati.


SUCCESSFUL WORK ON HUBBLE BRINGS NASA SOME RELIEF
In the first two of five planned space walks, the shuttle astronauts today and on Sunday ministered to the impaired Hubble Space Telescope with skill and effective -- if sometimes brute -- force, much to the relief of watchful mission officials and the astronauts themselves.
After a productive day of work on Sunday, when two astronauts replaced four of the telescope's gyroscopes, two others early today began the more demanding task of giving the telescope a new set of solar-power panels.


Market Place; Auto parts maker shifts its focus to capitalize on car abuse.
PARTS may be parts, but profits from parts vary widely, depending on when they are sold.
In boom times for the United States auto market, the suppliers of fuel pumps, brake pads and fenders thrive on sweet contracts.
But during the inevitable downturns they suffer.
There is one customer, however, who keeps buying parts even when the new-car market slumps: the hapless guy whose fuel pump is failing, brakes are chattering or fender is crumpled.


Female Genital Mutilation Celebrates Only Male Social Power
To the Editor:
Maynard H. Merwine's "How Africa Understands Female Circumcision" (letter, Nov. 24) reveals the heart of the controversy over female genital mutilation.
Of course the practice is surrounded by ceremony: how else to persuade children and parents of its social importance and their reward for compliance, full status in their community?
The other side of this ritualization is the threat of ostracism or excommunication for those who refuse to participate.


Chicago Has a Lot of Luck, a Fair Amount of Talent and a Share of First
They say you make your own luck in the National Football League, and if that is indeed the case, then let's all get a four-leaf clover and join the Chicago Bears for a frolicking good time.
But these Bears are more than lucky.


France Still Balking at Trade Pact
France said today that "excessive optimism" had emerged in recent days about a successful conclusion to world trade talks, underlining that problems remained on the eve of decisive negotiations Monday in Brussels between the European Community and the United States.
The statement, by Budget Minister Nicolas Sarkozy, followed hourlong meetings held by Prime Minister Edouard Balladur with the European Community's chief trade negotiator, Sir Leon Brittan, and with GATT's Director General, Peter Sutherland.


Sinclair Does It on Defense For Lincoln's First Title
After the Public Schools Athletic League A championship game had concluded, Frankie Sinclair dropped himself face down onto the mud-covered Baker Field at Wien Stadium in upper Manhattan and remained there without moving for what seemed like an eternity.
When the senior halfback was finally picked up by his friends from Coney Island, the trademark smile that punctuated his brilliant three-year career at Lincoln was missing.


Yeltsin Reaches for Iron Rule
To the Editor:
It has been suggested that the elections for Parliament and a new constitution in Russia on Dec. 12 will provide the democratic legitimacy needed by President Boris N. Yeltsin and his economic advisers to take the tough decisions necessary to revitalize the Russian economy ("Runaway Rubles," by Anders Aslund, Op-Ed, Nov. 24).


Leftists Apparently Sweep Local Italian Elections
After decades in opposition, candidates backed by Italy's former Communists won major municipal elections today, defeating neo-Fascists and conservatives, computer projections showed.
The voting, widely seen as a weather vane for national elections expected in the spring, pitted leftist alliances against neo-Fascists in Rome and Naples, and against the insurgent Northern League in Venice and Genoa.


A Surprise: Blue-Collar Jobs Rebound
After Terry Ochs got out of the Marine Corps last spring after eight years as a helicopter crewman and aircraft mechanic, he journeyed up and down the West Coast and throughout the Midwest searching fruitlessly for maintenance work with an airline.
Finally, he returned home with his wife and 4-year-old son to live with his parents in Fond du Lac, Wis., and widened his search to include, among others, the Brunswick Corporation's outboard engine factory there.


Sports of The Times; For the Jets, Four for the Money
EVER since their National Football League schedule was announced, the Jets have known what they had to do.
"We needed to be 8 and 4," guard Dave Cadigan was saying now, "so we could finish at 10 and 6, or 11 and 5."


Gun Owners Trade Arms for Tickets
Since he found a .357 Magnum in his backyard several years ago, Al Carey has had the powerful handgun hidden in a cardboard box in his garage, not sure whether to bury it, learn how to use it or sell it on the street, where he might get $100 for it.
Mr.
Carey, a security guard supervisor, said he occasionally worried about the gun, although he never tried to do anything about it.
But on Saturday he did.
After driving across town to a Baptist church, he left it with police officers and in exchange, Mr.
Carey got some peace of mind, and two tickets to a Luther Vandross concert, to boot. 67 Weapons Collected
In an unusual program organized by a local company, Bass Tickets, people can exchange guns for a pair of tickets that will get them into sports events, concert and comedy clubs, onto ski lifts or even buy themselves clothing or restaurant meals.
The tickets are worth an average of $50 a pair.


Statewide School Tax Is Proposed
A commission studying New Jersey's tortured school financing system, seeking a way out of the decade-old fight over school aid between rich and poor districts, has gingerly broached the idea of a statewide property tax to provide a guaranteed minimum spending level for each student in public schools.
But the commission remains divided between factions defending the suburbs, who see their level of school financing threatened by court-ordered increases in aid to the cities, and the cities, who point to dismal test scores, high dropout rates and ancient school buildings as proof of inadequate support.


Review/Dance; An Evening of Spectacle From a Guinean Troupe
Les Ballets Africains, the national dance company of Guinea, came blazing into the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College on Saturday night with a brightly wrapped holiday gift of storytelling, music and dance.
For decades after its founding by Keita Fodeba, a Guinean choreographer, the company has developed a winning popular theatrical presentation of folk themes and culture.
The many costumes are exquisite, mixing colors and fabric patterns in unexpected but beautiful ways, accented often by fantastic hats and head gear.
Music flows from traditional instruments, some of which look like handsome art objects.
And the spirited and accomplished performers delight in pleasing the audience without any hint of hard sell or patronizing.
It was no surprise that they were greeted by a standing ovation at the end of the performance.


Giuliani Must Find Cure For a Plague of Bullets
HOW long Rudolph W. Giuiliani and William S. Bratton hold their jobs may depend on a daunting challenge personified today by Carlos Carrion, Maria Witherspoon and Nelson Hernandez, a challenge with roots dating back seven centuries.


World Economies


One Dolphin Linebacker You Don't Want to Insult
Bryan Cox, the Miami Dolphins' talented but volatile linebacker, sat in front of his locker at Joe Robbie Stadium today stuffing equipment into a duffel bag and fairly shivering with anger.
With the Giants' 19-14 victory over the Dolphins fresh in his mind, Cox took on everybody.
He berated the game officials, he explained why he challenged a fan and a league official to fistfights -- and he took much of the responsibility for the defeat.


DANCE IN REVIEW
I Wan Jan Puppet Theater Taipei Theater McGraw-Hill Building


Wendy B. Kaye, Michael H. Morris
Wendy Burnham Kaye, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
I.
W.
Burnham 2d of New York, and Michael Howard Morris, the son of the late Robert and Celia Morris, were married yesterday at the Carlyle Hotel in New York.
Rabbi Peter J. Rubenstein officiated.
The bride, 54, is an associate broker at the Fox Residential Group, a residential real estate concern in New York.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father is the president of the Burnham Fund, a mutual fund in New York.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


2 Worlds Meet at Kennedy Center
From the whoop of gospel music to the crash of a Nebraska marching band, the 16th annual Kennedy Center Honors seemed as much a celebration of a rapprochement between the arts world and lawmakers as a tribute to the five artists honored.
"You can feel the change in the air," said the composer and lyricist Stephen Sondheim, who received one of the honors, given at at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts here.


For Some 'Biznesmeni' in Politics, Democracy Is Flavored by Rubles
In an election where most candidates are worried about voter indifference, Anatoly V. Guskov, a 45-year-old millionaire businessman running for a seat in Russia's new Parliament, knows how to draw a crowd.
When Mr.
Guskov arrived in this small town on Moscow's southeastern rim for a meeting with pensioners last week, the 650-seat hall was so full that extra benches had to be brought in to accommodate several dozen angry women who had been locked outside in the freezing cold, beating on the doors to get in.


Bridge
An overtrick can be trivial or crucial, depending on the type of scoring.
It is crucial in board-a-match play and helped the winners of the Reisinger teams championship that concluded the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals in Seattle a week ago.
North and South were Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., and Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., and their first two bids were artificial.
One club was strong, and the one-heart response, in their methods, showed either a spade suit or a balanced hand with 11-14.
The next round disclosed the latter, and the normal three no-trump contract was reached.


Recital by Two Pianists
The pianists Edward Aldwell and Richard Goode are to perform a benefit recital on Dec. 16 at 8 P.M. at Mannes College of Music, 150 West 85th Street, Manhattan.
The proceeds are to go to the Sheila Aldendorff Scholarship Fund -- named for a pianist and teacher -- to help students in the college's preparatory division.
Mr.
Aldwell will perform Bach's "French" Suite No. 6 and Chopin's Fantasy (Op. 49); Mr.
Goode is to play Beethoven's Sonatas Nos. 26 and 27; both artists, who are Mannes faculty members, will play the four-hand version of Ravel's "Mother Goose" Suite.
Tickets are $25 and $50.
Information: (212) 496-8524.


A Hopeful Step To Curb Arms Sales
To the Editor:
Re "Friends of the Slorc" (editorial, Dec. 2): Of course selling Myanmar "arms to use against its own people is reprehensible." Selling any government arms to use against its own people is reprehensible.


Drop in Oil Prices Starts to Show at Pump
The sharp drop in the price of oil has begun to push down prices of gasoline at the retail level as the average national price has fallen by almost 2 cents a gallon for self-serve regular, according to a national survey.
The Lundberg Survey, which traces gasoline prices every two weeks by polling about 10,000 stations, said the price fell by 1.96 cents, to $1.0606 a gallon, for regular unleaded, the best-selling type.


Venezuelan Voters Reject Two Entrenched Parties
Rafael Caldera Rodriguez, a populist with a reputation for honesty, was elected President of Venezuela today, three voter surveys projected.
Mr.
Caldera, 77, who was President during the early 1970's, was returned to office by voters who turned against the two parties that have alternated in governing this country for 35 years.


3 Naval Academy Students Are Killed in a Car Accident
Three midshipmen from the United States Naval Academy were killed and another was injured when their car hit a fallen oak tree this morning as they returned from the Army-Navy football game in East Rutherford, N.J., the authorities said.
The Anne Arundel County Police Department said the accident occurred less than a mile from campus on a dark road at 6:09 A.M. after heavy rain and wind that had uprooted the tree.


Sharing Memories of Organ Donors Who Shared
Most organ donors never meet the people they save.
But a Manhattan luncheon yesterday honored their memory, bringing together the families they left behind with the former patients who are alive because someone cared enough to give a piece of themselves.


California Town Mourns Abducted Girl
Stephanie Briggs never knew Polly Klaas, but today the freckle-faced 8-year-old grieved for her nevertheless.
Stephanie laid a bouquet of lavender roses on an impromptu shrine to Polly, whose dimpled smile had stared out from television screens, newspapers and tens of thousands of posters, faxes and billboards during two months of frantic searching following her abduction on Oct. 1.


Wisconsin Is on Top a World Away
For Wisconsin, the road to the Rose Bowl wound through the back streets of the Ginza and redefined Big 10 football's idea of an away game.
As vendors sold sushi in the stands, Wisconsin pushed through Michigan State's weak defensive line today and won a fairly painless victory, 41-20.
The triumph gave Wisconsin a 9-1-1 record for the season and a place in the Rose Bowl against U.C.L.A., the first trip to Pasadena, Calif., for the Badgers in 31 years.


Abroad at Home; The Whole Truth
Once in a rare while a writer re-examines a debated episode of recent history with such thoroughness and integrity that the truth can no longer be in doubt.
Mark Danner did just that in a long article that took up most of last week's issue of The New Yorker.
Mr.
Danner's subject was the massacre in December 1981 in the Salvadoran village of El Mozote.
Over the years politicians and journalists have differed bitterly about what happened there -- who did the killing, indeed whether there was a massacre at all.
The argument is over now.


Foster Children, Still at Risk
As Mayor-elect Rudolph Giuliani will soon discover, few agencies have as many problems as New York City's Child Welfare Administration.
The agency is responsible for the city's most vulnerable citizens -- abused and neglected children.
Many of these children are victimized twice -- first in an abusive home, again when they are shuttled from one foster home to another.
Sometimes a child dies when the system leaves the child in an abusive home too long.
Sometimes children suffer when a slipshod evaluation system sends them to the wrong foster home.
Sometimes children suffer even when they are placed with relatives.


Virginia's Unprecedented Triple
With Claudio Reyna leading the way moments after the final whistle had blown today, the Virginia Cavaliers started a victory march around Richardson Field.
The Cavaliers raised their arms in triumph, some pointing upward with their index fingers, signifying perhaps that the sky is the limit for them when it comes to college soccer.


Frank Zappa Dies; Rock Iconoclast, 52
Frank Zappa, the composer, guitarist and band leader, died Saturday evening at his home in Los Angeles.
Mr.
Zappa, 52, had prostate cancer.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
ABC Rail Products, Chicago, an initial public offering of three million shares.
Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three- month bill was 3.10 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.26 percent.


More Media Changes At Young &amp; Rubicam
Young &amp; Rubicam New York has reorganized its troubled media department again.
Robert E. Igiel will leave the Arts and Entertainment cable television network in New York, where he is senior vice president of business development and consumer products, to join Y.&amp; R. New York in the new position of executive vice president and director of broadcast and programming.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
France said that "excessive optimism" had emerged in recent days about a successful conclusion of world trade talks, underlining that problems remained on the eve of decisive talks in Brussels between the European Community and the United States.
The statement, by Budget Minister Nicolas Sarkozy, followed meetings between Prime Minister Edouard Balladur and the European Community's trade negotiator, Sir Leon Brittan, and GATT's Director General, Peter Sutherland.  [ Page D1. ] The Economy
November's steep drop in the unemployment rate reflected the second consecutive monthly increase in manufacturing jobs, a heartening rebound for blue-collar America that could persist and even accelerate in the next few months, according to economists and labor experts.
But they also warn that it is not likely to last.
Downward pressures include automation and a trend among manufacturers to move jobs overseas, not just in search of lower wages but also to be closer to foreign markets.  [ D1. ]


Preparing for Battle and, It Is Hoped, a Standing Ovation


2 Senators Take 2 Approaches On Health: 'Now!' vs. 'Now?'
One Irish-American grew up in Hell's Kitchen and became an intellectual.
The other was raised in privileged surroundings and went straight into politics.
The first has written hundreds of books and articles as the Senate's only working scholar.
The second has written hundreds of laws, more than anyone else in the Senate's 204 years.


On Cigarettes, Health and Lawyers
For all the complaints against the tobacco industry about health matters, rarely do senior executives of the country's leading cigarette companies discuss the issues in public.
One cigarette manufacturer, the Lorillard Tobacco Company, the maker of Newport and True brands, has a policy against issuing any public statement about anything.
On rare occasions, however, these voices are heard in specific forums, as they were in a class-action lawsuit filed early this year in a Florida state court in Miami.
A group of flight attendants, and the heirs of some who have died, are suing the country's leading cigarette makers and other tobacco companies, contending that exposure to cigarette smoke in flight caused their illnesses and deaths.


Woman Is Attacked on Brooklyn Bridge Path
A 23-year-old woman walking on the Brooklyn Bridge on Saturday night was sexually assaulted and robbed at knifepoint by a man who punched and choked her until she lost consciousness, the police said.
The department's Special Victims Squad was investigating last night whether the woman had been raped, as she was unable to remember specific details of the attack.
She was treated at Downtown Hospital for bruises of the neck and "knife scratches" on her hands and released, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.


DANCE IN REVIEW
I Wan Jan Puppet Theater Taipei Theater McGraw-Hill Building


Executive Changes
BREED TECHNOLOGIES INC., Lakeland, Fla., a manufacturer of automotive crash sensors and air bag systems, promoted Gary L. Tessitore, its executive vice president, to president and chief operating officer.
He succeeds Giovanni Magistrali, who will head the company's Italian operations as president and chief operating officer.
DONALDSON, LUFKIN &amp; JENRETTE, New York, named Karl R. Wyss managing director of its merchant banking group.


Review/Music; Ellington's Operatic Harlem Goes to Brooklyn
If there's one 20th-century composer everyone loves, it's Duke Ellington.
His music is serious and populist, profound and pleasurable.
Lately, the growing jazz repertory movement has yielded transcriptions of works originally preserved as recordings, making the music available to ensembles outside Ellington's own orchestra.
It's no wonder that classical institutions looking for broader audiences have latched onto Ellington, as the Brooklyn Philharmonic did with "Ellington's New York" on Friday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, and again on Saturday.
The main attraction was a concert version of "Queenie Pie," with music and lyrics by Ellington.
He described it as an "opera comique," and it was left unfinished at his death in 1974. (A different reconstruction of "Queenie Pie" was performed in Philadelphia and Washington in 1986.) Wisely, the concert booked guest specialists: the Duke Ellington Orchestra, now led by his son Mercer Ellington, was properly at center stage.
Luther Henderson, who worked with Ellington as an orchestrator and who adapted the music for "Jelly's Last Jam" on Broadway, conducted most of the concert.


John A. Thomas; Advertising Executive, 85
John A. Thomas, a former Manhattan advertising executive, died Nov. 23 in his home in San Jose, Calif.
He was 85.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said Judith Naughton, his daughter.
Mr.
Thomas retired in 1967 after spending 30 years on Madison Avenue with Batten, Barton, Durstin &amp; Osborne, then Benton &amp; Bowles, and finally Ogilvy, Benson &amp; Mather.


A Talk by Gregory Hines
Gregory Hines is to give a talk and demonstration, "My Life and Times," tomorrow at St.
Luke's School, 487 Hudson Street, at Grove Street, in Greenwich Village.
The program is to begin at 7:30 P.M., with a reception to follow.
Tickets are $30 at the door and proceeds will benefit the school's financial aid program.
Information: (212) 924-5960.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Rockets Ignite Second Booster  Vernon Maxwell hit a 3-pointer with 31.9 seconds left and Hakeem Olajuwon was a force in the closing minutes last night, rallying the Houston Rockets to a 99-98 victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers in Richfield, Ohio.
The Rockets improved to 16-1 after their season-opening 15-game streak ended Friday night in Atlanta. (AP) Suns 117, Bucks 98: Charles Barkley scored 23 points and Kevin Johnson 21 as visiting Phoenix used second-half runs of 10-0 and 11-0 to win for the eighth time in nine games. (AP) N.H.L.
Jets Win on Late Tkachuk Goalst  Keith Tkachuk scored twice in the last two minutes last night as the Winnipeg Jets beat the Detroit Red Wings, 6-4, in Winnipeg.
But Arizona did just that yesterday.
The No. 19 Wildcats beat No. 8 Oklahoma State, 97-84, in the second game of the Dial Invitational in Phoenix, limiting massive center Bryant Reeves to 12 points.
In the other game, Bill Curley made two free throws with about 20 seconds left to seal Boston College's 78-74 victory over Arizona State. (AP) FIGURE SKATING  Boitano Takes a Big Step  Brian Boitano took another step in his bid to return to the Olympics, winning the technical program last night at the Pro-Am Figure Skating Challenge.
Boitano, the 1988 Olympic gold medalist, beat out Paul Wylie and Scott Hamilton.
Nancy Kerrigan, the 1992 Olympic bronze medalist, delivered another strong performance in finishing first in the women's division.
SOCCER  Moore and U.S.
Feast on El Salvador  Joe-Max Moore, a midfielder getting a rare start at forward, became the first American to score four goals in a full international game since 1925 as the United States beat El Salvador, 7-0, yesterday in Los Angeles.
Moore also had two assists.
Dominic Kinnear added two goals, and Hugo Perez, a native of El Salvador who is now an American citizen, scored and had an assist. (AP) SWIMMING  It's a Broken Record; Chinese Break More  Chinese women set two more world records yesterday in Palma, Majorca, to close the World Short Course championship, bringing their total for the four-day meet to nine.
The Chinese thoroughly dominated strong teams from the United States and Australia.
He Cihong of China set a world record in the 200-meter backstroke in 2 minutes 6.09 seconds, erasing the old mark of 2:06.62 set by Kristina Egerszegi of Hungary in 1991.
China's other world mark yesterday came in the 400-meter medley relay with a time of 3:57.73.
Allison Wagner of the United States set a world record of 2:07.79 in the 200-meter individual medley. (AP) SPEED SKATING  Jansen and Blair of U.S.
Glide to Victories  Dan Jansen broke the 36-second barrier again in the 500 meters during a World Cup meet yesterday in Hamar, Norway, missing his world record by only 4-hundredths of a second.
Jansen finished in 35.96 seconds for his third victory in four 500-meter races this season.
Jansen, who has won the overall in the event the past two years, set the world record of 35.92 during Saturday's competition at the Viking Ship Olympic Arena.
Bonnie Blair, a two-time Olympic champion, won the women's 1,000 in 1 minute 19.97 seconds to retain her overall lead in the event with 50 points.
Monique Garbrecht of Germany is second with 35 points. (AP) YACHT RACING  Miles From Nowhere With Broken Rudder  Intrum Justitia, the European entry, continued to lead the 14-yacht fleet yesterday in the Whitbread Round the World Race as it raced toward Fremantle, Australia.
But Dolphin and Youth of Britain, which broke a rudder last week, took refuge in the Morbihan Bay off the coast of the Kerguelen Islands in the Indian Ocean. (AP)


U.S. IS CONSIDERING AIMING ITS MISSILES AWAY FROM RUSSIA
In a largely symbolic move that could reduce the dangers of accidental launchings, the Pentagon has drafted a plan to aim its nuclear missiles at desolate spots in the open seas and is talking with Russian generals about how to put a mutual pledge to "de-target" into effect.
Throughout the cold war, the most pressing question for the targeting experts at the United States Strategic Command in Omaha was how many nuclear warheads to aim at Russia's missile silos and military bases.


Abducted Girl Found Dead Is Mourned in California


Julianne Abelman, David Rubinstein
Julianne Abelman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence E. Abelman of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Paul Rubinstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Rubinstein of Belle Harbor, Queens..
Rabbi Joseph Weiss performed the ceremony at the Stanhope Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Rubinstein, 31, is an associate at the New York law firm of Abelman, Frayne &amp; Schwab, of which her father is a founding partner.
She graduated from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., and received her law degree from Boston University.


Bowls and Polls and Still Some Static in the Air
A year ago, the first time around, the leaders of the games that make up the bowl coalition gathered in a hotel in Atlanta, standing in bright lights, to announce the matchups that were their creation.
Yesterday, having recently canceled their Atlanta meeting, they were linked only by a faulty telephone conference call in an anticlimactic rundown of games that may or may not create a clear conclusion to the season.
Undefeated Nebraska and once-beaten Florida State, the two highest-rated teams in the combined polls used by the coalition, were officially matched in the Orange Bowl.
The Cotton Bowl, choosing next because Texas A&amp;M remained ahead of Florida in the latest combined poll despite the Gator victory in the Southeastern Conference championship game, went through with the formality of inviting undefeated West Virginia.
Cotton Comes Calling
The Mountaineers, who were upset at being excluded from a championship matchup, had already told Cotton Bowl officials they would rather accept a payout of $4.15 million in the Sugar Bowl, more than $1 million larger than the Cotton's.
They declined the Cotton invitation, using a clause in the coalition agreement that allows teams to pass on an invitation in order to earn more money elsewhere.
Instead, they'll meet Florida in New Orleans.


Sports of The Times; Simms and DeBerg: An Old-Timers' Day
ACCORDING to the 1990 census, the median age in the United States was 32.9 years and creeping up slightly.
Even if you factor out newborn infants, people who would rather listen to Bartok on a Sunday afternoon, soccer fans and other eccentrics, there are still millions of young people who follow football but could not possibly fathom what it meant for two elderly gents to be gamboling around Joe Robbie Stadium yesterday.
Steve DeBerg, age 39, the oldest active player in this brutal business, took seven stitches below the chin, an occupational hazard for quarterbacks, but rushed back onto the field, a bandage covering his throat, above his bloody uniform.


An American Who Shocked Britain Takes Her Act Home
Posing as a "dumb blond," wearing a banana peel as a wig, Ruby Wax interviewed Dudley Moore recently on one of her infamous television "chat" shows.
When she asked him, "What do you do for foreplay?" he laughed, slightly embarrassed, and replied, "You know, this used to be the BBC."
Indeed.
But nothing in Britain these days is what it was, as Ms.
Wax's popularity here demonstrates.
The 39-year-old American comedian has become famous for her bull-in-a-china-shop technique, capitalizing on foisting the pushy, motor-mouthed American stereotype on the genteel British.
They love her.
Or they loathe her.
But more and more of them are watching her show.


Robber Shoots Pregnant Girl in the Stomach as She Fumbles for $2
While her younger sister and a friend watched in horror, a 15-year-old girl whose 6-month pregnancy was obvious was shot twice in the abdomen by a robber near her Queens home Saturday night as she gave up a gold chain and fumbled for $2 more, the police said.
The wounded girl survived, but the fetus was killed.
Witnesses told the police that the gunman, who fired five shots from a .22-caliber pistol, ran into the night as the victim, Cynthia Hernandez, collapsed bleeding on a sidewalk at 11:45 P.M. two doors from her family's apartment on 67th Avenue in Ridgewood.


Smith's Injury Puts Damper on Knick Victory Revival
Charles Smith will miss the Knicks' three-game road trip this week because of continued soreness in his left knee.
He will be re-examined today to determine the extent of his latest setback, and it remained possible that he will be placed on the injured list.
Smith's health has become a growing concern.
The starting small forward has played in just four games this season.
He underwent arthroscopic knee surgery during the off season, but his left knee began to flare up during the preseason.


Who Protects Shareholders In Paramount Bidding War?
Lazard Freres &amp; Company, the august investment banking firm, came under a fair amount of criticism by the Delaware Chancery Court late last month.
Lazard Freres was cited by Vice Chancellor Jack B. Jacobs of the Chancery Court as having given the board of Paramount Communications Inc. insufficient information to support a decision to shun a hostile takeover offer by QVC Network Inc.
The criticism of Lazard Freres and other principals in the battle for control of Paramount tells much about the tussle between QVC and Viacom Inc. for control of Paramount.
More important, the details of the case speak volumes about the fragility of a system intended to protect the interests of shareholders of public companies.


The Jets Are Wet, Wild and Woeful
For two weeks now, dark clouds have been hanging over the Jets when they have taken the field.
Last week, they rode out a storm in New England and came away with a 6-0 victory.
This afternoon, the clouds gathered over Giants Stadium, but the wind wasn't as strong as it was a week ago and it wasn't raining sideways in sheets.
The thing that remained the same, however, was the Jets' point total, and this week it simply wasn't enough.
In a defeat that damaged their playoff chances, the Jets lost to the Colts, 9-6, on a 38-yard field goal by Dean Biasucci with 1 second to play.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  ENDURING VIOLENCE IN A NEW HOME "When I started opening my boxes, my husband said, 'You are not from a good family,' " said a woman recently arrived from New Delhi, tears filling her eyes as she recalled the insult.
"He was expecting gold bracelets and pendants." When he began hitting her for not providing a big enough dowry, she sought help.
Across the country, and especially in cities like New York that are major immigration gateways, the battle against domestic violence is becoming increasingly specialized along ethnic lines.
One such force is Sakhi, a three-year-old organization of Indian women formed to combat domestic violence.
Besides Sakhi, the New York Asian Women's Center operates a 24-hour telephone line, and the Violence Intervention Program has one for Spanish-speaking victims.
Park Slope Safe Homes, in Brooklyn, has an Arabic-speaking counselor who works with Middle Eastern victims.
B3.


CHRONICLE
A snippet of weekend life in midweek: denizens of the Hamptons will congregate at the Plaza tonight to watch three of their neighbors receive Lifetime Achievement in the Arts awards given by Guild Hall, the cultural center in East Hampton, L.I.
The winners this year are LUKAS FOSS, the composer and conductor; TERRENCE McNALLY, the playwright, and ESTEBAN VICENTE, the artist, and they will receive their awards from three previous winners: Kurt Vonnegut, Edward Albee and Jules Feiffer.


Dempsey's Jobs Filled
After six years as Washington State's athletic director, JIM LIVENGOOD accepted the same job at Arizona yesterday, replacing CEDRIC DEMPSEY , who is becoming executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association in January.


A Broad Plan for Safe Streets
"The first task is to reclaim the streets."
Those words are as true today as they were three years ago, when they first appeared on this page.
The question is how a new administration in New York City will approach a persistent problem, and answers are starting to come from Rudolph Giuliani and his police commissioner-designate, William Bratton.
In contrast to David Dinkins, who focused on expanding the Police Department, the Giuliani-Bratton team seems intent on changing the department's tactics: more civilians to free uniformed cops for patrol.
More street-level drug busts.
More protection for schools.
More accountability from police commanders.
And more attention paid to quality-of-life intrusions, like uninvited windshield washing.


Classical Music in Review
99% Artfree!
Charles Ludlam Theater 1 Sheridan Square Greenwich Village Tuesdays, through Jan. 3
Bill Dyszel is a baritone in the New York City Opera's associate chorus and is often heard as a soloist in church performances during the holidays.
He is also a keen observer of the musical world, and he has packed some of his more merciless observations into "99% Artfree!," a 45-minute satirical review that opened last Tuesday evening.


Clinton Defends Use of U.S. Plane To Take a Somali Leader to Talks
President Clinton said today that he supported the decision by his envoy in Somalia to ferry Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid to peace talks aboard a United States Army plane, but officials said they were seeking a less visible way to return General Aidid to Mogadishu.
Both the officials and Mr.
Clinton described General Aidid's participation in the peace talks in Addis Ababa as crucial.


Paul Walker, Director, Actor and Teacher, 41
Paul Walker, a director, actor and teacher of drama at New York University, died on Sunday at New York Downtown Hospital.
He was 41 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, said Eve Ensler, a friend.


Police Officer Kills Man
A plainclothes police officer shot and killed a man in Brooklyn yesterday during an undercover drug arrest, the police said.
The officer, who was not immediately identified, saw the man, Charles Sweet, 27 years old, carrying a gun in his belt on Dean Street in Park Slope, where the officer was posing as a drug buyer, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman.
She said the officer called other officers to back him up, and once they arrived, he approached Mr.
Sweet, who pointed a .25-caliber revolver at him.
The officer shot Mr.
Sweet once in the chest, Sergeant Haimeck said.
Mr.
Sweet, who lived at 1449 Dean Street, was pronounced dead on arrival at Methodist Hospital, Sergeant Haimeck said.


On My Mind; American Terrorism
The cities of America will not get much safer until the people who live in them get much smarter.
First they will have to understand that America is going through a civil crisis of criminality it has never before experienced.
A few decades ago, gangsters were using guns to kill each other, which was noisy but no great loss.
How innocent those days seem, almost pastoral.


Gloom Returns to Japanese Stock Market
The Japanese stock market provided another referendum Monday on the prospects of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's throwing the battered economy a lifeline -- stock prices plunged on signs that the Government was backing away from providing a quick economic fix.
Reversing its rebound of last week, when hopes rose that the Government would act quickly on a stimulus package, the Nikkei index of 225 issues fell 618.97 points, to 16,840.38.
That represented a 3.6 percent decline, the second-largest daily loss this year.


Premier of Haiti Is Seeking Talks To End Impasse
Groping for a way out of the political impasse that has resulted in crippling sanctions on his country, the Prime Minister of the Government of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide today invited representatives of a cross section of Haiti's society to a new round of negotiations intended to restore democratic rule.
But the Prime Minister, Robert Malval, said that he has yet to receive any assurances from Haiti's military leaders that they will send representatives to this new conference or abide by its decisions.
Indeed, Mr.
Malval said he did not sense in the country's military leaders a new willingness to compromise on the return of Father Aristide, the exiled president.


Queens Teen Arrested in Shooting of Pregnant Girl
The police arrested a 17-year-old suspect in Queens last night in the shooting of a pregnant girl, Cynthia Hernandez, whose fetus was struck and killed by a bullet.
Detectives arrested the suspect, Peter Kapihe, at his home in Middle Village at 10:20 p.m. after witnesses to the shooting provided information implicating him, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman.


Frank Zappa, Musical Iconoclast, Guitarist and Restless Innovator, Dies at 52
Frank Zappa, a composer, guitarist, band leader and producer who was rock's most committed iconoclast, died Saturday evening at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 52 years old.
The cause was prostate cancer, The Associated Press reported.


For Yanks, Subtraction Must Precede Addition
Do not expect the Yankees to trade for pitchers Andy Benes, Randy Johnson, Mark Langston or Pete Harnisch soon.
Do not expect them to sign free agent first baseman Rafael Palmeiro, either.
Until General Manager Gene Michael can dispose of some hefty current contracts, he conceded, a strict budget will prevent him from budging much to improve.
"Some things are on hold," said Michael.
"We have to get in a little bit better position."


Rabin Welcomes Syrian Offer on Missing Israelis
Israel today welcomed Syria's offer to help it learn the fate of long-missing Israeli servicemen, but said the gesture also showed that the Syrians controlled anti-Israel Islamic guerrillas in Lebanon.
The unusual Syrian move, relayed to Secretary of State Warren Christopher in Damascus on Sunday, touches an extremely sensitive spot in the Israeli national consciousness because of the importance attached to rescuing captured soldiers and retrieving the bodies of the dead.


Q&amp;A
Love Bugs
Q.
In South Carolina, I saw flying push-me, pull-you insects, attached by a filament.
The locals called them love bugs.
What are they?


Former Catholic Priest Sentenced To 18 to 20 Years for Sex Crimes
After listening to 22 of his former parishioners describe the trauma from the sexual abuse he inflicted in the 1960's, when they were children and he was their priest, James R. Porter was sentenced today to 18 to 20 years in prison.
Under Massachusetts law, Mr.
Porter, whose case brought national attention to the problem of child molestation by clergymen, particularly by many Roman Catholic priests, could be eligible for parole in six years.


Guguletu Journal; A Brutalized Generation Turns Its Rage on Whites
"I can leave you here and go away and come back just now," Victor Mdekazi told a white guest in this black township.
"When I come back I will find you so-o-o-o much in blood."
He sat in a parked car around the corner from the gas station where Amy Biehl, an American Fulbright scholar, was slashed to death in August by a taunting mob of young men for being a white in the wrong place.


Redstone-Tied Concern Invested in Viacom
A company in which the chairman of Viacom Inc., Sumner M. Redstone, is the largest single shareholder was a heavy buyer of Viacom stock during a crucial period in its takeover battle for Paramount Communications Inc.
WMS Industries, a Chicago-based electronics company in which Mr.
Redstone holds a 24.9 percent stake, bought stock in Viacom at a time when the market value of Viacom stock was an important issue in the debate over the relative merits of Viacom's bid, compared with a rival bid from QVC Network Inc.
Each side is offering a package of cash and stock for Paramount.


New Leader For Boeing Plane Group
The Boeing Company said today that Ron Woodard, a 27-year company employee, would take over as president of Boeing's Commercial Airplane Group, the company's largest division, immediately.
He succeeds Dean Thornton, who will continue serving as executive vice president of the parent company until he retires in early 1994.
Analysts said that the appointment of Mr.
Woodard, who is 50, to replace Mr.
Thornton, 65, showed Boeing was seeking new ideas as it tried to cut costs and stay competitive.


White Sox Bow Out on a Trade for Bonilla
The Mets -- bad, boring and belligerent in the 1993 season -- continue to intrigue as operators in the off season.
They take all calls, listen to all offers and thus surface in much of the speculation surrounding player movement.
A monitoring of the Shea Stadium switchboard yesterday turned up this:


Once Dull, GATT Enters Realm of Pop Culture
In the days when the world focused on the number of warheads in East and West, rather than the number of tons of subsidized beef the European Community can export, the bureaucrats at the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade labored in peaceful anonymity.
Asked how many calls he would receive a day when he became GATT's chief spokesman 10 years ago, David Woods replied: "A day? You must mean a week. A couple at most. The place was asleep -- depressed, actually."


Rangers Are Reveling in Winning Feeling
The Rangers lost their captain for 14 minutes with the score tied in a crucial hockey game.
They watched their goaltender allow two ugly goals in one of his less inspiring performances.
They had a coach with a bum knee, a top player serving a suspension and a nightmare of a schedule.
It didn't matter.
New York emerged from this past weekend as the top team in the National Hockey League, taking two huge victories that only re-emphasized the fact that this season's Rangers are for real.
With their Saturday-Sunday sweep of Toronto and New Jersey, the Rangers became the first team in the N.H.L. to reach 20 victories this season.
At the same time, they increased their point total to 42, tying them with the Maple Leafs for tops in the league, although New York gets the edge for having played one less game.


Cowboys Hold Off Rallying Eagles
By the time the Philadelphia Eagles figured out a way to slow Emmitt Smith, it was too late.
By the time the Eagles created a way to awaken their sleepy offense, it was way too late.
And as far as the Eagles' playoff plans, well, it's too late for that, too.


Stocks Gain Modestly, With Dow Up 6.14
Optimism fueled by Friday's employment report, and the bond market's failure to wilt despite the report's contents, led to modest gains in stock prices yesterday.
The Labor Department report showed that unemployment fell to a three-year low in November, and led a number of analysts to raise their economic growth forecasts for the coming year.


Knicks Take a Vacation as the Bumpy Road Heads West
The Knicks began a three-game trip tonight by letting a potential victory slip away.
Losing a 10-point halftime lead, New York (10-4) succumbed to the Utah Jazz, 103-96, before a crowd of 19,911 at the Delta Center.
The loss dropped the Knicks to 2-4 against Western Conference teams, and they have a 3-4 record since beginning the season 7-0.


Review/Pop; Rundgren: A Man and His Gadgets
Todd Rundgren performed from a high-tech playpen at Roseland on Saturday night.
His one-man-band setup, on a circular platform in the middle of the room, included keyboards, guitars, electronic drums, computers, lights, message boards, video screens, a fog machine and inflatable dinosaurs that he could lower into the audience.
Three female dancers did go-go routines.
Mr.
Rundgren has always been one of rock's gadget fans.
Since the early 1970's, he has been multi-tracking one-man albums; he has tinkered with video since the early 1980's.
His current album, "No World Order," was released as both a standard CD (on Forward/Rhino Records) and as an interactive disk (Philips) that lets listeners reshape the music.
On it, Mr.
Rundgren strives to be contemporary; songs use driving, techno-style keyboards and Mr.
Rundgren sometimes raps.
In concert, the rap lyrics flashed on the message boards.


Bonn Convicts a Top Spy From East Germany
Markus Wolf, the East German Communist spymaster who riddled Bonn with his agents during the cold war, was convicted of treason and bribery today by the country that absorbed his own in 1990.
Many spectators in the packed basement courtroom, including former Communists and some of Mr.
Wolf's former colleagues, jeered when the chief judge, Klaus Wagner, imposed a sentence of six years in prison, suspended while Mr.
Wolf appeals.


Isles' Pilon May Be Lost For Season
Don Maloney, general manager of the Islanders, said yesterday that he is worried defenseman Rich Pilon may need shoulder surgery and could miss the rest of the season.
"There's a chance that he will be out for the year," Maloney said.
"Actually, it's a good chance. We'll know Tuesday night. There's a problem with his shoulder slipping out of the joint."


U.S. PLANS TO EASE SANCTIONS ON SYRIA IN A PEACE GESTURE
The United States has decided to relax sanctions against Syria to allow the transfer of three American-made commercial aircraft to Syria from Kuwait, senior Administration officials said today.
The officials said that Secretary of State Warren Christopher formally informed Syria's President, Hafez al-Assad, of the American decision, which had not been publicly disclosed, in a meeting in Damascus on Sunday.
The sanctions were originally imposed to punish Syria for what Washington regarded as its support for terrorism.


Sports of The Times; A Match For Smoking, Not Tennis
THE last thing one might expect of Billie Jean King is for her to play the ostrich.
She has played championship tennis, and she has played a leading and courageous role in the emergence of women's professional tennis.
But she has never played with her head in sand.
Not Mother Freedom.
Yet that appears her pose on an issue of extreme importance, tobacco smoking, which is reported to cause more than 400,000 deaths a year in this country alone.
According to the American Cancer Society, it is the single greatest cause of death here.


Showing Off Black Dolls and a Heritage
Alethea Churchman was having a ball.
In the course of 15 minutes, the 4-year-old had had her picture taken with Santa, received a bunch of candy canes and won a Barbie doll as a door prize.
She was spinning in circles so fast her mother could hardly contain her.
Alethea and her mother, Edith Churchman, had come to a black doll show directly from Sunday school to find something for Christmas.


Zuckerman Is Given Deadline of 90 Days To Deal for Coliseum
Mayor David N. Dinkins joined with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority yesterday in giving the developer Mortimer B. Zuckerman 90 days to close on his deal to buy and build on the New York Coliseum site at Columbus Circle or forfeit his $33.8 million down payment.
City officials said the move was an attempt to prompt serious negotiations for a development there, though not necessarily one as large or as expensive as the contract specifies.
Under the 1989 contract, Mr.
Zuckerman is required to pay $338 million for the site and build a 2.1 million-square-foot office and retail complex.


Black Legislators Urge Anti-Violence Effort
Following a closed-door meeting with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today, a group of black state legislators issued an urgent plea for a radical redistribution of state resources to fight a "culture of violence" among youths that they said had turned cities into war zones.
The legislators said they were preparing a detailed "Marshall Plan" for Mr.
Cuomo that would use Federal anti-crime money for social programs such as youth counseling, job programs and school-based health clinics.
The legislators said they would ask Mr.
Cuomo to avoid using any new Federal or state money on prison construction.


Knee Surgery Will Sideline Knick's Smith for Six Weeks
Charles Smith, who signed a seven-year, $26 million contract in June and looked forward to producing a solid season, will undergo arthroscopic surgery on his left knee Tuesday, a procedure that is expected to keep the Knicks' forward out of action for about six weeks.
The decision to operate, which was made after an examination today, was not a surprise.
Smith played in just 4 of the team's first 13 games this season and has been bothered by knee pain since late October.
Dr.
Norman Scott, the Knicks' team physician, will perform Tuesday's surgery, and he was optimistic that six weeks was an accurate projection for Smith's recovery period.
But Scott said he would know more following Tuesday's operation at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-18  U.S.
EASES SANCTIONS ON SYRIA  Washington has decided to relax sanctions against Syria to allow the transfer of American commercial planes to Syria from Kuwait.
A1


Harvard Hires Murphy
TIM MURPHY , taking a pay cut to join the Ivy League, was hired as Harvard's coach yesterday.
Murphy, Cincinnati's coach the past five years, replaces JOE RESTIC , who retired after 23 years as coach of the Crimson.
Murphy signed a five-year contract with Harvard for about $75,000 a season.
His base salary at Cincinnati was a reported $111,996.


Johnson &amp; Johnson Loosens Y.&amp; R. Link
Johnson &amp; Johnson has further loosened its ties with Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York, saying yesterday that it would transfer the American network-television buying portion of its estimated $220 million account to McCann-Erickson Worldwide in New York, effective Jan. 3.
Though F. Robert Kniffin, a Johnson &amp; Johnson spokesman in New Brunswick, N.J., declined to elaborate, Advertising Age reported this week that a review on the assignment did not include Y.&amp; R. It listed as the participants McCann and three other large New York shops that are core Johnson &amp; Johnson agencies: DDB Needham Worldwide, Lintas Worldwide and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising.


Chess
The women's world champion, 23-year-old Jun Xie of China, steamrollered her challenger, 31-year-old Nana Ioseliani of Georgia, in their title match, which began on Oct. 25 at the Metropole Palace Hotel in Monaco.
Jun scored 8 1/2 points to Ioseliani's 2 1/2, thus making further play in the 16-game series unnecessary.
Jun was awarded the prize of just over $125,000.
Ioseliani got about $75,000.
This was Jun's first defense of the championhship she had won from Maya Chiburdanidze of Georgia two years ago in Manila.
For Ioseliani, it was her second unsuccessful challenge for top women's honors.
In 1988, she was beaten back by Chiburdanidze in their match in Telavi, Georgia.


Why Cops Wear Hats
To the Editor:
Your humorous news article on police hats (Nov. 27) overlooked the three most important reasons that police officers wear hats.


Bridge
There are five major championships in the New York metropolitan area: the Goldman Pairs, the Reisinger Teams, the Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Teams, the Grand National Teams and the Grand National Pairs.
By winning the last of these on Sunday at the Vanderbilt Club in Lake Success, L.I., Michael Radin of Manhattan and Michael Kopera of Brooklyn became the first players ever to have won all five in the course of their careers.
They have won both Grand National titles this year, a rare double.
The runners-up in Lake Success were Jim Becker of Manhattan and Howard Chandross of Long Beach, L.I.
Both pairs earned expense-paid trips to the national finals to be played in Cincinnati in March.


Pressuring China on Rights: A Pointless Policy
To the Editor:
It is precisely in the name of "human rights" that I offer a challenge to the thinking behind your Nov. 23 editorial "China Stiffs the President," in which you cite such rights.


Former White House Aide Will Run Hill &amp; Knowlton
Hill &amp; Knowlton Inc., the troubled public relations giant, yesterday named Howard Paster, who recently resigned as President Clinton's chief lobbyist on Capitol Hill, to be its new chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Paster, 48, will take over a firm that has been buffeted in recent years by declining billings, turmoil in senior management, staff cutbacks and criticism that it has shown poor judgment in its choice of clients.
And its parent company, WPP Group P.L.C. of Britain, has struggled with heavy debt amassed during a takeover binge in the 1980's that included the purchase of Hill &amp; Knowlton.


SOCCER
Professional League
The United States was awarded the World Cup by FIFA on July 4, 1988, on condition that a professional league would be in place in this country by 1992.
The American organizers, however, persuaded soccer's world governing body to make the success of the tournament the first priority and to worry about a league later.


Woman Is Penn President; The First in the Ivy League
Judith Rodin, the provost of Yale University, has been chosen president of the University of Pennsylvania, becoming the first woman to head an Ivy League institution.
Dr.
Rodin, 49, a behavioral psychologist who is a Philadelphia native and a Penn alumna, will assume the post next June and face a number of problems, including a relatively low endowment, the need for academic consolidation and issues of racial strife and free speech.


Industry Group's Stand on Encoding
An industry group plans to tell the Clinton Administration that it is prepared to support the Administration's proposed method for scrambling phone calls and computer communications, but only if it is a voluntary standard and the Government is willing to drop strict export restrictions on other commercially available encoding technologies.
The group, including some of the nation's largest computer makers and software publishers, plans to make its case today in a letter to President Clinton signed by 24 computer and telecommunications companies and organizations.
The group includes Apple Computer, Digital Equipment, Hewlett-Packard, I.B.M., Lotus Development, Microsoft, Oracle, Prodigy Services and Sun Microsystems.


Little Mo Can Remember When Giants Were Giants
On the practice fields of St.
Michael's College, then in Winooski, Vt., where the Giants once performed their preseason labors, there was a distant shed used as a marker.
Jim Lee Howell, the coach, would order the players to run laps, twice around the shed, at the end of practice.
"What Jim Lee didn't know," said Dick Modzelewski, "was that at night we would move the shed a little closer. But not too close. And Jim Lee never caught on."


3 Promising Naval Officers Leave Tears and Disbelief
Tears belied the stoic bearing of the mourners in their prim Navy dress uniforms this gray morning as the remains of a star athlete from the Naval Academy were carried into the Roman Catholic church where she had once hoped to be married.
Her old boss from Cook's pharmacy, her teachers from high school, her parents and coaches and half the women's track team from the Academy cried over the Navy officer killed not by a foreign enemy but by one of her own -- the ensign she once pledged to marry -- in a murder-suicide that took the lives of three officers last week.


For Older Children, Electronic Playthings
A WIDE variety of computer gifts is on the shelves for older children, a group that includes most adults.
Here are a few that stood out in the flood.
Movie Select is a database of information about more than 44,000 videos.
It can be browsed in like any other database, but its "artificial intelligence" comes into play when it does the hard work itself.
Click on the Movie Select Recommends box and select three of your favorite movies, either from the whole list or from one of 10 categories.
I selected "2001: A Space Odyssey," "Airplane" and "Back to the Future." The program then presents a list of movies, 16 in this case, and you highlight those you especially liked.
I selected "Star Wars," "The Lion in Winter" and "Dead Poets Society."


Slain Burundi President and 7 Aides Are Buried


British Panel on Arms Sales To Iraq to Question Thatcher
Former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher will face public questioning this week for the first time about her role in Britain's sales of arms-making equipment to Iraq, officials said today.
Lady Thatcher, who headed the Government until November 1990, will be asked whether she misled Parliament in 1989 by stating that there had been no change in the Government's policy barring such export.


Ring Around De La Hoya, All Fall Down
Oscar De La Hoya was in hiding today instead of in training.
His fight Thursday night at Madison Square Garden is canceled, he and his co-managers are trading lawsuits and a family squabble is apparently pitting his father against his cousin.
Only 16 months ago at the 1992 Barcelona Olympics, he knelt in prayer for his late mother and draped his gold medal around her photograph.
He was dubbed boxing's "golden boy" and was considered a Sugar Ray Leonard in waiting.
But now, at the age of 20, his professional boxing license could be in limbo, his television deals are on hold and he is certain to see the middle of a court room.


METRO DIGEST
FIGHTING TO RETAIN PHONE BUSINESS A small Long Island company is fighting the Republic of Georgia to keep its exclusive contract to provide international phone service, even though that service allows just six calls out of the country at one time.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY ZUCKERMAN IS GIVEN 90 DAYS TO CLOSE DEAL Mayor Dinkins joined with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority in giving the developer Mortimer B. Zuckerman 90 days to close on his deal to buy and build on the New York Coliseum site at Columbus Circle or forfeit his $33.8 million down payment.
A1.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Palestinians who mourned for a vegetable vendor killed on Saturday in a Jewish settlement on the West Bank referred incorrectly to Hebron, where the vendor worked.
It is a predominantly Arab town in the West Bank, not a Jewish settlement in Israel.


McCall Seeks Repayments For Pensions
State Comptroller H. Carl McCall said today that he would give New York State and its local governments at least 12 years to make restitution for a $4 billion raid on the state pension system that was ruled illegal last month.
His reimbursement plan will allow the state and local governments to repay relatively small sums in the next few years, including the 1994 election year, and much larger sums near the turn of the century.


Review/Fashion; Celebrating the Flair That Was Vreeland
She has become part of the mythology of fashion, dominating the middle decades of this century.
So it was altogether fitting and proper that the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art chose Diana Vreeland as the subject of its next exhibition, previewed last night.
It will open to the public on Thursday.
The exhibition captures some of the enthusiasms and style of the woman with craggy features and blue-black hair who served as an impresario of fashion from the mid-1930's until her death, in 1989, at age 86.
She mesmerized designers as diverse as Bill Blass, Oscar de la Renta, Issey Miyake, Valentino, Gianni Versace and Arnold Scaasi.


Observer; Hazardous to Health
Trying to understand the various health care programs kicking around Washington reminds me of what I've always said about the income-tax law: They could make it even tougher for the American mind to grasp if they'd write the directions in Finnish.
At first glance, the main goal of people who draw up tax laws and these health care programs seems to be to make the customer feel inferior.
Actually, this is not so.


Classical Music in Review
'Fidelio'  Metropolitan Opera
Amid a slew of cast changes in "Fidelio" on Saturday afternoon, Anne Evans sang Leonore for the first time at the Met.
Although the British soprano has sung much Wagner and made her Met debut two years ago in "Tannhauser," she has a timbre lighter and sweeter than the Wagnerian norm, and therefore would seem ideal for Leonore.
But on Saturday her voice seemed to lack focus and force; Helen Donath (entering the production as Marzelline) and Gary Lakes (continuing as Florestan) eclipsed her at times, and in "Abscheulicher! Wo eilst du hin?" she seemed a rather dim and even ghostly presence.
Still, she has a cultivated, evenly controlled tone, welcome in an opera that is too often saddled with Wagnerians on holiday.


Medicine Does Not Begin and End With Scalpel
To the Editor:
"How Doctors Learn to Think They're Doctors" (Week in Review, Nov. 28) would have us believe that doctors as a group are condescending, paternalistic and self-absorbed.
In particular, you quote Dr.
Joseph DeRose Jr., a surgical intern at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, who claims that young doctors are increasingly driven into high-paying "no patient contact" specialties such as anesthesiology and radiology.
If you wanted to prove that doctors are arrogant and detached from reality, you chose a perfect example.


Classical Music in Review
Choir and Orchestra of St. Ignatius Loyola  Church of St. Ignatius Loyola Manhattan
Kent Trittle, the music director at St.
Ignatius Loyola, took the high road in his holiday concert on Wednesday night.
The major works on the program -- Haydn's "Lord Nelson" Mass and Bernstein's "Chichester Psalms" (in the version for organ, harp and percussion) -- were at a far remove from obvious Christmas fare.
Ralph Vaughan Williams's Fantasia on Christmas Carols, although a flimsy example of the holiday-potpourri genre, had the virtue of not being crushingly familiar.


CHRONICLE
Rush Limbaugh's name is sure to be evoked this evening during a panel discussion entitled "Talk Radio: Where Are the Women?" at the Columbia University Building, Lexington Avenue and 51st Street.
A panel of radio hosts, commentators and executives will debate "Is talk radio news or entertainment, and why aren't more women talk show hosts?" The panelists include Joan Hamburg, who has a show on WOR; Brian Lehrer, who is on WNYC; Lynn Samuels of WABC, and Betty Friedan.


Pacers Sign Scott
The Indiana Pacers, looking for depth at shooting guard, signed veteran BYRON SCOTT yesterday as a backup to REGGIE MILLER .
"One of the things they told me is they want me to come in and rub off on some of the younger guys," Scott said.
"I've been with teams that know how to win." (AP)


Parking Rules
Alternate-side street cleaning regulations will be suspended tomorrow for the Catholic holiday of Immaculate Conception, including the Bay Ridge and Dyker Heights sections of Brooklyn.


Should Municipalities or Businesses Control Trash Handling?
To the Editor:
Currently before the United States Supreme Court is a case not much discussed in the press that has profound environmental and economic implications for the nation.
In the case, C. &amp; A. Carbone v.
Town of Clarkstown, a waste handler asks that the Court decide whether state or municipal government can direct or "flow" waste to designated facilities, or whether this interferes with interstate commerce in trash.


Rockies Sign Galarraga To a Four-Year Contract
The Colorado Rockies and first baseman ANDRES GALARRAGA agreed yesterday on a guaranteed contract that will keep the National League batting champion in Colorado for the next four seasons.
News reports said the deal was for about $12 million and included incentives totaling $3 million to $4 million.
Galarraga, 32, who led the league with a .370 batting average last season, said: "I'm so happy, so excited to sign for four years."


High-Tech Land Mines Aren't Any Safer
To the Editor:
I would like to commend you for bringing to light the insidious nature of land mines in "100 Million Infernal Machines" (editorial, Nov. 29).
However, its last paragraph has me a bit worried.


RESULTS PLUS
SPEED SKATING German Woman Breaks Mark Gunda Niemann of Germany broke the world record for the women's 5,000-meter race yesterday in Hamar, Norway, clocking 7 minutes 13.29 seconds.
The previous record of 7:14.13 was set by Yvonne van Gennip of the Netherlands during the 1988 Calgary Olympics.
Dan Jansen won the 1,000 in 1:13.01, a track record and just short of the world record. (AP)


Truck Flips on Expressway Ramp in Brooklyn; 8 Are Injured


More Letter Bombings in Austria Raise Fears of Neo-Nazi Terrorism
A wave of letter bombings continued to shake Austria today, shattering the calm of life in the capital and setting off fears that the country may be facing an outbreak of neo-Nazi terrorism.
"This subjects our whole country and body politic to a test that we must pass," Chancellor Franz Vranitzky said.
"It must be possible for a state, for a social republic like Austria, to put a stop to this."


Pasqualoni Ranks No. 4
Syracuse Coach PAUL PASQUALONI was paid $165,140 last year, trailing only two of Syracuse University's 944 faculty members and its chancellor, according to records the school is required to disclose to the Internal Revenue Service.
The only university employees paid more than Pasqualoni were JOHN ROBINSON , a computer science professor ($228,000); Chancellor KENNETH SHAW ($209,628), and GEOFFREY FOX , a computer science professor ($167,717).


Rockport Moves To Consolidate
The Rockport Company in Marlborough, Mass., said yesterday that it had consolidated the creative portion of its global account, estimated at $12 million to $15 million, at Bartle Bogle Hegarty in London, which already handles the account's international creative portion.
Bartle Bogle was awarded the American portion from Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor in New York, which continues to handle American media buying.


A Deal Done in U.S. Style Dazes an Ex-Soviet State
This article is based on reporting by Barry Meier in New York and Raymond Bonner in Tbilisi, Georgia, and was written by Mr.
Meier.
Three years ago, a fledgling New York company persuaded officials in the former Soviet republic of Georgia to give it an exclusive 25-year contract to erect an elaborate international telephone system that would bring the world a dial tone away.


Station Puts on Its Best Face for Holiday Travelers


Review/Music; Exploring 'Rheingold' Anew as a Symphony
Only now, in its 75th-anniversary season, has the versatile Cleveland Orchestra come round to one of the most glorious symphonies of all: Wagner's "Rheingold." Oh, sure, Wagner called it a music drama, and it functions admirably as opera.
But with its incomparably rich orchestral fabric, its taut evolutionary musical logic and its epically scaled four-movement structure, it can also be viewed as a powerful oversize symphony.
Hearing the fresh emphases and nuances, let alone the sheer imposing sonorities, that a great symphony orchestra can find in the score is often thrilling.
Christoph von Dohnanyi, the music director of the Cleveland Orchestra and an experienced Wagner hand, is bringing Wagner's entire "Ring" cycle to Cleveland in semistaged performances and recording it for Decca/London in a multi-year project.
"Die Walkure" was done last year.
"Rheingold" was performed on Thursday and Saturday evenings and will be recorded this week.
"Siegfried" is projected for the 1995-96 season, as the search for a suitably heroic tenor continues; "Gotterdammerung," for the following season.


INSIDE
North Korean Offer Rejected
An offer by North Korea on inspections would not enable experts to tell if it had quit a nuclear arms effort, a United Nations agency said.
Page A6.
East German Spy Chief Guilty
Markus Wolf was convicted of treason and bribery in Germany and sentenced to six years in prison, suspended while he appeals.
Page A13.
Durenberger Case Dropped
Saying Senate documents were used wrongly, a Federal judge dismissed criminal charges against Senator David F. Durenberger.
Page A22.
Death Penalty Challenge
The Supreme Court will hear a challenge to the death penalty in California, the state with the most inmates on death row.
Page B10.
Mourning 3 Promising Lives
Three young Navy officers are dead in a double murder and suicide, leaving confusion and grief.
Page A22.
Easing the Pain in Albany
New York governments can take 12 years to pay $4 billion illegally taken from pension funds.
Page B1.
New President for Penn
As the new president of the University of Pennsylvania, Judith Rodin, provost of Yale University, will be the first woman to head an Ivy League institution.
Page B8.


CHARGES DISMISSED IN SENATOR'S CASE
Without addressing the merits of the case, a Federal judge in Minnesota has dismissed criminal charges that Senator Dave Durenberger submitted false expense claims to the Senate.
The judge, Warren K. Urbom of Federal District Court, ruled that the prosecutors had violated Mr.
Durenberger's constitutional rights and threatened the independence of the Senate by giving a grand jury access to official Senate records involving the Senator, a Republican from Minnesota.
The jury went on to indict him.
The speech-and-debate clause of the Constitution protects lawmakers against prosecution for actions taken in their official capacity.


3 Space Station Partners Agree to Invite Russia
THE foreign partners in the old plan for the space station -- Europe, Japan and Canada -- agreed yesterday to formally invite Russia to join work on the revamped outpost, overcoming a major potential obstacle for the East-West endeavor and bringing it one step closer to fruition.
The invitation is to be delivered in the next few days.
"A major hurdle has been overcome," said a Clinton Administration official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
"The governments of the international partners are all now agreed to bring in Russia. There was a time when we weren't so sure." Hope Overcomes Surprise
The partners met yesterday at the State Department in Washington and gave their approval.
When the Clinton Administration first announced its intention to bring Moscow into the project, many of the partners expressed shock, bewilderment or tepid support.
But as the plan has progressed, initial skepticism seems to have given way to an appreciation of potential advantages.


Nightmare or the Dream Of a New Era in Genetics?
In an ambitious attempt to eliminate common recessive diseases from their community, a group of Orthodox Jews in New York and Israel is using the most advanced molecular technology to screen young people considering marriage.
It is a project that elicits strong emotions from geneticists and ethicists.
Some say it is the fruit of a new genetic era.
Others say it verges on a nightmare.


Review/Theater: The Green Bird; Magic Without Realism: A Fantasy In Commedia dell'Arte Tradition
"I don't understand this," says Tartaglia, the gruff king of Monterotondo, pondering the enchantments that have been unfolding all about him.
"It's as if I'm asleep and dreaming, or taking part in a play with transformations."
He is but one of many astonished characters in "The Green Bird," a rarely seen 18th-century fantasy that the Minneapolis-based Theatre de la Jeune Lune is performing here through Dec. 18 at the Yale Repertory Theater.
His blinking befuddlement is understandable.
In this magical work, 1 of 10 "tales for the theater" in which the Italian playwright Carlo Gozzi combined stock characters of the commedia dell'arte with exotic storybook figures of his own devising, a palace materializes out of thin air, forbidding statues come alive and an evil queen mother turns into a turtle.
Convincingly, too.


Patterns
An Underwear Denouement
Companies pay small fortunes to be dropped into the background of movies, a Coke can here, a Reese's Piece there.
But Calvin Klein underwear and the model sporting it have become so much a part of the culture of Times Square that, without the designer paying a cent, Mr.
Klein's billboard is the centerpiece of a new film, "The Cowboy Way." Not only the centerpiece, but the denouement of a morality tale about two naive cowboys, played by Woody Harrelson and Kiefer Sutherland, who not only survive New York (and save the girl), but also leave the city richer men.


Big 3 Offer Compromise, Promising Cleaner Cars
In a plan that would sidestep a requirement for electric cars in the Northeast, the Big Three American auto makers proposed a compromise on pollution standards yesterday.
General Motors, Ford Motor and Chrysler offered to produce gasoline-powered cars that would be cleaner than the ones the Federal Government plans to require.
But such vehicles would not be as clean as those that meet California's stricter emission standards, which New York and Massachusetts have adopted and other states are considering.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The economy may be improving, but Madison Avenue isn't ready to celebrate just yet.
ASKEIN of recent statistics indicates the economy may finally be improving.
But a leading forecaster is warning Madison Avenue not to break out the Champagne and confetti just yet.
Robert J. Coen, in his semiannual presentation of the outlook for ad spending worldwide, said yesterday that he had reduced his estimates for domestic results this year a third time in addition to trimming his expectations for 1994.


Jets Begin to Pick Up the Pieces After the Loss to Colts
It has been five weeks since the Jets have had the Monday morning blahs, so forgive them if they are not accustomed to the feeling.
But a day after an ugly 9-6 loss to the inept Colts, and with a four-game final stretch that includes Dallas, Buffalo and Houston standing between them and the playoffs, the Jets were left wondering how they could play so poorly with so much on the line.
Coach Bruce Coslet offered no excuses for the loss to the Colts, saying it was out of character after a five-game winning streak had seemed to solidify the Jets' playoff hopes.


Finding Help in Raising Grandchildren
There are moments when Maria Lemons feels as if she has been fated to live two decades of her life over again.
As a young woman, she experienced the years of joy, hard work and occasional heartbreak that came with raising a son and a daughter.


Francis M. Ellis, 70, Partner in Law Firm
Francis M. Ellis, a former managing partner of the Manhattan-based law firm of Carter, Ledyard &amp; Milburn who did legal work for the American Express Company, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 70.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, the former Marilyn Martin.


Medicine Does Not Begin and End With Scalpel; Joining the Fraternity
To the Editor:
You seem to have uncovered one of the major faults in the system of delivery of medical care in "How Doctors Learn to Think They're Doctors." Since the early 60's, medical curriculums have been centered on the authoritative solutions to the problems of disease.
Solutions are fixed with little or no consideration of the variations from the "norm" of each individual patient.
Physicians treat computer-generated data with computer-generated modalities.
Rarely does today's specialist perform a complete history and physical examination including the four basic components: inspection, palpation, percussion and auscultation.


Dr. Roy N. Barnett, 79, A Pathologist, Is Dead
Dr.
Roy N. Barnett, a pathologist associated with Norwalk Hospital, Yale University School of Medicine and, most recently, Mount Sinai Medical Center, died on Friday at the Carolton Convalescent Home in Fairfield, Conn.
He was 79 and lived in Westport.
He had a long illness after a stroke a year ago, his family said.


Clintons Refurnish White House History
To the Editor:
"A Redecorated White House, the Way the Clintons Like It" (front page, Nov. 24) explained how the Clintons have determined the Victorian period to be the historical as well as personal point of origin for redecorating the Treaty Room and, apparently, other rooms of the White House.


Books of The Times; Allusions and Illusions, Mirrors Within Mirrors
Ghosts  By John Banville 245 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $21.
"Ghosts," the elliptical new novel by the Irish writer John Banville, begins with a mysterious shipwreck and ends with a criminal's confession.
The volume is filled to the brim with literary allusions -- from "The Tempest" to "Les Fleurs du Mal" to "The Odyssey" -- and it reads like a literary jigsaw puzzle: one of those M. C. Escher puzzles, perhaps, where staircases turn into barricades, water flows upward and nothing is what it seems.


Cray Research Does Poorly In Computer Sales to Japan
Cray Research Inc., America's largest supercomputer company, has fared poorly in recent supercomputer procurements by Japan's Government.
"Cray has sort of been blown out of the water," said Raul Mendez, president of International Systems Research, a supercomputer consulting firm in Tokyo.
He said Japanese companies had "bid incredibly low."


A Boat With a View


Classical Music in Review
Itzhak Perlman  Violinist Avery Fisher Hall
Itzhak Perlman has not been known for his adventures in modernism, but on Sunday afternoon he offered a program in which works by Luigi Dallapiccola, Toru Takemitsu and William Bolcom nestled alongside favorites by Tartini, Schumann and Sarasate.


No Headline
"It makes you want to put glass domes over your children. I don't know what we do to fix it. How do we fix the world?" -- MARION ROSENFIELD, whose cousin, a star athlete from the Naval Academy, was murdered.  [ A22:1. ]


Oliver Stone Returns To the Vietnam War; Let the Debate Begin
He's back.
Two years after his film "J. F. K." stirred more headlines and editorials than any other movie in a long while, the director Oliver Stone has a new movie that is -- big surprise -- both provocative and about a subject that obsesses him.
In this case, it's Vietnam.


Discount With a Vengeance; A New Wrinkle in Retailing Hits the Metropolitan Region
Patty Menges is the kind of shopper who makes mall retailers nervous.
"I don't like malls; I don't go to malls," she said, standing outside the Price Club, a floor-to-ceiling serve-yourself retailer of just about everything in bulk.
Ms.
Menges doesn't feel safe in the vast acreage of a mall parking lot and doesn't care for the prices either.
"It's not discount," she said.


PITTSBURGH BANK IS BUYING DREYFUS FOR $1.85 BILLION
The Mellon Bank Corporation said yesterday that it would acquire the Dreyfus Corporation, the country's sixth-largest mutual fund company, for $1.85 billion in stock.
Like many big banks, Pittsburgh-based Mellon is trying to move away from the traditional business of taking deposits and making loans, which represents a declining share of the nation's financial activity.
This year, for the first time, the nearly $2 trillion in mutual funds equals the amount on deposit at the nation's banks.


U.S. Olympians Confident
It didn't count in the won-lost standing but rather in the way these things matter in the mind of an athlete: The American hockey players, by coming back to win with three third-period goals on Saturday, can perform with the experienced, heady Russians.
"We passed the test," said the coach of the United States Olympic team, Tim Taylor.
"We can skate up and down with that club."


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association  INDIANA PACERS -- Signed Byron Scott, guard.
Placed LaSalle Thompson, center-forward, on the injured list.
Football National Football League  DETROIT LIONS -- Fired Dan Henning, offensive coordinator.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.97
2.96
2.92
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.11
3.10
3.24
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.27
3.26
3.34
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.23
5.30
6.42
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.16
6.23
7.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.17
7.25
8.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.59
5.65
6.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


IN NOTING ABSENCE, A.M.A. SEES A SNUB
Struggling to quell a revolt within their ranks, leaders of the American Medical Association criticized the Clinton Administration today for not sending any high-ranking officials to their convention here to defend the President's plan to overhaul the nation's health care system.
The association supports Mr.
Clinton's goal of guaranteeing health insurance coverage for all Americans.
But with many elements of the Clinton plan coming under fire from doctors, there was no one here to speak for the White House, to rebut the critics or to defend the President's proposal to require all employers to provide insurance for their employees.


Ancient 'Starting Pistol' Turns Out to Be 2 Cords
AT the Panhellenic Games of ancient Greece, as early as the fourth century B.C., runners would crouch and lean forward at the ready, their naked bodies glistening with oil.
They were restrained against a premature start by two cords stretched tight across the starting line.
One cord held them at their waist and another at the knees.
At the cry of "apite," for "take off," the cords fell forward and the runners broke, sprinting down the track to the cheers of spectators in the stadium.
This was the way the highly competitive foot races of Greece began at least as early as 340 B.C., long before there were starting pistols.


Market Place Commonwealth Edison Is Liked Despite Its Debt and High Rates
COMMONWEALTH EDISON has embraced nuclear power more fervently than any other electric utility in the nation, and it is best known on Wall Street for the resulting troubles with regulators, consumer groups and environmentalists.
So why then do many Wall Street analysts like the stock?


For Dreyfus, a Chance To Make a Comeback
The acquisition of the Dreyfus Corporation, one of the nation's best-known mutual fund companies, by the Mellon Bank Corporation gives Dreyfus a new opportunity to improve its sagging performance and highlights the growing importance in the mutual fund industry of new channels of distribution.
With some 4,410 mutual funds competing for the investor's dollar, the Dreyfus-Mellon arrangement allows Dreyfus to leapfrog over the competition with new ways of selling its funds, new funds in its lineup, a stronger toehold in the growing market for 401(k) employee retirement savings plansand possible cost savings through back-office consolidations.


Trade Pact Still Eludes Negotiators
The United States and the European Community struggled into the early morning hours today to bridge differences that are holding up a world trade agreement, now divided mainly by a bitter dispute over access for American movies and television programs in the European market.
Despite more than 19 hours of talks between the United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, and the European Community's chief negotiator, Sir Leon Brittan, officials on both sides reported little progress.


Times Co. Expects Earnings To Increase Despite a Charge
The New York Times Company said yesterday that a one-time charge against earnings for voluntary early retirements for production employees at The New York Times would reduce fourth-quarter earnings by $4.5 million, or 3 cents a share.
Nancy Nielsen, a spokeswoman for the Times Company, said that labor contracts signed over the last 19 months with craft unions allowed the company to streamline the production staff of its flagship newspaper.


Bond Prices Continuing to Rally
The good feeling of last week held in the bond market yesterday as prices rallied for the second consecutive trading day and interest rates fell.
Traders said activity was light but that a drop in the oil prices gave investors another dose of positive news on inflation ahead of two Government inflation indicators at the end of the week.


Baseball Is Considering a New Round of Expansion
Major league baseball has made no official plans to expand again, but unofficially the owners are considering placing teams in Phoenix, and presumably St.
Petersburg, Fla., for the 1997 season.
Although no confirmation was forthcoming from baseball officials today, the likelihood of the 1997 timetable stems from conversations between owners and Jerry Colangelo, head of the Phoenix Suns of the National Basketball Association, who in just a few months has put together a baseball ownership group.


Venezuela Victor: Will Vows Be Kept?
On the campaign trail, Rafael Caldera promised that gasoline prices would remain frozen at 22 cents a gallon, that a new national sales tax would be abolished, and that the deficit would be cut by asking foreign creditor banks for a break.
At the same time, Mr.
Caldera's economic advisers quietly traveled to the United States and tried to reassure foreign business executives that the 77-year-old presidential candidate was just saying these things to get elected.


Bears Are Hugging Their Opponents
We know defense. Do we know the Chicago Bears?
Well, let's see, there are Richard Dent and Steve McMichael on the line.
We know them.
In fact, McMichael played in his 187th consecutive game here on Sunday, breaking Walter Payton's team record.
McMichael made seven tackles and recovered a fumble during Chicago's 30-17 victory over Green Bay.
Not bad for a 35-year- old in his 14th season from the University of Texas.


U.N. Rebukes Myanmar Leaders On Human Rights and Democracy
A General Assembly committee today unanimously rebuked the military rulers of Myanmar, formerly Burma, for their continuing refusal to hand over power to a democratically elected Parliament and deplored the violations of basic human rights there.
The Third Committee, which deals with social and cultural issues, also called for the release of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the opposition leader and Nobel Peace Prize winner, who is now in her fifth year of house arrest, and of other political prisoners.


Candy and Some Sweet-Talk in Russia As a Candidate Seeks Women's Votes
The bad boy of Russian politics, Vladimir Zhirinovsky, a nationalist who thrives on shock value, turned on the charm tonight with a televised appeal to Russia's overworked and underappreciated women.
"We men are mostly guilty before our women," the 47-year-old leader of the Liberal-Democratic Party said in a broadcast that began with his sister showing old photographs of their grandmother and their mother, and ended with the candidate offering his female viewers a symbolic gift of roses and candy.


Bomb Trial Tracks Suspect's Movements
The World Trade Center trial yesterday focused on the days before the blast at the trade center occurred, with the prosecutors and the defense offering contradictory explanations for the actions of the lead suspect in the case, Mohammed A. Salameh.
Testimony centered on Mr.
Salameh, who rented the yellow van that prosecutors say contained the bomb that rocked the foundations of the trade center shortly after noon on Feb. 26, killing six people and injuring more than a thousand.


By Design; A Step Into Yesterday
You may not want to wear baby-doll dresses or carry one of Anna Sui's stuffed-animal backpacks, but how about Mary Janes?
They are one of the few schoolgirl styles from the spring shows that could find their way into many women's wardrobes.
If you're too young to have worn Mary Jane shoes yourself, you must surely have seen photographs of little girls in party clothes with round-toed patent leather flats secured with a strap across the instep.
A grown-up shouldn't feel at all silly wearing one of the new versions of the shoe with pants or a short skirt.


The Italians Peer Ahead
The Italians voted Sunday for the mayors of major cities and the result was fairly clear: the former Communists won, the neo-Fascists cemented gains and the insurgent Northern League remained strong only where its name suggests it should.
What the election really did was set the guidelines for a national vote expected next spring to decide who inherits the land from the Christian Democrats, brought down after a half-century in power by the end of the cold war and their own corruption.


Violinists and Tax Writeoffs: Bach Testifies in Federal Court
The acoustics were not ideal.
And the occasion was peculiar: a Federal Tax Court trial in Foley Square in in lower Manhattan.
But Richard Simon and his wife, Fiona Simon, violinists with the New York Philharmonic, attacked the third movement of Bach's double violin concerto with verve.
As the final notes died away, Judge David Laro had only one question: "Could you do a little Beethoven?"
The Internal Revenue Service is not disputing the virtuosity of the Simons.
It is challenging their 1989 Federal tax return, however, on which the violinists depreciated 21 percent of the value of two bows by the master French bowmaker Francois Tourte, often referred to as the Stradivari of bowmakers.


Hextall Still Waits for Islander Fans to Put Out Welcome Mat
If he were a cowboy, he'd be given a black hat.
Instead he wears an Islander helmet that too many times this season has had to serve as protection from a shower of boos inside his own rink as well as on the road.
There are still so many reasons why Ron Hextall, who made his reputation with Philadelphia as the most cantankerous goaltender to wield a stick since Billy Smith, remains an Islander in name only.


Italy's Great Red Hope?
In municipal elections on Sunday, voters in five major Italian cities chose the more moderate alternative -- the candidates backed by the former Communist Party, now known as the Democratic Party of the Left.
The former Communists now plausibly, though paradoxically, offer themselves as the strongest remaining champion of a unified, democratic and European-oriented Italy in the months leading up to next year's national parliamentary elections.


Mercer Trial Delayed
RAY MERCER' s bribery trial has been postponed until Jan. 10.
Mercer is charged with offering $100,000 to JESSE FERGUSON to take a dive during their heavyweight bout at Madison Square Garden last February.
The trial was originally scheduled for yesterday in Manhattan Supreme Court.


U.N. Atom Agency Rejects Offer by North Korea
The International Atomic Energy Agency said today that North Korea's offer to allow only limited inspections of its key nuclear installations was unacceptable and would not enable the agency's inspectors to tell if Pyongyang had abandoned its nuclear weapons program.
The Atomic Energy Agency's statement is important because the United States has said it will be guided by its assessment on issues involving the spread of nuclear weapons.


Tree Links 2 Continents
A TREE found in Costa Rica has been linked to a plant family that previously was believed to exist only in Africa, scientists at the Missouri Botanical Garden say.
The Costa Rican tree, which was thought to be a type of mahogany, has been reclassified in a study published in the current issue of the botanical garden's journal, Novon.
The tree, Ruptiliocarpon caracolito, is the newest member of the Lepidobotryaceae plant family, which was created in 1950 solely for the classification of the distinctive African Lepidobotrys, said Dr.
Barry Hammel, a botanist at the Missouri Botanical Garden and an author of the study.


Search for Budget Chief Is Narrowed by Giuliani
Rudolph W. Giuliani has narrowed his search for a budget director to two leading candidates: the finance director of the Democratic-controlled City Council and the chief fiscal analyst for the Republican majority in the State Senate, advisers to the Mayor-elect said yesterday.
With a budget shortfall estimated at $1.7 billion to $2 billion looming for the next fiscal year, Mr.
Giuliani is pushing to have the city budget director named by midweek.
A meeting of the search committee for budget director has been called for tomorrow, aides said.


A Benefit for Mass Transit Commuters
More than 1,200 companies in and around New York City have given tax-free mass transit vouchers to employees this year alone.
These "Transitcheks" are worth up to $60 a month in fares on some 40 transit systems -- buses, trains, ferries and the subway.
At least 15 other cities have regional plans patterned on New York's.
The concept overflows with good sense.
As a public benefit, vouchers encourage travel by public transit and reduce the air and traffic pollution of commuting by car.
As a private benefit, mass-transit commuters get tax-free compensation comparable to free parking for those who drive.
And for employers, a year's worth of vouchers is less costly than a pay raise of equivalent value, because the employee pays no tax on the vouchers.


Classical Music in Review
Choir and Orchestra of St. Ignatius Loyola  Church of St. Ignatius Loyola Manhattan
Kent Trittle, the music director at St.
Ignatius Loyola, took the high road in his holiday concert on Wednesday night.
The major works on the program -- Haydn's "Lord Nelson" Mass and Bernstein's "Chichester Psalms" (in the version for organ, harp and percussion) -- were at a far remove from obvious Christmas fare.
Ralph Vaughan Williams's Fantasia on Christmas Carols, although a flimsy example of the holiday-potpourri genre, had the virtue of not being crushingly familiar.


Cellpro Gets $220 Million Investment
Adding to its rapidly growing stake in biotechnology start-up companies, Corange Ltd., a drug and medical device maker, announced yesterday that it had agreed to invest up to $220 million in Cellpro Inc., a four-year-old company with a promising therapy for breast cancer patients.
Cellpro, based in Bothell, Wash., recently began selling a new system for regenerating blood cells used in bone marrow transplants for patients with advanced cancers.
The company said the system, which is already being sold in Europe, would be submitted to the United States Food and Drug Administration for approval later this month.


Chip Stocks
Semiconductor stocks were bitten yesterday, thanks to Thomas Kurlak, an influential Merrill Lynch analyst.
The firm lowered earnings estimates on Intel and Motorola and cut ratings on the stocks to "neutral." The Standard &amp; Poor's index of semiconductor issues fell more than seven points, to its lowest level since mid-November.


CHRONICLE
President Clinton was not the only out-of-town draw on the party circuit in Hollywood during the weekend: RUSH LIMBAUGH, the outspoken talk show host, did admirably considering that the cocktail party given by Pocket Books to celebrate the publication of his second book, "See, I Told You So," was held the same evening that the President was at an exclusive ($25,000 a couple) fund-raiser at the home of Marvin Davis.
An eclectic and nonpaying crowd of more than 200 came to the Chateau Marmont on Saturday to congratulate Mr.
Limbaugh.
Among the guests: MARY MATALIN, the political director for President Bush's campaign and now a talk show host herself; Darryl F. Gates, the former Los Angeles police chief; Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer, the movie producers; the writers Dominick Dunne, Michael Medved and Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington; Thomas Sowell, the conservative economist, and Brandon Tartikoff, the former chairman of NBC Entertainment and Paramount Pictures.


Court to Hear Challenge To a Death Penalty Law
Accepting appeals from two prisoners on death row, the Supreme Court today agreed to hear a broad challenge to California's death penalty law.
A decision in the prisoners' favor could have the effect of invalidating many death sentences in California, which this year passed Texas and now leads the nation as the state with the most prisoners on death row -- 375.


Give the Latest Fantasy In an Electronic Form
YOUR favorite computer users probably work all day on spreadsheets, data bases and other boring software, so it may be advisable to avoid business programs as holiday gifts, unless you are the type who gave Mom a new ironing board last year.
By day they may enter data and process words, but by night they long to swash their buckles, defend Earth against alien invaders, pilot experimental aircraft and vaporize enemy tanks.
Here are some recommendations for Apple Macintosh games and entertainment software.
Games for Windows-based computers will be discussed later.
Realistic Pinball
Crystal Caliburn, the third title in a series called Solid State Pinball from the Japanese developer Little Wing, will be at the top of Silicon Santa's gift list this year.
As did its predecessors, Tristan and Eight Ball Deluxe, Crystal Caliburn transforms the Macintosh screen into a pinball game, with the keyboard used to control the flippers and the plunger.


Newark Officer Acquitted Of Shooting Teen-Age Thief
The Newark police officer accused of ambushing and shooting an unarmed teen-age car thief 18 months ago was acquitted today of that charge and all but one of the other six charges against him.
But the sole conviction, for aiming a weapon at a passenger who had been riding in the stolen car, could end the police career of the officer, 32-year-old Kenneth Holloway Jr., and subject him to 18 months in prison.


In New Data on Climate Changes, Decades, Not Centuries, Count
ACCORDING to conventional wisdom, the world's climate over the last millennium has been dominated by two big global events: a medieval warm period, between about 900 and 1300 A.D., when vineyards flourished in Britain and the Vikings colonized Greenland; and a Little Ice Age from the 15th to the 19th centuries, when mountain glaciers expanded, extreme cold ravaged Europe and people occasionally walked from Staten Island to Manhattan on the ice.
More precise analysis is now casting serious doubt on this picture of worldwide, centuries-long climatic episodes, so much so that a number of scientists are urging that the commonly used terms "Little Ice Age" and "Medieval Warm Period" be abandoned.
"These terms have become entrenched in the literature, but they obfuscate what really took place, when and exactly where," said Dr.
Raymond S. Bradley, a paleoclimatologist at the University of Massachusetts in Amherst.


A Bill on 'Street Money' Calls for Check Payments
A legislative committee today released a bill that would require Election Day "street money" to be paid by check, a move its sponsors hope will rob the term of its illicit aura as well as prevent abuse of the money.
To many people, the term street money suggests cash spent to buy votes, Frederick M. Herrmann, the executive director of the State Election Law Enforcement Commission, told the committee today.
But under state law, Election Day money is legitimate spending to get out the vote, to staff polling places and to canvass voters and provide them with transportation to the polls.
Political parties, campaign groups and anyone else spending money on Election Day must report to the commission everyone who receives $25 or more.


A Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World for Dolphins' Cox
Bryan Cox, the Dolphins' linebacker, is explosive on and off the field.
During and after Miami's 19-14 loss to the Giants on Sunday, he talked back to Referee Gary Lane, who was telling him not to talk back to the game officials.
He publicly criticized the officials.
He almost got into a fight with a taunting fan and he argued with a league security official.
After the game, he even argued with Joe Greene, a Dolphins assistant coach, who was trying to get him to leave the field.
Cox brought up the word "discrimination," but he made it clear that he was not talking of racial discrimination.


Clinton Advisers Oppose Leniency For American Who Spied for Israel
President Clinton's advisers are recommending that he reject a petition for clemency by Jonathan Jay Pollard, an American Jew who was convicted of spying for Israel in 1987 and sentenced to life in prison, Administration officials said today.
Faced with solidifying opposition within the Administration, officials said it appeared unlikely that Mr.
Clinton would shorten Mr.
Pollard's sentence despite an intense lobbying campaign by American supporters and a personal plea last month by Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel.


Some Feared Mirror Flaws Even Before Hubble Orbit
IT turns out that makers of the 94.5-inch main mirror of the Hubble Space Telescope were haunted for years by fears that its supremely smooth surface held a major flaw.
But they did nothing to alert the Government of their apprehensions or to stop the launching of the most complex and costly scientific instrument ever put into space.
The Federal Government recently disclosed this and other new details of its three-year investigation into the causes of the mirror problem after the builders agreed to pay $25 million in damages.
The mirror, made in the early 1980's, has a symmetrical distortion known as spherical aberration, which throws off the Hubble's focus so that starlight, instead of falling at one point within the telescope, is spread over an area.
The current space shuttle mission is to repair that flaw.


Minister, 52, Is Shot and Killed in Brooklyn in Apparent Robbery Attempt
A 52-year-old minister of a storefront church who also owned several buildings was shot and killed in Brooklyn late Sunday night during what the police believe was an attempted robbery.
Bishop John Dyer, pastor of the Church of the Living God, was shot shortly after leaving the church at 3401 Church Avenue in East Flatbush.
He had driven several blocks to his two-story house on Linden Boulevard and was closing the gate to his carport when a gunman approached at about 10 P.M., said Sgt.
Patrick Hughes of the 67th Precinct detective squad.


Hubble Telescope Repairs Enter Critical Phase


L. L. Snyder, 86, Authority on Rise Of Hitler, Is Dead
Louis L. Snyder, an authority on the rise and fall of Nazi Germany and the author of more than 60 books, died on Nov. 25 at the Princeton Medical Center in Princeton, N.J.
He was 86 and lived in Princeton.
The cause was cholangitis, an infection of the bile ducts, said his physician, Dr.
Louis Jourdain.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BP OIL CO., Cleveland, an American unit of British Petroleum P.L.C., said yesterday that it would remain in the California retail gasoline business because efforts to sell its network of 400 service stations had failed.
W.
R.
GRACE CO., New York, has acquired the personal-care health services business of Vivra Inc., San Francisco, for an undisclosed amount.


Review/Music; High Drama Amid Quietude
Going to new-music concerts can be like a visit to the flea market or the antiques fair.
One sifts through mounds of the inconsequential, keeping a sharp eye for the occasional item of value.
Notable in the Arditti Quartet's program at Alice Tully Hall on Sunday afternoon was the value of just about everything it had to offer.
Much of this worthiness was generated by quality controls imposed by the performers themselves, often before the act of composition.
Harrison Birtwistle's Three Movements for String Quartet is the result of an Arditti commission.
Akira Nishimura's "Pulses of Light" was dedicated to and first played by this splendid British group.
In much the same way, Conlon Nancarrow's Quartet No. 3 was written at the Arditti's urging and first performed by it five years ago.


2 West Bank Jews Die; Violence Grows
Palestinian gunmen killed a Jewish settler and his son today and wounded three other sons near the West Bank town of Hebron, apparently in revenge for the weekend killing of an Arab by settlers.
The attack was the latest explosion in steadily increasing violence between Arabs and Jews in Hebron, and it drew a strong condemnation from Secretary of State Warren Christopher as he returned to Israel after stops in Syria and Jordan to push forward Middle East peace efforts.


Dr. John Wildeman, Criminologist, 56, Dies
Dr.
John Wildeman, a criminologist and professor of sociology at Hofstra University, died on Thursday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 56 and lived in Hempstead, L.I.
The cause was chronic liver disease, the university said.


William J. Block, Lawyer, 89
William J. Block, a retired Manhattan lawyer who specialized in product liability, died on Nov. 17 at the Martha's Vineyard Hospital in Oak Bluffs, Mass.
He was 89.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his son, Noah Block of Manhattan.


SOFTWARE COMPANY TO OFFER ELECTRONIC SHOPPING
Eshop Technology, a Silicon Valley software company, said yesterday that it would offer electronic shopping services through personal computers, televisions, personal communicators and video game machines.
Eshop, based in San Mateo, Calif., said that it had licensed its technology, which will be commercially available in mid-1994, to A.T.&amp; T. The system permits consumers to connect to a computer-generated image of a store and make purchases electronically.


Paying Tribute to Six In Public Jobs Well Done
One is an education supervisor trying to restore harmony in a public school district buffeted by scandal and fractious racial disputes.
Another administers residences for abused or abandoned youths who have been rejected by other social-service agencies.
And still another oversees physical therapy at a municipal hospital where staff and grateful patients call her "Mother."
The three were among six people selected from the ranks of the 200,000 men and women employed by New York City to receive the 21st annual Sloan Public Service Awards.
The awards are sponsored by the Fund for the City of New York, a nonprofit organization created by the Ford Foundation to encourage better government.
Prize money, $5,000 for each winner, is provided by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.


Try This Deal on North Korea
A new U.S. intelligence estimate predicts that diplomatic efforts will fail to coax North Korea into allowing international inspectors into its nuclear sites.
But there is no way of knowing that without giving diplomacy a chance.
Last Friday, Pyongyang said it would open several of its nuclear sites to inspection, but not its reactor, reprocessing plant and waste sites at Yongbyon.
Access to the Yongbyon sites would depend on negotiating a package deal with the U.S.


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center  Alice Tully Hall
The illness of Andre Watts on Friday made the Chamber Music Society do some reconfiguring: Grieg's C-minor Violin Sonata was out, Brahms's Sonata in G (Op. 78) was in.
Lee Luvisi took Mr.
Watts's place here and in the Schubert E-flat Trio.
The changes meant not so much loss through substitution as an altogether different event.
The Brahms piece, with its pervasive gentleness, is a good introduction to the privacy and reticence of the composer's last music.
Joseph Silverstein's violin playing was highly charged and at the same time low-key.
Mr.
Luvisi offered the dignity and rectitude that make him such a satisfying chamber player.


CHRONICLE
Pope JOHN PAUL II has recuperated nicely from a fall last month in which he fractured his right shoulder.
Appearing on Sunday for his regular address in St.
Peter's Square in Vatican City, the Pontiff, 73, acknowledged that there has been considerable concern for his health, The Associated Press reported.
"Well, I must tell you that I'm much better," he said.
Then switching to the third person, he said: "He behaves himself. He follows the instructions of his doctors."


Classical Music in Review


Mississippi Fights Ban On Prayers In Schools
On Sunday mornings in Jackson, the parking lots of churches are crammed, and the sidewalks in front are filled with men in dark suits, women in long dresses and children on their best behavior.
This is a church-going town.
There are 12 pages for churches in the telephone book, 11 more than for bookstores, nearly a third of which are religious.
So it is little wonder that when a public school principal, Bishop Knox, was dismissed last month for allowing a prayer to be read over the school intercom, he would attract plenty of community support.
But few could have foreseen just how much.


Nets Up to Strength, If Not Up to Par
The Nets expect to be back at full 12-man strength, more or less, for their game against the Boston Celtics at the Meadowlands tonight.
Chris Morris, who has been in and out of the lineup with a sprained ankle for the last couple of weeks, is slated to suit up again.
He practiced for the second time without incident yesterday after a three-game layoff.


With New Equipment, Hubble's Eye Gets A New Lease on Life
After two successful space walks, the shuttle astronauts have completed the critical repairs to extend the $1.6 billion Hubble Space Telescope's expected operating lifetime.
Early today they put the finishing touches on the first round of work to make it a more scientifically meaningful life through new optics to correct the telescope's blurred view of the universe.
In a space walk of more than six hours late Sunday and early Monday, two astronauts replaced the Hubble's two solar-power panels, one of which was warped and twisted, with an improved set to eliminate the vibrations that had upset many of the telescope's observations.
The work went without a hitch, and initial tests indicated that the arrays of electricity-producing cells functioned normally.


Corrections
An art review in the Long Island Weekly on Nov. 28 omitted the location of an exhibition called "John Heartfield: Photomontages of the Nazi Period." It is at the Swirbul Gallery of Adelphi University in Garden City through Dec. 15.


It Wasn't Without A Worrisome Cost: Giants Lose Brooks
The Giants may have to play at least the next three games without Michael Brooks, their star linebacker and emotional leader on defense, because of sprained ligaments in his foot.
Injuries dominated the talk in the Giants' locker room today, somewhat overshadowing Sunday's brilliant 19-14 victory over the Miami Dolphins.
H-Back Aaron Pierce, who had his best game as a pro with 3 catches for 98 yards, suffered an almost identical injury to Brooks's, but the Giants fear Pierce's may be worse.
It's uncertain, though, whether the injury will end his season.


Another Day, Another Sarajevo Raid
It was foggy and drizzly, the kind of weather the people here like because it makes it hard for snipers to see, and so the market called Ciglane was crowded at 11:30 this morning, when the shells began falling.
When it was over, 5 people were dead and 17 wounded, an unremarkable toll for a city entering its 20th month under siege by Serbian forces dug in on the surrounding mountains.
A total of 22 Sarajevans have been killed by shellfire in just the last week.


Harry Rubenstein, 69, Dance-Group Director
Harry Rubenstein, the general director of the Joyce Trisler Danscompany, died on Wednesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 69 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said Regina Larkin, the artistic director of Danscompany.


3 Accused of Running Mafia Betting Ring
Two men and a woman described by prosecutors as the Mafia's "super bookies" on the East Coast were indicted yesterday in Brooklyn on charges of taking in at least $86 million a year in illegal wagers on professional and college sports.
Officials in the Brooklyn District Attorney's office said that the business was conducted mainly by telephone for four hours a day from one of two apartments in Bay Ridge and Bensonhurst.
Investigators who had court authorization to tap one of three telephone lines in each apartment said that wagers accepted on each tapped line ranged from $200,000 to $300,000 a day.


Stress and Isolation Tied To a Reduced Life Span
STRONG new evidence shows that high levels of stress combined with a lack of close friends or family can significantly reduce life expectancy.
Data from a new Swedish study show that 50-year-old men who had recently endured high levels of emotional stress without social support were three times as likely to die within the next seven years as those whose lives were placid.


Holidays at the Clintons': Crafts and Plenty of Cats
Socks, the Clintons' black and white cat, is playing a big part in the family's first White House Christmas.
That the Clintons are planning a warm and fuzzy holiday became apparent today when Hillary Rodham Clinton, stepping into a traditional First Lady role, unveiled a White House bedecked to the hilt for the holidays.
Definitely in the Christmas spirit, Mrs.
Clinton said an enormous gingerbread house in the shape of the White House was being called Socks House, or more formally, the House of Socks.
Standing in front of the 18-foot Christmas tree in the East Room, decorated with hand-crafted ornaments contributed by American artisans, Mrs.
Clinton, wearing a red suit with a rhinestone Christmas stocking pin, gave reporters a glimpse of the personal holiday style of the First Family and talked about their plans for the season.
Unlike President George Bush and his wife, Barbara, the Clintons will spend Christmas at the White House with relatives.
Their biggest worry is Christmas shopping.


Times News Service on Line
The New York Times Company and Dow Jones &amp; Company announced an agreement yesterday to provide the daily contents of The New York Times News Service to customers of Dow Jones electronic news services.
The New York Times News Service, which sells articles to other newspapers, includes about 90 percent of the content of The Times.


Reactor Passes Point of No Return In Uphill Path to Fusion Energy
THE promise of cheap, clean fusion energy is about to undergo an acid test as tritium fuel flows for the first time into America's most advanced fusion test reactor here.
A landmark series of experiments, scheduled to begin before Christmas and end next September, when the test reactor will be dismantled, could be either a giant step toward the dream of unlimited fusion energy or a blow that hobbles progress indefinitely.


On Congress's Home Front, Faith That All Politics Is Indeed Local
The Congressman knocked at the door of Everett Quint, a 64-year-old retired cabinetmaker.
Mr.
Quint peered through the crack and immediately recognized Representative Jim Bacchus.
"I know how you voted on Nafta!" Mr.
Quint growled.


Microsoft Aims for Younger Market
The Microsoft Corporation, the world's leading maker of personal-computer software, is aiming its formidable marketing arsenal at a new target -- 10-year-olds.
The company's entry into the children's software market begins today with the introduction of Creative Writer, a writing program with animated cartoon characters to guide kids through the mysteries of computing.
A drawing package, Fine Artist, is scheduled to go on sale in March.


Business Digest
Companies
Mellon Bank said it would acquire Dreyfus, the country's sixth-largest mutual fund company, for $1.85 billion in stock.
Mellon is trying to move from traditional banking, which has a declining share of the nation's financial activity.  [ Page A1. ]  The sale gives Dreyfus an opportunity to improve a sagging performance.  [ D7. ]
Microsoft is entering the children's computer software market with the introduction of a writing program to guide youngsters through the mysteries of computing.  [ D1. ]


Medrad Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Nippon Phone Seeks Alliances
The Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation is talking separately with the Microsoft Corporation and with the Apple Computer Corporation about possible alliances to explore new businesses, the president of the Japanese phone company said today.
Masashi Kojima, N.T.T.'s president, said he had met with Microsoft's chairman, William H. Gates, and Apple's president, Michael Spindler, and N.T.T. had formed working groups with each company to explore what he called "quite exciting" opportunities that would combine computing and telecommunications.


Police Query Man 2d Time In a Shooting
A day after arresting a 17-year-old youth in the shooting of a pregnant Queens teen-ager, the police yesterday questioned the victim's boyfriend for a second time, noting that the young man knew the suspect.
The boyfriend, John Clemenza, 18, was taken in for questioning hours after the police arrested Peter Kapihe in the robbery and shooting of Mr.
Clemenza's girlfriend, Cynthia Hernandez, the police said.


GITANO GROUP THE TARGET OF A TRADEMARK LAWSUIT
Netherby Ltd., the British company that owns the worldwide rights to the Gloria Vanderbilt trademarks, is suing the Gitano Group, charging that it had failed to make payments for the use of the trademarks in the United States and Canada.
The suit, filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, also contends that Gitano acted fraudulently when it sold the United States and Canadian trademarks to the Gloria Vanderbilt Apparel Corporation.
Gloria Vanderbilt Apparel is owned by the Dabah family, whose patriarch, Morris Dabah, founded Gitano and whose members held 70 percent of Gitano's stock when the sale of the trademarks took place in 1988.
Netherby is asking the court to reverse that sale by returning the trademarks to a licensing subsidiary of Gitano, and is seeking more than $1 million in payments.


Drug Said to Help Body Shed Alcohol Quickly
You drank too much and need to sober up, so you blearily resign yourself to the traditional, all-too-temporary remedies: a cold shower, some blistering cups of espresso, a barrage of slaps to the face.
But you realize that because your body can remove only so much alcohol, your legs will totter for some time.
Now a small medical company says it has bought an option for the rights to a drug that it says is the first to enhance the body's ability to remove alcohol from blood.
The drug, Detoxahol, causes the small intestine to help the liver re-establish normality in a person jolted by a five-martini lunch.


Israeli Deadline Slips
Self-rule for Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and Jericho will be delayed beyond the Dec. 13 deadline for withdrawal of Israeli troops, both sides said.
But they said they were making progress and expected an agreement by early next year.
Article, page A16.


Score Board (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Wordstar International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Help Welfare Clients, Not Their Employers
To the Editor:
President Clinton's plan to aid employers who hire welfare recipients is not a new idea (front page, Nov. 28).
Unfortunately, such efforts have a long history of failure.


Remembering Pearl Harbor


Their End? Squeegee Guys Say No
THE squeegee guys at the 56th Street exit of the West Side Highway were grumbling defiantly about William J. Bratton of Boston and his promise to crack down on their kind when he takes over as the city's Police Commissioner.
If Mr.
Bratton had sounded like Eliot Ness warning he would come to Chicago to get Al Capone, the squeegee guys were responding with sentiments reminiscent of "Come and get me, copper."
The spot is a hot bed of squeegee activity and the men who hang there are tough squeegee guys.
Their hands are chapped from washing windshields for drivers, appreciative and scornful.
Some have been known to wash first and ask questions later.
Sometimes they get hoarse from saying, "Have a nice day," and offering other rejoinders.


Leon M. Block; Clothier, 83
Leon M. Block, the retired president of Dunhill Tailors, died last Wednesday at his residence in the Ritz Tower Hotel.
He was 83.
The cause was complications of pneumonia, said Rainer Greeven, a friend.


G. Heileman Brewing Names Marketing Specialist as Chief
Until recently, most of what Richard F. Gaccione knew about beer came from inside a mug.
Now Mr.
Gaccione, who was named yesterday as the chief executive and president of the G. Heileman Brewing Company, needs to learn about how to sell beer.
For the last two years, Mr.
Gaccione, a marketing specialist who calls himself "a medium user of beer," had been senior vice president at the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company.
At Heileman, he will report to William J. Turner, who was named chairman last month, when the Dallas investment firm Hicks, Muse &amp; Company agreed to pay $390 million for the company.
Heileman is the nation's fifth-largest brewer, with about 5 percent of the national market.


Greenman Bros. Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Orthopedic Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Limits on Transracial Adoption Hurt Children
To the Editor:
"Black Children, White Parents" (editorial, Nov. 27) and "Debate on Race and Adoptions Is Being Reborn" (news article, Oct. 24), dealing with race-matching policies in adoption, have been seriously misleading and inaccurate in describing the issues and the legislation introduced by Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum now pending before the United States Senate.
Your articles describe this legislation as prohibiting the use of race to prevent adoptive placement, and give the impression that opposition to the bill is limited to those who oppose transracial adoption.


Riders on Board Train Scramble to Survive
Carl A. Petersen usually claims a seat on the aisle near the back of the 5:33 to Hicksville, but yesterday he took one by a window up front.
It didn't seem to matter -- just a spur-of-the-moment impulse at the weary end of a long day.
And then the shooting started, back where Mr.
Petersen usually sits.
"Once I heard the first two shots," said Mr.
Petersen, a 48-year-old software specialist for National Westminster Bank, "I knew it was gunfire."


COMPANY BRIEFS
FIRST ALABAMA BANCSHARES INC., Birmingham, Ala., plans to change its name to Regions Financial Corp. next year.
FREEPORT-MCMORAN COPPER AND GOLD INC., New Orleans, said its Indonesian subsidiary would sell power-generation assets to a joint venture of energy companies, including the Duke Energy Corp., Charlotte, N.C., and the Powerlink Corp., Alberta, Canada, for about $200 million.


'Media All-Stars' Selected in Survey
Gene DeWitt, president and chief executive at DeWitt Media in New York, has been named Media Executive of the Year as part of the eighth annual "Media All-Stars" awards sponsored by Mediaweek magazine.
David Martin, president and chief executive at Pentacom in Troy, Mich., received the President's Award.


Driver Joins Growing List of Injured
The Devils are going through an unpleasant patch for the first time this season.
They have no victories in their last five games and they have three injuries to key players.
Bruce Driver's separated shoulder is the most severe of the injuries and it is expected to keep the defenseman out of action for four to seven weeks.


One Ireland: In Reach Yet?
While hopes for the new Northern Ireland peace initiative persist, the Governments of Ireland and Britain remain deeply divided over whether there can ever be a united Ireland free of British rule, the ultimate goal of the Irish Republican Army, but the ultimate abomination to the leaders of Ulster's Protestant majority.
In their meeting last week, Prime Ministers John Major of Britain and Albert Reynolds of Ireland sought to work out a statement of principles that would lead first to a prolonged cessation of violence in the British province and then to a place at a peace talks table for Sinn Fein, the political arm of the I.R.A.


Mets Pump Up the Volume on Saberhagen Trade
The Mets and Indians, who have exchanged contracts and proposals and one telephone call after another, may be on the verge of completing a deal that would send Bret Saberhagen to Cleveland.
One executive involved in the talks last night called the deal "very much alive" and would not rule out the chance that the trade would be completed today.
Executives at Shea Stadium, in fact, waited in their offices until late last evening for a call from Cleveland General Manager John Hart.


New Study Portrays the Young As More and More Troubled
THE dissolute picture of youth portrayed by Beavis and Butthead is growing alarmingly close to the truth, a new study suggests.
Emotional and behavioral problems have been increasing since the mid-1970's for American children, the study shows.
Problems showing the biggest increase ranged from destroying other people's property and hanging out with other children who get into trouble to doing poorly in school work, being sullen and underactive and whining.


Astro-Med Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Mesa Airlines (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Review/City Ballet; A Revisionist Drosselmeier By La Fosse
Acting to music is an art, as the character of Drosselmeier proves annually in the New York City Ballet's production of "The Nutcracker." The part of the toy maker who is godfather to Marie, the ballet's little heroine, is essentially a nondancing role.
But it is a major one, as Robert La Fosse made clear again in a persuasive and idiosyncratic debut as Drosselmeier on Saturday night at the New York State Theater.
George Balanchine's version of Tchaikovsky's ballet score has made room for a variety of interpretations.
Balanchine himself and Jerome Robbins portrayed Drosselmeier as a visible elder; Mr.
La Fosse, although adding a peg-leg limp, injected a youthful spryness.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  HOLLYWOOD'S TRADE ISSUE  A conflict over France's effort to protect its film industry from Hollywood is becoming a central issue in the GATT world trade talks.
A1  JAPAN TO OPEN RICE MARKET  Japan plans to open its rice market to imports, removing a major stumbling block to a world trade pact by the deadline.
D1


Stop &amp; Shop Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 6


Autozone Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 20


60-Minute Gourmet
IF someone had told me 25 years ago that yogurt would become an acceptable ingredient in French cuisine, I would have laughed.
Back then it was considered a mysterious and not altogether appealing substance that was consumed largely by people in North Africa and Eastern Europe.
In fact, even when yogurt became a popular snack food, I saw little use for it in a serious kitchen.
Eventually, though, the tide of public demand -- and the call for low-fat alternatives to heavy cream -- compelled me to experiment with yogurt.
I was as delighted as I was surprised to find that tart fresh yogurt has an exemplary binding quality for sauces.
Its relatively neutral flavor and high acidity allow it to blend beautifully with all kinds of herbs and spices.
In addition, yogurt works exceedingly well in marinades, for its enzymes and acid break down protein efficiently.


Odds-N-Ends Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Personal Health; Deciding how, or whether, to treat menopause.
EVERY woman, if she lives long enough, goes through menopause, when her ovaries stop releasing eggs, her menstrual cycles cease and production of estrogen and other ovarian hormones falls sharply.
The average age at menopause for American women is now 51, and those who reach this age will live on average 30 more years, or 10 years longer than women of the same age lived at the turn of the century.
Thus, unless she receives hormone replacement therapy, the typical American woman spends more than a third of her life without the considerable benefits of estrogen to her heart, bones, skin and other tissues.
Yet only about one menopausal woman in seven chooses to take replacement hormones.
Critics often cite these objections to this therapy:


Near Station, A Grim Wait For Families
For more than 30 people, the anxious, unimaginable wait for information about their sons and daughters, fathers and mothers, husbands and wives ended in the decorated lobby of Village Hall in Garden City, a half-mile from the station where the Long Island Rail Road train stopped after a gunman opened fire in a car crowded with commuters.
The police had ordered everyone who arrived, frantic, at the station to wait in the Village Hall for information, beneath the sparkling garlands, red bows and Christmas wreathes.
They began gathering by 8 o'clock, and they waited and waited.


Austrian Police Sifting Clues on Letter Bombs
Police investigators say that they have received more than 500 responses to their request for clues about the wave of letter bombs that has swept Austria in recent days, and that they are coming closer to solving the crimes.
"We are reviewing and assessing some good information," said Michael Sika, the chief of Austria's Public Security Agency.
"I can say that a few of the clues are especially interesting, and could lead to success."


Review/Television; Crime and Crime Fighting in Florida
Among the people you can meet on tonight's vivid "48 Hours" report on crime in Florida are a 13-year-old Tallahassee boy who has capped his many encounters with the criminal justice system by being charged in the murder of a tourist; a single mother of seven who tries, without much hope, to keep her teen-age son locked up at home so he won't go out robbing, and a juvenile-court judge who sentences young offenders knowing they will be back before him soon after their early release from jail.
For all the angry calls for a crackdown that are heard tonight, the program invites no optimism that much can be done to control the violence that keeps inner-city families in constant fear, forces retail stores to hire private security guards and strikes hard at the state's tourist industry.
Despite tougher police tactics and some small experiments in putting chronic offenders to work, the program leaves the impression that the system is not up to the job; there are not enough prison cells to keep predators behind bars, and rehabilitation efforts are famous for failure.


Doctors' Group Urges Alternative To Employer Insurance Mandate
The American Medical Association urged Congress today to consider alternatives to President Clinton's plan to require all employers to buy health insurance for their employees.
But it did not embarrass Mr.
Clinton by repealing its official policy in support of such a requirement.
The doctors said they agreed with Mr.
Clinton's goal of guaranteeing health insurance for all Americans, but they made it clear that they no longer shared his view that an insurance mandate for employers was the only way to achieve that goal.


U.S. Trails Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Go-Video Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Educational Upheaval In Former Soviet Bloc
Struggling to break loose from the uniformity and dogma imposed by highly centralized Communist regimes, education authorities in much of the former Soviet bloc are introducing what for them is the revolutionary notion of choice in their school systems.
A World Education Report published here today by Unesco said many newly democratic governments of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union were allowing parents to pick between public, private and religious schools and giving greater autonomy to schools and teachers.


Greif Brothers Corp. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Ecology &amp; Environment Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Coach for Gamecocks
BRAD SCOTT, offensive coordinator at Florida State, was selected as South Carolina's new head football coach yesterday.
Coach SPARKY WOODS was dismissed last week after a 4-7 season.
He had been the Gamecock coach since 1989.


Don Ameche Is Dead at 85; Oscar Winner for 'Cocoon'
Don Ameche, who was one of Hollywood's busiest and most versatile stars in the 1930's and 40's and who saw his fame triumphantly rekindled when he won an Oscar for his work in the comedy "Cocoon" in 1985, died on Monday at the home of his son, Don Jr., in Scottsdale, Ariz.
He was 85.
The cause was prostate cancer, his son said.


Joint South African Council Takes Over
After nearly three centuries of white-monopoly rule, the black majority in South Africa got its first real say in governing today with the inauguration of a multiracial council that will oversee the running of the country until democratic elections next April.
The meeting of the 32-member council marks the effective end of Africa's last bastion of white minority rule.
Although the Government of President F. W. de Klerk will remain in office for five more months, it will not be able to make any major decisions without the approval of this group, the Transitional Executive Council.


Russian Coach Stays
Russian soccer authorities said yesterday that they would retain PAVEL SADYRIN as the national team's coach for next summer's World Cup.
The vote by the executive committee of the Russian Football Federation came after 14 players on the team demanded the resignation of Sadryin, who claimed the players' letter was masterminded by his predecessor.
The players had claimed that Sadryin had failed to take responsibility for poor play.


Hillary Clinton Says Health Plan Will Be Familiar
Hillary Rodham Clinton today offered a fresh description of one of the most confusing elements of the Administration health care plan, the health insurance purchasing alliances, saying they would let all Americans choose coverage in the way members of Congress do.
The alliances -- or agencies that would collect premiums and pass them on to insurance companies or other health care providers -- would be the linchpin of President Clinton's plan.


Giants' Punter Doesn't Get an Assist, but He's Now Getting Credit
When Giants defensive end Keith Hamilton stood over a prone Miami quarterback Steve DeBerg in the end zone Sunday, his arms raised in triumph to signal the safety he had just caused with his sack, Mike Horan simultaneously raised his arms on the sideline.
It was no empty gesture.
It isn't often that a punter should be credited with half a sack, but it would have been appropriate in this case.
Horan deserved credit for an assist for the safety, the play that extended the Giants' fourth-quarter lead to 19-7 and effectively took a game-tying field goal out of the equation.


Eating Well
Ellen Haas, the Assistant Secretary of Agriculture for food and consumer services, has a novel idea about school lunches: Make food that is good for kids taste good, and then maybe they'll eat it.
The concept is so simple it seems that it couldn't be controversial.
But to make that change, Ms.
Haas will have to deal with several Government and school bureaucracies that have become entrenched in their ways, either giving children nutritious but dreadful-tasting foods or capitulating to their taste buds and offering them a McDonald's menu.


The Myth of 'Voluntary' School Prayer
Public prayer is popular in Jackson, Miss.
Students at Wingfield High School voted overwhelmingly to allow one of their number to open a recent school day with a prayer over the school's intercom.
When the local school board dismissed the principal for permitting the prayer, many students walked out of classes and many parents staged protest rallies.
A State Senator promises to introduce a bill cutting off the school system's funding if it doesn't allow "voluntary" student prayer.
The protesting students and parents contend, mistakenly, that the Constitution allows and may even require the prayer.
Fortunately for the religious liberty of all, the First Amendment does not let even huge majorities in a school require all students, whatever their faith or lack of it, to pray.


PHP Healthcare Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Film: Six Degrees of Separation; John Guare's 'Six Degrees,' on Art And Life Stories, Real and Fake
The Fifth Avenue apartment where much of "Six Degrees of Separation" unfolds is filled with expensive artifacts, most notably Flan and Ouisa Kittredge themselves.
Flan (Donald Sutherland) and Ouisa (Stockard Channing), a self-important art dealer and the wife he describes as "a Dada manifesto," live all too comfortably within this sanctuary.
The Kittredges are serenely unaware that their lives can be rearranged by a single uninvited guest, one who manages to tap into their fears, desires and hilariously fatuous daydreams.
Neither Flan nor Ouisa might have suspected, before this story begins, that they could yearn so desperately for the respect of their own children, or hope to be extras in a movie version of "Cats."
The visitor is Paul (Will Smith), the cunning, too-good-to-be-true impostor whose exploits are derived from a real news story.
Paul has done enough homework to know how perfectly a fake connection to Sidney Poitier will sway uneasy white socialites, people who may be self-styled liberals but can still address a friend as "You darling old poop."


Enzo Biochem Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


No Headline
"In our school, you have everything you need outside of your house." -- CARMELIN DIAZ, a pupil at a Manhattan school that has become a health and social services center.  [ A1:3. ]


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 3
Nov. 26
Dec. 4
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.8
7.5
7.5
Distillate production, daily
3.6
3.5
3.3
Gasoline stocks
223.2
218.5
212.8
Distillate stocks
145.7
142.1
142.4
Crude imports, daily
8.0
6.5
6.2
Product imports, daily
2.0
1.3
1.8
Crude stocks
340.0
334.9
324.8
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
93.1
91.5
89.7
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Waclaw Jedrzejewicz; Historian, 100
Waclaw Jedrzejewicz, a Polish emigre and historian, died Nov. 30 at the Cheshire Convalescent Center in Cheshire, Conn.
He was 100.
Mr.
Jedrzejewicz was a prolific author of books and articles on Polish history between the two World Wars.
During that time he served in a series of military and diplomatic posts in the Polish Government.


Giuliani Goes to the Top; Gets 40 Minutes in Meeting With Clinton
Unlike Mayor David N. Dinkins, who had to spend nearly two years in office before George Bush let him sneak into the Oval Office on Thanksgiving eve with no witnesses, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani sailed through the front door today for a 40-minute, bipartisian chat on gun control, welfare reform, Medicaid and politics with President Clinton, who was interested enough to ask for a second cup of coffee just when the New Yorkers thought the meeting was ready to break up.
Mr.
Giuliani, who will be New York's first Republican Mayor since Mr.
Clinton was in college -- came to make peace overtures to this Democratic President and this Democratic town, where he once cut a wide swath in the Reagan years, and to make common cause with Republican Congressional friends.
He left with no promises, some White House M &amp; M's and a bit of a lecture on political politesse from Representative Charles B. Rangel of Harlem, who is not generally known for his own.


Cascade Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Piedmont Natural Gas Co.  reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Neediest Cases; Fighting the Past, She Raises Her Children With Help and Guidance
Three years ago today, Felicita Diaz received a call from her aunt at the hospital with the news that her mother had died.
She dropped the phone and started to scream.
It was not as if Martha Diaz's death had come unexpectedly.
Her five daughters had watched her body wither from AIDS for a year and a half.
They had nursed her and bribed her with candy to make her eat during the last months of her life.


Lowe Direct Wins A Citibank Account
Citibank's North American Consumer Bank in New York has consolidated its direct-marketing account, previously divided among various direct-marketing agencies, at Lowe Direct in New York.
Billings on the account, which involves retail banks in eight states and the District of Columbia, were estimated at $10 million to $20 million.


After Stern Lecture, Man in Riot Beating Gets Maximum Term
With a stern lecture and a final, silent showing of the brutal videotapes with which the case began, a judge today sentenced Damian M. Williams to a maximum 10-year term for a series of beatings that have come to symbolize the Los Angeles riots 19 months ago.
Under California law he is likely to serve about three and a half years.
"Mr. Williams, it is intolerable in this society to attack and maim people because of their race," said Judge John Ouderkirk of Superior Court, referring to attacks by the black defendant that included the beating of three Hispanic victims, an Asian and a white truck driver, Reginald O. Denny.


Prudential Said to Hold Talks on a Texas Pact
Prudential Securities is negotiating with Texas state regulators to settle charges of securities law violations stemming largely from misdeeds at the firm's north Dallas branch that cost clients millions of dollars, people involved in the situation said yesterday.
The talks have apparently been difficult, in part because regulators are said to be interested in a punishment that would involve more than simply imposing a large fine.


A List Isn't Just A List
"WINE is a hook," Danny Meyer said, "and we need hooks to get people to come back."
It could be argued that Mr.
Meyer, who owns Union Square Cafe, a popular restaurant on East 16th Street, was suffering a modesty attack.
His American-style restaurant ranks among the best in the city in every critical appraisal.
Customers fill the place daily, and nothing indicates that any hook is needed to bring them in.


A Shooting Victim in a Newark Car Theft Says the Wrong Officer Was Put on Trial
One day after a police officer was acquitted of ambushing and shooting a teen-ager, Howard Caesar, after a car theft, Mr.
Caesar and his family accused the authorities of putting the wrong officer on trial to avoid a race riot in the wake of the Rodney King case.
At a news conference in front of the Essex County Courthouse, Mr.
Caesar, who had testified as a defense witness in the trial, said that he had told the authorities from the beginning that he had seen a white officer aim a gun at him.
Mr.
Caesar and the officer tried in his shooting, Kenneth Holloway Jr., 32, are both black.


Edison Brothers Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


INSIDE
Support for Gay Students
Massachusetts is about to become the first state to outlaw discrimination against gay and lesbian students in public schools.
Page A18.
Reversal on Apple Benefits
The Texas county that denied Apple Computer a tax break because of its benefits for unmarried workers negotiated new tax breaks.
Page A18.
Lobby Rules at Issue Again
Two White House aides are becoming lobby executives a year after the President announced an ethics policy limiting shifts to that field.
Page A22.
Ivory Coast Leader Dies
President Felix Houphouet-Boigny, at least 88, had served 33 years, more than any African leader.
Page B9.
Don Ameche Is Dead
The versatile and popular actor, whose career spanned 30's radio and 90's films, was 85.
Page B8.
Trade Center Trial Surprise
A witness in the World Trade Center trial, asked to identify two defendants he said he had encountered, picked out two jurors instead.
Page B1.
A Time for Caring
A woman who saw her mother destroyed by addiction fights to break a cycle of drug abuse, illness and poverty.
The Neediest Cases, page B4.


Puroflow Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Hunger Remains a Threat in Somalia


Review/Piano; Richard Goode in Recital, Competing With Himself
The pianist Richard Goode, who gave a recital in Carnegie Hall on Monday night, is in the unenviable position of having to live up to his well-deserved reputation.
It is a reputation that has grown steadily over the last 10 years without the assistance of hype, packaging or promotion.
Two years ago, when I last heard him play, there was no ambiguity: he had clearly developed into a distinguished successor to Artur Schnabel.
Like that earlier pianistic master, Mr.
Goode devotes himself to music greater than it can be played, most notably to Schubert and Beethoven; like Schnabel, too, he is first a musician and second a pianist.
Mr.
Goode has a limpid, reflective style that does not shy from technical and emotional risks.
And he has a sense of structure that makes even the most eccentric and challenging scores seem like novels in sound.


Uranium Rusting in Storage Pools Is Troubling Energy Department
Millions of pounds of highly radioactive reactor fuel have been sitting in Energy Department storage pools for so long that they are rusting and spreading radioactivity, the Energy Department said today.
The problem promises to add substantially to cleanup costs after 50 years of nuclear weapons production, already expected to run into the tens of billions of dollars.


Stuarts Department Stores Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Industrial Acoustics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gypsies Find No Welcome From Czechs
Perhaps other Czech towns can compete with Usti nad Labem for being the most desolate, but Czechs agree that those towns, too, would be here in Sudetenland.
The industries draw their energy from highly polluting brown coal, which adds its attack on the environment to that of the chemicals that the plants consume and produce.
The Elbe River will take a long time to recover.


Houston's Return Home Won't Induce Nostalgia
For most football players, the memories of events in a stadium center on some exploit on the field: a great tackle, a brilliant touchdown run or a spectacular pass reception.
Jets linebacker Bobby Houston has a very different kind of memory of R.F.K.
Stadium in Washington, a recollection more horrifying than electrifying.
As a youngster, Houston grew up two blocks from the stadium and occasionally sold peanuts during Redskins games.
One day, a man holding his hand in his pocket as if he had a gun walked up to Houston in one of the stadium corridors and robbed him.


The Pop Life
Daltrey Plus Townshend
Roger Daltrey says he wants to celebrate his 50th birthday next year by doing one of the things he loves most: singing Pete Townshend's music.
Those who want to join in the celebration can head for Carnegie Hall on Feb. 23 and 24, when three of the four original members of the Who -- Mr.
Daltrey, the lead singer; Mr.
Townshend, the guitarist and songwriter, and John Entwistle, the bass player -- are scheduled to come together for Mr.
Daltrey's tribute to Mr.
Townshend. (Keith Moon, the Who's drummer, died in 1978. The drummer for the February appearance hasn't been announced yet.)


Palmeiro, Spurned by Rangers, Eyes the Mets
Deciding that the compensation of two draft choices was not worth the risk of paying a $7 million salary they didn't want to pay, the Texas Rangers opted today not to offer Rafael Palmeiro salary arbitration.
Their decision prompted an immediate telephone call from Palmeiro's agent to the Mets.
"I talked to Joe very briefly right after I got the call from the Rangers," said Jim Bronner, Palmeiro's agent, referring to Joe McIlvaine, the Mets' general manager.
"He said he was going to have a meeting with the owner and would let me know something in the next couple days. He wasn't prepared to say anything right now."


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Massachusetts-Amherst
Fiscal restraint rather than expansion has been the theme of intercollegiate athletics during the 1990's.
An exception is the successful start this season of a major Division I hockey program at Massachusetts, where the Minutemen play in a magnificent new arena, the Mullins Memorial Center with 8,389 seats.


Weak but Defiant, Kevorkian Continues Jailhouse Hunger Strike
Seven days into a hunger strike after being jailed on charges of aiding a suicide, Dr.
Jack Kevorkian was "considerably weaker" but still refusing to submit to a physical examination, his lawyer said today.
"We are now, as much as I hate to say it, beginning the death watch," the lawyer, Geoffrey N. Fieger, said.


A California Quake: $70 for White Wine
MATANZAS CREEK WINERY, a Sonoma Valley estate, has introduced a chardonnay that carries a suggested retail price of $70, a record for a California white wine.
The wine, Journey, comes from the 1990 vintage.
Matanzas Creek produced only 212 six-bottle cases of regular-size bottles and 82 six-bottle cases of magnums (the magnum costs $140).
Most have been tightly rationed to selected retailers and restaurateurs around the country.


Alico Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


New Plan Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Dairy Mart Convenience Stores Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Automated Telephone Management Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Catherines Stores (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Deep disagreement over France's attempt to finance its film industry and protect it against U.S. competition is gaining prominence in the GATT talks for a new world trade accord.  [ Page A1. ]  Japan plans to open its rice market to imports, removing an obstacle to a trade pact, but causing political turmoil.  [ D1. ]


Copley Pharmaceutical Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Lloyd's Offers Investors $1.3 Billion to Settle
Lloyd's of London offered its financially battered investors more than $1.3 billion today to settle claims of mismanagement and fraud in the insurance market.
But leaders of groups representing the investors said they would recommend rejecting the proposal as inadequate.
After months of negotiations with the investors, known as "names," Lloyd's said it was making the offer as part of an effort to close out the bleakest period in its history.
Lloyd's has lost more than $8 billion over the last three years, with nearly all of that loss ultimately borne by 21,000 names, who are personally liable for up to their entire wealth.
The losses resulted from large payouts on natural disasters, asbestos-related payments and spiraling losses from re-insurance of Lloyd's-issued policies.


Sportsman's Guide reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Family Uses Legacy to Aid Connecticut Schoolchildren
An immigrant family that rose from poverty with the help of education will use a $50 million legacy to benefit Connecticut's 550,000 schoolchildren.
The money is from the New Haven-based William Caspar Graustein Memorial Fund, which wants to improve the quality of education for pupils in primary, middle and secondary schools throughout Connecticut.


Leon M. Block; Clothier, 83
Leon M. Block, the retired president of Dunhill Tailors, died last Wednesday at his residence in the Ritz Tower Hotel.
He was 83.
The cause was complications of pneumonia, said Rainer Greeven, a friend.


Chief of Inquiry at Trade Center To Head F.B.I. New York Office
William A. Gavin, who supervised the investigation of the World Trade Center bombing case, was named by the Federal Bureau of Investigation to head its New York office when James M. Fox retires in January.
Mr.
Gavin, 52, known as a smart manager who relies on a good sense of humor to keep fellow agents motivated, has been in New York as deputy assistant director -- or second in command -- since July 1992.
His promotion was expected.


New Chief of Secret Service
The Clinton Administration today appointed Eljay Bowron as Director of the Secret Service.
Mr.
Bowron, a 42-year-old career agent, replaces John W. Magaw, who became the new head of the Treasury's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms in October after a review of its role in the raid on the Branch Davidian cult near Waco, Tex., in February.
The review said senior officials of the firearms agency had botched the Feb. 28 raid in which four agents were killed and then lied to cover up their mistakes.


Clinton and Giuliani Exchange Ideas at the White House


Burying Jews: Grief Is Bitter, Anger Intense
Their neighbors and fellow settlers laid Mordechai and Shalom Lapid to rest in this ancient town today with prayers, tears and virtual calls to rebellion against an Israeli Government that has agreed to Palestinian self-rule.
The funeral for the Lapids, a father and son shot to death Monday night by Palestinian gunmen outside the neighboring Jewish settlement of Qiryat Arba, touched off an emotional outpouring -- part mourning, part protest and part distress signal for a Government that acknowledges that every bullet chips away at public support for its agreement with the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Xylogics Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Unfinished 'Turandot' Premiered at La Scala
To the Editor:
Please allow me to clarify some facts in "Unfinished Works" (editorial, Nov. 30).


Nippon Seeks Alliances
The Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation is discussing separately with the Microsoft Corporation and the Apple Computer Corporation possible alliances to explore new businesses, the president of the huge Japanese telephone phone company, Masashi Kojima, said today.


Royal Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


United Video Satellite Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pork and Cabbage, Balanced With Bread
AT the end of November, a Federal agency released a report that questioned the accuracy of the Government's nutrition analysis data, which is used by, among others, the nutritionists who analyze recipes.
Although there may be some inaccuracies in the data, they are not serious enough to turn something fatty into something low-fat.
Cabbage, for example, will not become a high-fat food when the inaccuracies are corrected.


Boeing
Shares of the Boeing Company rose more than 5 percent yesterday after Salomon Brothers issued a "buy" recommendation for the first time in three years.
Last week, Boeing announced big production cuts, leading analysts to slash earnings estimates.
But Salomon said the worst of the company's troubles were behind it.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Becker Takes Another Nose Dive  Boris Becker's troubled career took another plunge yesterday when he lost in the first round of the Grand Slam Cup, beaten in straight sets by Wayne Ferreira of South Africa.
Ranked 22d and unseeded, Ferreira broke Becker once in each set to win, 7-5, 6-4, in 1 hour 37 minutes in Munich, Germany.
The seventh-seeded Becker's ground strokes lacked consistency and confidence, his volleys were erratic and his 13 aces were nearly erased by 10 double-faults.
Two straight double-faults by Becker gave Ferreira a key break in the 11th game.
Becker also announced that Eric Jelen, a longtime friend who became his sixth coach less than six months ago, had decided to end the partnership.
Becker has now gone through four coaches in nearly three years. (AP) N.F.L.
Johnson Cites a Weakness: Coaching  A grim Jimmy Johnson has decided that one of the main problems with the Dallas Cowboys is coaching.
Johnson came to that conclusion yesterday, the day after the Cowboys struggled to a 23-17 victory over the Philadelphia Eagles in Irving, Tex.
The victory kept them a game behind the National Football Conference East-leading Giants with an 8-4 record.
"It's not the effort and the talent of the players," Johnson said.
"We've got to do a better job of coaching. It took a 172-yard rushing effort from Emmitt Smith to save the Cowboys against the Eagles." (AP) FIGURE SKATING  N.H.L.
Verbeek Scores 3 to Lead Whalers  Pat Verbeek had three goals and Sean Burke enjoyed a successful return to the goal as the streaking Whalers beat the Washington Capitals, 6-1, in Landover, Md., last night.
Verbeek scored twice and Geoff Sanderson added his 18th goal in the first period to help Hartford take a 3-0 lead.
That proved to be more than enough offense for Burke, who stopped 30 shots in his first start since Oct. 27.
The Whalers led, 6-0, after two periods.
Hartford is 5-2 in its last seven games after a 4-14-2 start.
Burke, plagued by hamstring problems, was playing in only his third game of the season. (AP) Blues 3, Blackhawks 2: Curtis Joseph had another oustanding game in goal for host St.
Louis, making 37 saves.
The Blues were outshot by 39-18 but had the trump card in Joseph.
Last season he faced 2,202 shots, more than any goaltender since the league began keeping that statistic in 1982-83, and his shots-per-game average of 34 is above last year's figure of 32.4. (AP) Flames 4, Nordiques 4: Gary Roberts scored his second goal of the game with 2:12 left in regulation, giving Calgary the tie.
Rookie Iain Fraser had a pair of first-period goals and Valery Kamensky snapped a tie 1:59 into the third period for the Nordiques. (AP) Panthers 3, Mighty Ducks 2: Scott Mellanby and Jesse Belanger scored less than three and a half minutes apart in the first period as Florida beat host Anaheim in the first meeting between the expansion teams.
The Ducks lost for the fifth time in six games since their four-game winning streak through Canada and have dropped all seven games they have played against teams that entered the league after the 1990-91 season.
The Ducks also lost leading scorer Anatoli Semenov with a dislocated left elbow. (AP) Lightning 3, Sharks 1: Brian Bradley's power-play goal capped a three-goal burst in the first period and Tampa Bay racked up a third straight road victory by beating San Jose.
Denis Savard and Adam Creighton also had goals for the Lightning. (AP)


Lewis Gilbert, 86, Advocate of Shareholder Rights
Lewis D. Gilbert, an advocate of shareowner rights and one of the first gadflies to speak out at annual meetings on behalf of small stockholders, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 86 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was a heart ailment, said his brother, John J., who worked with Lewis for 40 years in publishing an annual compendium of stockholder activities at corporate meetings.


Education Alternatives reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Marcus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 11


5 Research Teams to Hunt for New Drugs in Nature, Gently
The Government today announced the first awards under a program to find and produce new drugs from plants and animals in the developing world while preserving endangered species.
Five groups, each representing unusual collaborations among university researchers, environmental organizations, pharmaceutical companies, museums and government agencies, will share $2.5 million a year for five years.


Alvin B. Boxer, 86, Toy Manufacturer
Alvin B. Boxer, founder of the Canadian branch of Hasbro Inc., one of the world's biggest toy makers, died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in New York.
He was 86 and had homes in Montreal, Manhattan and Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


Accounts
*
Harman International Industries, Washington, to Merkley Newman Harty, New York, for its American stereo components account, previously inactive.
The agency was awarded the account, to advertise the company's Harman Kardon, JBL and Infinity brands, after a review that also included Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York, and Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, New York.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.


JetForm Corp. (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Regency Health Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; Thermo Fibertek may offer a stock play in paper recycling.
PRESIDENT CLINTON not long ago ended months of arguments between environmental groups and the paper industry when he ordered Federal agencies to buy paper with at least 20 percent recycled fiber by the end of next year.
The order has wide implications for the recycling industry, especially when the requirement increases to 30 percent by 1998.
Can investors find a stock play in paper recycling?
It is not easy.
Many of the smaller recyclers are offshoots of privately held trash-collection companies.
Publicly traded trash companies like WMX Technologies and Browning-Ferris do have recycling operations, but they are overshadowed by collecting and dumping operations.


Blue Chips at Record High in Quiet Session
The bull market plodded on yesterday, as blue-chip stock prices set a record high, barely two weeks since its previous high.
But trading was so quiet, the breadth of the advance was so limited, and other market indicators so mixed that few traders seemed to notice, or care.


Pentagon Begins Effort to Combat More Lethal Arms in Third World
To guard against new third-world threats, the Pentagon said today that it was undertaking a major effort to protect American troops against poison gas, biological agents and nuclear weapons.
The Pentagon initiative reflects the view that efforts to stem the spread of weapons of mass destruction are likely to fall short, making American forces increasingly vulnerable to attacks by third-world foes.


Corrections
Captions in Business Day on Monday with pictures of two tobacco company executives interviewed about cigarettes and health were reversed in some copies.
The man with the beard was Bennett S. LeBow; the clean-shaven man was Andrew H. Tisch.


Pulaski Furniture Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Editorial Notebook; China and Global Warming
If global warming materializes as the threat many scientists predict, the world's ability to head it off may well be determined by China.
The United States is currently the world's leading emitter of carbon dioxide, the chief man-made contributor to global warming.
But rapid economic growth and heavy reliance on dirty fuel may soon propel China toward that unenviable distinction.
China's pell-mell industrialization is powered largely by huge reserves of coal, the dirtiest of fuels in carbon emissions.
Three-quarters of China's energy needs, from factories to home heating, are now met by burning coal.
The result is all too palpable, as I found on a visit to several provinces late this summer.
Noxious fumes sting the eyes of city dwellers, haze obscures the views, and acid rain falls as far as Japan in one direction and southwest China in another.
More worrisome for the rest of the world, China's smokestacks spew tons of carbon into the atmosphere, increasing the buildup of heat-trapping gases.


Somali War Casualties May Be 10,000
President Clinton's special envoy to Somalia and a Marine Corps general who directed United States military operations there say there were 6,000 to 10,000 Somali casualties in four months last summer, either in clashes with United Nations peacekeepers or in fights between rival factions.
In interviews, Robert B. Oakley, the envoy, and Maj.
Gen.
Anthony C. Zinni could provide no breakdown of how many Somalis were killed and how many wounded, nor did they have an exact count of how many casualties were inflicted by clan fighting and how many in clashes with United Nations forces.


Knicks Overcome Collapse In 3d Quarter
The Knicks captured a much-needed victory tonight, but their terrible third quarter almost ruined it.
Scoring only 10 points in the third period, the Knicks squandered almost all of a 20-point lead they had built in the first half.
Fortunately for the Knicks, they had enough composure to regroup and defeat the Los Angeles Lakers, 92-78, at the Great Western Forum.
The victory gave New York (11-4) a 1-1 record on this three-game trip heading into a game against the Golden State Warriors on Thursday.


Etz Lavud Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Marietta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


P.L.O. and Israel Both Say First Deadline May Slip By
Palestinians and Israelis involved in talks over self-rule in Jericho and the Gaza Strip said today that they still expected to complete an agreement early next year even though they probably could not be finished by the Dec. 13 deadline set for the withdrawal of Israeli troops.
The negotiators were said to have made some progress in the talks, which have been taking place in Cairo this week.
But the teams have recessed to draw up proposals that will be exchanged on Wednesday.
The two groups will then begin negotiations anew based on the proposals.


Barnwell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stop-and-Start Redmen Lose at Home Yet Again
After watching their team lose at home to Towson State two weeks ago, St.
John's fans were within their rights to predict that 1993-94 season could be a long one.
After watching St.
John's enthralling, come-from-behind victory over Seton Hall on Saturday, fans couldn't be blamed for thinking that the season might have some promise after all.
Now fans may not know what to think after watching St.
John's scrappy but failed effort against Pittsburgh last night at Alumni Hall.


Marie Blake, 74, Jazz Singer and Pianist in Village for 40 Years
Marie Blake, a scat singer and stride pianist whose renditions of show tunes and jazz entertained lovers of popular music for 40 years in Greenwich Village, died on Sunday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
She was 74 and lived in Manhattan.
For 22 years, Miss Blake was the featured performer at the Five Oaks Restaurant, 49 Grove Street, at Bleecker Street, and for 19 years before that, she entertained nearby at another piano bar, Marie's Crisis.


Heading Around the World


Morrison Is Arrested
The heavyweight TOMMY MORRISON was arrested yesterday on charges that he was publicly intoxicated and punched a 20-year-old student at an Iowa City restaurant.


Crime Rates Decline; Outrage Hasn't
Statistics issued by the Federal Bureau of Investigation last weekend seem to contradict a public perception that violent crime across the country is rapidly rising.
In fact, the numbers show, America's crime rate, for violent and nonviolent offenses alike, has actually fallen a little in the last two years.
The bureau's semiannual tabulation, issued on Sunday, showed that the rate of crime as a whole declined 5 percent in the first six months of 1993 from the same period the year before and that the rate of violent crime dropped 3 percent.
Those lower rates followed similar declines from 1991 to 1992.


Hadco Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Healy Takes Shot and 30 Stitches in Face
While Mike Richter's solid goaltending has helped the Rangers to the best record in the National Hockey League (20-6-2), his seldom-used backup, Glenn Healy, has had to keep his sanity and skills intact during practices.
But even in an optional practice here Monday morning, Healy took another blow, this one to his face, not his ego.
Healy, who has played only once while the Rangers have had a 16-1-2 mark in their last 19 games, was hit in the face with a blistering, point-blank slap shot by his teammate Mike Hudson, resulting in a bloody mess and 30 stitches for Healy across the bridge of his nose.


Bam Morris Honored
When Texas Tech lost five of its first six games, it didn't appear that the Red Raiders would have anything to smile about in December.
But BYRON (BAM) MORRIS led the Raiders to five straight victories, rushing for 223, 222 and 223 yards in his last three games and giving Texas Tech a berth in the John Hancock Bowl against Oklahoma on Christmas Eve.


'Kentucky Cycle' to Close
"The Kentucky Cycle," Robert Schenkkan's two-part historical drama, is to close after the evening performance on Sunday at the Royale Theater, 242 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
Sunday evening's will be the 34th regular performance of the play, directed by Warner Shook and starring Stacy Keach.
It had 14 previews.


2 Major Boston Hospitals Are Likely to Merge
Two of the nation's oldest and most prestigious hospitals, Massachusetts General Hospital and Brigham and Women's Hospital, are expected to merge, an official at Brigham and Women's said tonight.
The boards of both hospitals are meeting on Wednesday morning to vote on the merger, said David Est ridge, a spokesman for Brigham and Women's.
Both hospitals have scheduled a news conference for Wednesday afternoon for what they said was a major announcement.


Computer Disk About Vietnam
CBS, The New York Times Company and Apple Computer Inc. announced yesterday that they would jointly produce an "interactive multimedia" encyclopedia of the Vietnam War.
Material for the CD-ROM encyclopedia will be drawn from the archives and reporting of The New York Times and CBS News.
The product will include a time line that will allow users to pick any date during the war and call up pictures and text on important events at that time in Vietnam and in the United States.


Genesis Health Ventures reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


DeTomaso Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Seeing Poor in Greater Need, Donors Give More
Charities in New York City see a spontaneous increase in donations this time of year.
For some people, the gifts are as integral to their Christmas or Hanukkah traditions as trimming the tree or lighting the candles of the menorah.
Others give in remembrance of a mother, a father or even a teacher whose absence is felt more acutely during the holidays.
Still others donate because they see the gap between the haves and have-nots yawning wider at this time.


Recognition International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Clinton Administration has proposed new standards to insure that banks end discrimination in lending to members of minority groups and people with low incomes.  [ Page A1. ]
The Department of Energy plans initiatives to encourage the use of natural gas, open up Federal lands for oil and gas exploration and expand drilling in the Gulf of Mexico.  [ D2. ]


Around the World In About a Year or So
Eat your heart out Phileas Fogg -- Rick Dobbertin is going to leave you in his dust, or rather his diesel exhaust.
A quintessential American garage mechanic, Mr.
Dobbertin is putting the finishing touches on preparations for a round-the-world journey that will make the voyage of Jules Verne's eccentric English gentleman seem like little more than a Sunday outing.


Let the Kids In
The Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum in Boston is unusual.
Like New York's Frick Collection, it is housed in a mansion -- the former home of its eponymous patron.
Unlike the Frick, it retains most of its original furnishings, including fragile antique furniture, wall hangings and personal objects placed as Mrs.
Gardner directed in her will.
Also unlike the Frick, the Gardner Museum welcomes children.
New York's Frick Collection is among a group of establishments that will be affected by new rules issued by the city's Human Rights Commission.
No longer will public places be allowed to discriminate on the basis of age.
Nor should they.


Dixon Ticonderoga Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Where Time Stops and Serenity Is on the Menu
Thomas Larkin has visited more than 20 retreat centers around the world, in London, Madrid and Sedona, Ariz., but he said none can match the beauty of the Vikingsborg Guest House, a 12-room retreat inn here on Long Island Sound.
"This is the most enchanting place I've ever seen," Mr.
Larkin said.
"It's got to be the best-kept secret of Connecticut." Mr.
Larkin, a Wilton business consultant who runs training seminars, stayed at the inn recently to find peace and solitude on his 40th birthday.


Texas County Retreats Over Apple's Gay Policy
A Texas county beat a clear retreat today in its battle over Apple Computer's policy of granting health benefits to homosexual couples.
Williamson County, eager to attract high-tech jobs, offered new tax breaks that the company quickly accepted, calling them equal to those the county commissioners turned down last week in protest of that policy.
As he did last week, Commissioner David Hays provided the swing vote at a jammed meeting at the courthouse in Georgetown, the county seat.
After arm-twisting by Gov.
Ann W. Richards, who had lobbied to keep Apple from going to another state, Mr.
Hays joined two other commissioners to approve nearly $1 million in tax incentives to Apple in return for the company's agreeing to build an office complex in this suburban county a few miles north of Austin.
Apple said it planned a ground-breaking next spring on the $80 million customer support center.


Alcide Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Casino America Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Green Point Told to Delay Stock Vote
The New York State Banking Department has told the Green Point Savings Bank that it must postpone the vote scheduled for Friday on its proposed stock offering or risk having the vote declared invalid.
Derrick D. Cephas, the Superintendent of Banks, said the department had new information that raised questions about the appraisal of Green Point that was used to set the price of the stock offering.


CHRONICLE
The retirement of ARTHUR M. SCHLESINGER JR. at the end of this academic year from his post at the City University of New York Graduate School will bring to an end a career notable for its intellectual accomplishment -- and for its longevity.
"I first taught at Radcliffe College in 1940 and stayed there until the war," said Mr.
Schlesinger, 76, who has been the Albert Schweitzer Professor in the Humanities at City University since 1966.
"After the war, I taught at Harvard from 1947 to 1961." He then joined the Kennedy Administration and served as special assistant to the president.


Real Estate; The BMW plant under construction in South Carolina is pushing up property values nearby.
TEN months from the completion of a $350 million BMW auto assembly plant in this community in northwestern South Carolina, the reverberations in the commercial real estate market are being felt in surrounding properties.
National chains of fast-food restaurants and motels, as well as banks and retail shops, have bought land and shaped plans to build outlets to serve BMW's 1,200 workers.
Brokers say property values have increased 25 percent or more on some strategically situated parcels since BMW's plans were announced more than a year ago.


Bradlees Inc.  reports earnings for 12wks to Nov 6


RJR Nabisco Revamping to Cut 6,000 Jobs
The intense competition to sell cigarettes in the United States has pushed more jobs toward extinction as the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation announced yesterday that a restructuring program would eliminate 6,000 employees, almost 9 percent of the company's work force.
That announcement, which includes a fourth-quarter charge of $445 million, or 32 cents a share, came just 13 days after RJR's main rival, the Philip Morris Companies, said its restructuring would cost 14,000 jobs, or 8 percent of its employees.


Yevgeny Gabrilovich, Soviet Film Writer, 94
Yevgeny I. Gabrilovich, a renowned scenarist of Soviet cinema, died in a Moscow hospital on Monday.
He was 94.
Mr.
Gabrilovich was best known in Russia for his scripts for "The Last Night" (1937), "Mashenka" (1942), "The Dream" (1943), co-written with Mikhail Romm and especially "Communist" (1958).


Harlyn Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Japanese Reluctantly Agree to Open Rice Market
After decades of declarations that rice farmers hold a sacred place in Japan that must be protected from foreign incursions, Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa said today that Japan would reluctantly open its rice market to imports, removing a major stumbling block to the conclusion of world trade talks by the middle of next week.
In South Korea, which also has a highly protected rice market, farmers and politicians took to the streets today when it became clear that President Kim Young Sam had secretly agreed to a deal almost identical to Japan's.


Boston Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


METRO DIGEST
SCHOOL OFFERS SOCIAL-SERVICE MODEL
Intermediate School 218 in Washington Heights, one of the poorest and most violent sections of New York City, is a public school that is rarely without activity.
It is not alone.
Creating comprehensive school-based health and social services has turned into a national movement in the last few years, said Janet Levy, a program director at the Danforth Foundation.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Sports of The Times; The Agent Who Created 'Autogate'
MEL LEVINE'S book tour will be cut short by a previous engagement -- nearly two years in prison for tax and bank fraud.
He's not going away for anything he did as a sports agent, but he is now claiming he coordinated a cover-up of payments to three University of Miami football players in 1986.
Only the naive believed him then.
Only the stubborn disbelieve him now.


Suspect Charged With Murder of Polly Klaas


Investment In Viacom Is Questioned
The disclosure that WMS Industries, in which Viacom Inc.'s chairman, Sumner Redstone, is the biggest shareholder, bought large amounts of Viacom stock at a crucial time in its bidding war for Paramount Communications drew strong reactions from Wall Street analysts and traders yesterday.
"It seems on the surface that an affiliated company was supporting Viacom's share price at a time when the share price was critical in valuing the return of Viacom's offer to Paramount's shareholders," Jessica Reif, a media analyst at Oppenheimer &amp; Company, said.


Review/Pop; From Metal Into Melody
Paw could be an all-out heavy-metal band if it wanted to be.
At CBGB on Thursday night, Mark Hennessy sang his lyrics in a deep, bleak baritone growl; Grant Fitch on guitar, Charles Bryan on bass and Peter Fitch on drums blasted out belligerent, bulldozing riffs.
But while Paw's songs often start out thrashing, they don't stay that way; heavy-metal verses give way to choruses and bridges that ease back into folk-rock and sometimes hint at country-rock.
Often, Paw (which comes from Lawrence, Kan.) does what might be called a reverse Nirvana; where Nirvana's songs often start out quietly and break into a roar, Paw's songs move from metal to melody.
The music's colliding styles match shifting emotions in the lyrics.
On Paw's album, "Dragline" (A &amp; M Records), Mr.
Hennessy sings about anger and trust, about breaking connections and trying to save them, about the inevitability of death.
In "Jessie," the singer is trying to run away from home, but his dog follows him; in "Lolita," a father romances and denounces the daughter he has abused.
"Sleeping Bag" juxtaposes an attempted suicide and an auto accident; in "Pansy," an old man howls, "I just want to lay down long enough to die!" Mr.
Hennessy's conviction, and his ability to distill situations into terse, allusive lyrics, make him a rival of Pearl Jam's Eddie Vedder.
And Paw's music, unsettled but carefully shaped, suits a band that distrusts its only inheritance.


Police Arrest 60 in Raids To Break a Heroin Ring
An international drug operation led by organized-crime figures that imported more than 400 pounds of heroin yearly into the New York metropolitan area and relied on a city police officer to detect undercover surveillance was shut down yesterday with the arrest of about 60 suspects, law-enforcement authorities said.
Capping a two-year investigation, which investigators say uncovered a drug route from Paris to Moscow to Singapore to New York, 500 narcotics officers from the Police Department raided the homes and hideouts of the suspects yesterday.
At one location, a garage in Maspeth, Queens, the officers found $1.7 million in cash hidden in the false bottom of a container.
They also recovered $103,000 from a suspected trafficker's safe-deposit box in a midtown bank.
Like 'French Connection'
Law-enforcement officials said that the inquiry, which involved international intrigue, recalled the celebrated "French Connection" case of the late 1960's, which marked the first time that narcotics investigators broke up a multimillion-dollar drug-smuggling operation.


Fluor Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Side Effect of Life-Saving Air Bags
FEW people still question the value of seat belts and shoulder harnesses in preventing severe injury in case of a motor vehicle crash.
This confidence exists, even though these passive restraints can themselves cause compression injuries when they suddenly lock in place to restrain an occupant who might otherwise hit the windshield or be thrown from the vehicle.
The same is true of air bags.
As more and more vehicles equipped with these so-called active restraints are involved in accidents that cause the air bags to inflate, doctors are finding that the devices can sometimes result in serious eye injuries.
Injuries have ranged from corneal abrasions, chemical burns and minor hemorrhages that temporarily impair vision to retinal tears and detachments that can lead to permanent visual loss.
Especially at risk are drivers who are short, and therefore more likely to get hit in the face when the air bag is propelled out of its storage compartment at speeds that typically exceed 100 miles an hour.


A Free and Simple Computer Link
Think of it as a map to the buried treasures of the Information Age.
A new software program available free to companies and individuals is helping even novice computer users find their way around the global Internet, the network of networks that is rich in information but can be baffling to navigate.


Alexander's Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25


Yankees Find Roster Holes That Might Be Hard to Fill
Left field is barren, the closer seat belongs to a novice and the starting rotation will remain unchanged unless some expensive contracts are trimmed.
Welcome to another wacky off season with the Yankees.
Dion James has left New York to play baseball in Japan, Lee Smith was not offered salary arbitration yesterday so he has left for a place that will be determined later and the players the Yankees would like to discard are not moving via trades.


International Gaming Management reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


A U.P.S. Vehicle Is Ransacked As Driver Is Left Tied in Woods
At least two gunmen hijacked a United Parcel Service truck in a secluded residential neighborhood this morning, rifling through all the packages inside and leaving the driver bound and gagged in the woods, the Suffolk County police said.
The police said that they were not ruling out the possibility of "an inside job" and that the gunmen may have been looking for a specific package.


Metropolitan Diary
PROFESSIONALLY lettered sign seen in the window of a shop on Commerce Street in Greenwich Village:  ROBERT P. REITER  ATTORNEY AT LAW  (I ALSO DABBLE IN  ANTIQUES.)
. . .
While driving from New England to Manhattan on Thanksgiving weekend, Joseph Cvinar heard the following radio spot (he swears he did):
"We carry all your Hanukkah needs including dreidels, menorahs and guilt."
. . .
Letter from a movie-fan friend:
My contribution -- if not solution -- to the recent Diary entry on the subject of conduct unbecoming to art-house gentility:
I awoke early the other morning to catch the 11 o'clock showing of "The Remains of the Day" at the Loews Paris theater in Manhattan.
The seats filled up quickly with others of my age group (the elderly $4 crowd).
As this exquisite filmunfolded, two women in back of me opened their aluminum-foil-covered lunch.
Noisily.
Think fast. What's a 76-year-old woman to do? How would Emily Post have handled this?
I turned around and murmured, "Stop rattling the paper or I WILL PUNCH YOU OUT!"
I am delighted to report that quiet was instantly restored.
. . .
Dear Diary:
It is 8:30 A.M., and I am on a crowded express train.
I spot an empty seat, sit down and push over to make room for another passenger, indicating the space to the woman standing over me.
She glances at the space, leans down and whispers in my ear.
"Thank you very much," she says, "but that seat is a size 8 and I'm a size 16." INA ROSENTHAL
. . .
40 REGULAR I like to think there's only  one thing about me that's perfectly  average: my suit size.  40 Regular is so standard  that store mannequins wear it.
Once at Schlesinger's  they had to climb in the window  to retrieve the last 40 Regular  of what I wanted.
It may not be apparent  to strangers in the street,  but haberdashery dummies and I  have much in common.
L.
ADAMS
. . .
Dear Diary:
Witnessed outside an Upper East Side preparatory school on Thanksgiving Eve.
A little girl and her mother are having words.
Suddenly, the child rips off her construction paper Indian headband and begins to stomp on it.
The mother is aghast.
Says the little one indignantly, "Grandma said we were pilgrims." TOM CANNON JR.
. . .
Dear Diary:
As a longtime editor of Isaac Asimov I was invited to the recent dedication ceremony of the Isaac Asimov School for Science and Literature on East 10th Street in Brooklyn.
During the reception a fourth-grade boy asked me what kind of computer I use.
When I confessed I didn't have a computer he gave me a blank stare.
Trying to gain favor I said, "But I do have a pickup truck." He was unimpressed.
LAWRENCE PEEL ASHMEAD
. . .
THE VILLAGE CUBED You can sit in the Figaro  and look at the Borgia; or  you can sit in the Borgia  and look at the Figaro:  the only way to look at both  at once would be  in a picture by Picasso.
ED ROSSMANN
. . .
A friend who works at the Museum of Modern Art writes:
East is East and West is West, especially in communicating with the very youthful and confident secretarial force throughout Southern California.
A recent conversation with a cheerful executive assistant, based in Burbank, concluded thus:
"I am sure he will get back to you just as soon as possible after lunch."
"Thank you."
"And it's Mrs. Bancy, right?"
"It's Mrs. Bandy, thank you."
"Right. And you're with the Museum of Natural Art, right?"
"Right." MARY LEA BANDY
. . .
Scene: Rockefeller Center.
Dramatis personae: A smartly dressed woman, her dressed-up poodle and the gentleman who stops to admire the dog.
The overdressed pet sports a sweater, a beret and, on one front paw, a wristwatch,
"Pardon me," the gentleman says, "but is your dog always so dressed-up?"
The woman smiles sweetly. "Oh, no," she replies. "Only when we go to see Santa Claus."


Review/Music; One Imprint, Many Styles
Part of the appeal of Meredith Monk's music is its combination of derivativeness and originality.
At any point in one of her works -- and certainly in those she presented on Saturday evening at Merkin Concert Hall -- a listener can find something familiar, drawn from the stew pot of post-1965 avant-garde styles.
But the juxtapositions of these elements, and the uses to which they are put, are peculiar to Ms.
Monk.
A vocal warble in the style of early Yoko Ono is set against a Philip Glass-style chord progression played on a reedy keyboard; a spiky Steve Reich rhythmic figure propels vocal counterpoint and animal noises.
The influences may be easily catalogued, but Ms.
Monk's signature is always clear.
Ms.
Monk opened her concert with glimpses of "Vessel" (1971), a sprawling multi-media work originally performed by a cast of 150.
In the excerpts she offered at Merkin Hall, Ms.
Monk played keyboards and sang, and was joined by two singers, Allison Easter and Dina Emerson.
If the selections scarcely suggested the spirit of the full work, they gave a fair overview of the colorful vocal techniques Ms.
Monk employs, and her way of using them to enliven and disguise the harmonic modesty of her material.


Book Notes
Small-Press Convention
Marshall Hryciuk of Toronto, whose business card reads "Poet, Publisher, Sales Agent," came to Manhattan last weekend to take part in the sixth annual Small Press Book Fair, a free-for-all business and literary meeting place for some of the smallest publishers around.
Standing at his exhibition spot in the Library of the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen on West 44th Street, amid the books of 250 participating presses, Mr.
Hryciuk described how he started his own imprint, Nietzche's Brolly, after larger companies were strikingly unwilling to publish his poetry.
"They would say, 'Shows promise -- keep working' or 'It's uneven' or 'It's great but not for our program,' " Mr.
Hryciuk said.


In Key Repair, Telescope Gets Better Eyesight
The myopic Hubble Space Telescope, which has had an embarrassingly out-of-focus view of the heavens for three and a half years, got two new sets of expensive prescription eyeglasses today.
The repair work continued a string of such successes by shuttle astronauts and raised hopes of impressive astronomical discoveries in years to come.
Astronomers considered today's accomplishment the most important of the mission.


Terminal Data Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Expansion Talk Early
Bud Selig, baseball's acting commissioner, said today that talk of expansion for 1997 was premature.
But he acknowledged that of the owners who had spoken with him about the subject, more favored additional expansion than opposed it.
Selig also confirmed he has spoken extensively with Jerry Colangelo of the Phoenix Suns, who heads a group that would own a franchise in Phoenix.


Job Plans of Clinton Aides Renew Debate on Lobbying
A year after President-elect Bill Clinton promised to stop the revolving door between Government and lobbying, he has left it open for two White House aides to become highly paid lobbying executives.
When Mr.
Clinton and his advisers unveiled their new ethics standards, they hailed them as the most rigid ever imposed on Government officials.
But the departure of two of the President's most senior advisers to take charge of lobbying enterprises at salaries of $500,000 a year and more have called attention to the limits of the rules.


Transmedia Network Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Morris In, Parish Out As Nets Romp
One of the trademarks of Celtic basketball through the years has been to put a half-dozen players in double figures and wear down the opposition.
Boston had seven players in double figures tonight, but New Jersey countered with more impressive performances -- including an outstanding game by Chris Morris, back from an injury -- on its way to a 117-90 laugher at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Nets did it, however, without having to face Robert Parish.
The 7-foot center banged his right elbow in pre-game drills and did not play.


Public School Offers a Social-Service Model
Carmelin Diaz, an eighth grader, got out of her second-period class Monday morning and walked down to the first floor at Intermediate School 218 to get her teeth cleaned.
In a half hour, she had all her plaque scraped off, flouride and sealant treatments, and X-rays.
"O.K., you're almost done," said the school clinic's hygienist, Evelyn Medina, diving into Carmelin's mouth one last time.
"Now this is how you massage the gums, over here you do the gum line. Don't be afraid of a little blood. O.K., you feel it? O.K.? O.K." Then Carmelin got a free toothbrush, an appointment to see the school dentist and a pass back to her community arts class.


Providence Tops Villanova On Basket by Abdullah
Providence 66, Villanova 65
Abdul Abdullah scored on a driving layup with 2 seconds left to give visiting Providence a 66-65 victory over Villanova in a Big East game last night.


Newcomer to Join U.S. Team
Tom Gullikson, the new captain of the United States Davis Cup team, is expected to announce today that a newcomer, 13th-ranked Todd Martin, will back up third-ranked Jim Courier in singles competition when the United States faces India in the first round of 1994 play March 25-27.
The match will take place on grass in New Delhi.
The Indians, led by the 1990 Wimbledon junior champion, Leander Paes, were surprise semifinalists this year before losing to Australia, which in turn bowed to Germany in the 1993 final last week.
Courier, 3-5 in Davis Cup singles play, was runner-up to Pete Sampras this year at Wimbledon, where Martin was a quarterfinalist.
Sampras declined to make himself available against India, and Andre Agassi is serving a suspension that prevents him from first-round participation.


Syria Is Reported Ready to Resume Peace Talks With Israel
Secretary of State Warren Christopher told Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin today that Syria was prepared to resume face-to-face talks with Israel in an effort to break the deadlock in their peace negotiations, senior State Department and Israeli officials said.
Syria broke off the talks in September after the disclosure of the secret Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement.
President Hafez al-Assad of Syria vowed not to return to the negotiations without an Israeli commitment to meet Syrian demands for a total withdrawal from the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights.


Bridge
The World Bridge Federation used to rank players in two ways, one based on their career performances, another based primarily on performance in the last 10 years.
Last year they abandoned the career list, thus downgrading and irritating many players whose major performances were more than a decade ago.
The top player in the 10-year list is Bob Hamman of Dallas, a burly, cheerful man who is 55 years old.
He is also the top American in the career list, with major performances in world championships stretching back for three decades.
He recently won the International Bridge Press Association's Award for the best defense of the year.
On the diagramed deal from the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams, played in Kansas City in March, he held the East cards and was defending three no-trump.


204 Secret Nuclear Tests By U.S. Are Made Public
The United States conducted 204 previously unannounced nuclear weapons tests during the cold war, the Clinton Administration disclosed today.
The number of secret tests was about twice as high as private analysts had suspected and accounted for almost 20 percent of the 1,051 nuclear tests conducted by this country.
The underground tests, which took place from 1963 to 1990 in Nevada, were often small enough to escape detection by seismic instruments.
Some resulted in accidental releases of radioactive gases into the atmosphere, usually in amounts too low to be considered harmful.


The Spymaster in a Kangaroo Court
A man who spends 33 years running an intelligence service for a brutal dictatorship is unlikely to be a nice guy.
Markus Wolf, the former East German spymaster, admits as much.
"The methods of intelligence services do not fit the moral standards of polite society anywhere," he said.
And the former German Democratic Republic was a less polite society than most.
Yet there are good reasons to think that Mr.
Wolf's trial for treason, which ended Monday with his conviction and a six-year prison sentence, was scandalous.


Rimac Journal; In a Calmer Peru, Braver Bulls and Fewer Bombs
Bull's blood glistening on his $3,000 imported Spanish costume, a triumphant matador was hoisted on eager shoulders as the 18th-century bullring here shook with delirious chants of "Peru! Peru! Peru!"
South America's bullfighting season has begun.
Following a route traced in the last century when matadors and their retinues moved up the Pacific Coast by steamship and railroad, the South American circuit starts in Peru in late October and gradually arcs through Ecuador and Colombia, finishing in Venezuela in February.


Limits on Transracial Adoption Hurt Children; Foster Care Limbo
To the Editor:
"Black Children, White Parents" (editorial, Nov. 27), about the politics of race-matching policies in adoption, fails to address the impact these policies have on the lives of thousands of black children who are left without families.
The fate of these children and not their ethnicity or the ethnicity of their parents should determine policy, not politics or ideology.


Cygne Designs Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Criminal Justice
To the Editor:
Bernard McCummings, a convicted mugger, is awarded $4.8 million by a jury, and he is permitted to keep and spend that money because a New York City transit police officer shot him as he attempted to escape the mugging scene (news article, Nov. 30).
The 80-year-old victim of the mugging receives nothing, since his right to sue his attacker expired three years after the crime was committed.


BRE Properties Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Uranium Rusting in Storage Pools Is Troubling Energy Department
Millions of pounds of highly radioactive reactor fuel have been sitting in Energy Department storage pools for so long that they are rusting and spreading radioactivity, the Energy Department said today.
The problem promises to add substantially to cleanup costs after 50 years of nuclear weapons production, already expected to run into the tens of billions of dollars.


Compania Naviera Perez Companc SA reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Rule on Political Giving Delayed
The rule-writing group for municipal bond dealers announced yesterday that it was delaying for at least two months the effective date of its rule on campaign contributions from bond underwriters to government officials who can award them municipal-bond business.
The basic proposal will remain unchanged.
The rule bans an underwriting firm from doing business for two years with a state, local or other issuer of municipal bonds, if disallowed political contributions have been made.
Contributions cannot be made to an official with a role in choosing a bond underwriter by the firm, employees of the firm's municipal bond department or top executives.


Witness Fails to Identify Two Blast Defendants
An important witness in the World Trade Center trial, asked yesterday to identify two of the defendants who he said he had encountered hours before the trade center blast, walked around the courtroom and then picked out two members of the jury instead.
The witness, Willie Hernandez Moosh, was a gas station attendant in Jersey City whose testimony was clearly seen as an important piece of the Government's case, which is built on a slow accumulation of circumstantial evidence.


Uranium Rusting in Storage Pools Is Troubling Energy Department
Millions of pounds of highly radioactive reactor fuel have been sitting in Energy Department storage pools for so long that they are rusting and spreading radioactivity, the Energy Department said today.
The problem promises to add substantially to cleanup costs after 50 years of nuclear weapons production, already expected to run into the tens of billions of dollars.


New York Has Power to Protect Taxi Drivers
To the Editor:
Recent assaults and murders of livery cab drivers make it clear that New York City must do more to protect drivers from this mayhem.


Wilshire Oil Co. of Texas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gay Rights Law for Schools Advances in Massachusetts
Massachusetts is about to become the first state in the nation to outlaw discrimination against gay and lesbian students in public schools.
Aides to Gov.
William F. Weld say he will soon sign into law a bill that passed the State Senate here after an extraordinary lobbying campaign by hundreds of high school students -- gay and lesbian, as well as heterosexual.


AT LUNCH WITH: Spalding Gray; A Life Based On a True Story
NEAR the end of "Gray's Anatomy," Spalding Gray's latest monologue, Mr.
Gray describes an incident in which he was saved from drowning by three men who dragged him out of the water and then instantly propped him up so they could have their picture taken with him.
During the rescue, the men had recognized him from the poster for a previous monologue, "Swimming to Cambodia," which pictured half of Mr.
Gray's face bobbing up from underwater.
On stage at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center, where he is performing "Gray's Anatomy" on Sunday and Monday nights through Jan. 3 (he'll return in June after touring the show), Mr.
Gray pauses at this point in the tale and throws the audience a comic, helpless look, as if to say: "This is all just too weird." What he does say is: "Art imitates life; life imitates art!"


Trimedyne Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hanson Plc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gifts for Every Cook, Kitchen and Pocketbook
FORGET the proverbial glass of milk for Santa.
This year, chances are it will be supplanted by espresso, cappuccino or maybe a yuletide latte, with biscotti on the side.
The espresso and cappuccino tide that is foaming eastward from the West Coast has retailers in New York selling home espresso makers of every stripe.


CHRONICLE
The apple may not fall far from the tree, but consider this: VICTOR NAVASKY, the editor of the Nation magazine, has written three books: one about the Justice Department under Robert F. Kennedy, one about former Communists turned informants during the McCarthy era and one a spoof, "The Experts Speak: the Definitive Guide to Authorative Misinformation," which he wrote with Christopher Cerf.
Now his son, BRUNO NAVASKY, 26, has done a book too, an ethereal volume titled "Festival in My Heart: Poems by Japanese Children." It is an anthology of more than 100 poems selected and translated by Mr.
Navasky from a children's poetry column that appears daily in Yomiuri Shimbun, a Japanese newspaper.


Corrections
An article yesterday about State Comptroller H. Carl McCall's plan for New York State to repay money that it diverted illegally from the state's pension system misstated one effect of the plan.
Because the former accounting system for the pension fund is being phased back in, it will not be until the 1999 fiscal year that state and local governments' annual contributions to the fund are greater than if Mr.
McCall had required a return to the former accounting method immediately.
The 1999 comparison in the article was drawn, incorrectly, with a method struck down last month by the Court of Appeals.
That new accounting method was approved by the Governor and Legislature in 1990 and enabled a $4 billion raid on the pension fund.


Florafax International (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


In Sweden, Proof of The Power Of Words
In her lecture as the recipient of the 1993 Nobel Prize in Literature, Toni Morrison, the American author, delivered a lovingly wrought paean to language and to the sublime vocation of "word work."
In a half-hour address that brought the crowd in the Swedish Academy here this evening to a standing ovation, she spoke of the value of language: not official language or the censoring language of the state or the trick language of journalism, but language as words, with the magic they contain when they are learned by children.


Southwestern Bell and Cox Plan a $4.9 Billion Venture
The Southwestern Bell Corporation and Cox Cable of Atlanta announced yesterday that they would form a $4.9 billion joint venture, marking the third powerful alliance formed this year between telephone and cable companies in the race to build advanced networks.
The new alliance would unite one of the strongest of the seven Bell companies with the nation's sixth-largest operator of cable television systems.
Amid the current wave of media combinations, the deal would be exceeded in size only by Bell Atlantic's $26 billion bid to buy Tele-Communications Inc. and U S West's alliance with Time Warner's cable system.


Cimco Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Dr. Jerome A. Marks; Gastroenterologist, 94
Dr.
Jerome A. Marks, a retired gastroenterologist and associate professor of clinical medicine at New York University Medical Center, died at his home in Manhattan on Sunday.
He was 94.
Dr.
Marks was born in New York City.
He graduated from Columbia College in 1921 and from the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University in 1925.
He was in private practice in New York City for nearly 50 years, during which he served as director of medicine at Gouverneur Hospital, associated attending physician at Bellevue Hospital and consulting physician at Beekman Downtown Hospital.
He taught at N.Y.U.
Medical Center before and after his retirement in 1976.


Ark Restaurants Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Bonso Electronics International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Part of America's Past Becomes a Stamp of Tomorrow


Top Position At Upjohn Is Filled
The Upjohn Company, one of the largest diversified drug makers, named a longtime Merck &amp; Company executive, John L. Zabriskie, as chairman and chief executive yesterday.
Mr.
Zabriskie had been a leading candidate to be the next Merck chairman.
He is the second senior executive to leave Merck, the world's largest drug maker, in the last five months, reducing the handful of potential successors that P. Roy Vagelos, the chairman of Merck, said were his "dream team."


Limits on Transracial Adoption Hurt Children; No to Race Preferences
To the Editor:
"Black Children, White Parents" (editorial, Nov. 27) begins well enough by reporting a recent study that shows black children adopted by white parents do not suffer the kinds of harm that the National Association of Black Social Workers proclaimed when it branded such transracial adoptions "genocide." Indeed the study you report, that these adopted children have a perfectly wholesome sense of identity, accords with the weight of dispassionate research.


Robert Taft Jr., 76, an Ex-Senator And Heir to Ohio G.O.P. Dynasty
Robert Taft Jr., a former United States Representative and Senator who was the grandson of a President and the son of a Presidential contender, died on Monday at Jewish Hospital in Cincinnati.
He was 76.
The Cincinnati Enquirer said he had a stroke on Nov. 29.


Croatia Forced Thousands From Homes, Rights Group Says
The Government of Croatia has forced thousands of its enemies from their homes and from the country, according to the new Zagreb office of the human rights organization Helsinki Watch.
The actions have been directed mostly against Serbs, who once constituted a sizable minority in Croatia, but also against Croats opposed to the rule of President Franjo Tudjman, said Ivan Zvonimir Cicak, who heads Helsinki Watch of Croatia.


Credence Systems Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Health-Mor reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nicholas Kounovsky, Fitness Expert, 80
Nicholas Kounovsky, a physical-fitness teacher who introduced European-style gymnastics to Americans and others, died on Friday at the Tolstoy Center in Valley Cottage, N.Y.
He was 80 and lived in Glen Cove, L.I.
Born to Russian parents in Odessa, Mr.
Kounovsky arrived in New York in 1940.
He established gymnasiums in Manhattan, West Hampton Beach, L.I., and Hollywood, and trained a whole generation of instructors who then set up exercise studios across the country.


Just One Electron Is Basis For New Chip From Hitachi
Hitachi Ltd. said today that it had overcome a major hurdle blocking development of a computer chip that is fantastically tiny and powerful, even by today's standards.
It has demonstrated what it says is the world's first electronic memory that uses only a single electron to store a bit of information while operating at room temperature.
Scientists have known and previously demonstrated the principles of single-electron memory devices, but such demonstrations required extremely low temperatures.


Village Super Market Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 23


Raiders' Robinson Out With an Injured Knee
GREG ROBINSON, the Los Angeles Raiders' leading rusher, will almost surely miss the remainder of the regular season because of an injured left knee, the team said yesterday.
The rookie will undergo arthroscopic surgery to repair torn cartilage.
Robinson was injured while running the ball Sunday at Buffalo on the first play of the second half in the Raiders' 25-24 victory over the Bills.
It was a noncontact injury.


Islanders Need Best To Tie The Worst
The Edmonton Oilers brought the National Hockey League's worst record to Nassau Coliseum tonight and they played without Jason Arnott, their injured rookie star.
Still, they gave the struggling Islanders an entertaining tussle before only 8,780 fans, who grumbled a bit until the home team came from behind twice and settled for a ragged 4-4 tie.


Food Notes
Choice Chilies
Hot Stuff, 227 Sullivan Street (near Bleecker Street), a shop specializing in spicy condiments, has ristras, strings of dried chilies, which make great Christmas decorations.
They come in two-foot and four-foot lengths of fragrant, medium-hot chimayo chilies, and cost $25 and $40 respectively.
Another way to heat up the holidays is to give a year-round gift of chilies from Chile Today Hot Tamale, a company in New Brunswick, N.J., that sends a package containing different dried chilies every month.
Among the varieties are arbol, chipotle, ancho, and habanero.
Each is packaged with a rating indicating its heat.


Haitian Plans a Vatican Visit To Win Support for Aristide
A day after he announced that he would stay on past his scheduled Dec. 15 resignation, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide's Prime Minister announced that he would go to the Vatican to seek support for a new effort to press Haiti's military leaders to give up power.
Robert Malval said today, "We are about to launch a new initiative and we want the Church to take part and support what we are about to do."


Luxtec Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


In Russia, Democracy Now Gladly Goes to Prison


Gunman Kills 5 on L.I.R.R. Train; 19 Are Wounded
A taciturn gunman opened fire without warning inside a crowded Long Island Rail Road train during rush hour yesterday, killing at least five people and wounding 19 others, the police said.
The gunfire erupted as the train neared the Merillon Avenue station in Garden City shortly after 6 P.M., when the man entered the train's third car and walked backward down the aisle, looking into the eyes of passengers as he shot one after another with his 9-millimeter handgun.
As passengers screamed, diving to the floor, the man calmly emptied his gun, reloaded it and began shooting again.
He did not utter a word, witnesses said.


Surgeon General Suggests Study of Legalizing Drugs
The nation's Surgeon General, Joycelyn Elders, today recommended that the Government study the idea of legalizing drugs, suggesting that doing so might reduce violent crimes.
But she stopped short of endorsing such a radical reversal of the nation's drug policy.
Nonetheless, sensing that weeks of effort by the Clinton Administration to look tough on crime could be erased by Dr.
Elders's comments, the White House moved swiftly to distance itself from her remarks, and officials said she was privately rebuked for what she had said.


Interstate General Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Heinz (H.J.) Inc. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 27


No Contest: Pistons Score 6 in the 4th
Magic 91, Pistons 89
Orlando set a National Basketball Association record last night by holding the Detroit Pistons to 6 points in the fourth quarter, and the Magic rallied from a 17-point deficit to win, 91-89, in Orlando, Fla.


Pure Tech Intl (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Penril Datacomm Networks Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


In America; The 'Squash It!' Campaign
Dr.
Jay Winsten, director of the Center for Health Communication at the Harvard School of Public Health, gave us the media campaign in the 1980's that made the designated driver part of the national culture.
A television blitz was the only way to convince many of us that it was not a good idea to spend most of an evening as a reveler swallowing prodigious amounts of booze, and the remainder of it as a semi-coherent, half-blind motorist careening down a highway.


Consumer Installment Debt Jumps
Increasingly confident consumers took on an unexpectedly large $8.1 billion more of new installment debt in October than they paid off, a tally by the Federal Reserve showed today.
Even though previously published figures had shown hefty gains in sales of automotive and other retail goods during October, analysts said today that they were impressed by the degree to which consumers were willing to take on fresh debt.


Scientific Software-Intercomp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mays (J.W.) Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


National Picture &amp; Frame Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Supermail International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


John Lurie Continues His Mission: To Experiment in an Accessible Way
John Lurie, the saxophonist, actor and leader of the Lounge Lizards, has made a series of questionable decisions, but the worst may have been in the late 1970's when he declared his music "fake jazz." He has not been taken seriously as a musician since.
It didn't help that Mr.
Lurie, 40, also fooled around with acting, or that he tried to start a television program on fishing, featuring guests like Tom Waits and Dennis Hopper.
Or that onstage he gave free rein to his wise-guy bohemian streak, delivering surreal monologues and jokes between tunes.
The combination drove a spike through the heart of his career.


Sampling Wines of the World in New York Shops
WHEN Lew Eklund, a decorative painter and musician from Queens, walked into Morrell &amp; Company in Manhattan on Saturday, he was clearly baffled by the sight of six open bottles of out-of-state red wines on a rear counter.
But that sight will become increasingly common.
Since Nov. 23, because of a state legislative change, merchants have been permitted to offer on-premise tastings of wines produced anywhere in the world; previously, only New York State wines could be offered to customers.


Fluke Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Vote? Anger Pierces Russia's Suffering Heartland
Two old women walked past, bent by age and thickly bundled in worn quilted cotton and huge felt boots, but moving surprisingly fast through the carpet of new snow.
"So babushka, 'everyone to the elections,' right?" said a passer-by, invoking the old Soviet slogan that used to insure turnouts of 99 percent and better for an unopposed Communist slate.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.75
2.97
2.77
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.11
3.24
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.25
3.27
3.31
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.23
5.23
6.35
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.16
6.16
7.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.17
7.17
8.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.56
5.59
6.38
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Advance Circuits (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Magic Restaurants Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Cavco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Old Budget Thinking Misses at City Hall
To the Editor:
I didn't want to leave you with the impression (re "Budget Advice for the Mayor-Elect," editorial Dec. 4) that the Kummerfeld report on New York City's budget had gone unread around here; duly read and digested, it has gone through a number of hands, including my own.


Catalina Lighting Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; Capturing the Genius and the Scoundrel in Genet
Genet
A Biography
By Edmund White
728 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $35.
On a fine summer day in 1911, an unmarried woman of 22 turned her 7-month-old child over to the Hospice for Welfare Children in Paris.
She was a governess, she said, but eight years later her death certificate described her as a maid.


No Action Is Planned Against De La Hoya
Although Oscar De La Hoya will not fight in New York tomorrow night, plenty of action continues to swirl around the high-profile but currently undercover boxer.
Randy Gordon, chairman of the New York State Athletic Commission, said yesterday that De La Hoya could be subject to disciplinary action for his failure to participate as the marquee attraction at the Paramount if the promoter filed a formal complaint.
If a complaint were filed, a hearing would be scheduled and a suspension could result.
A suspension, said Gordon, would most likely be honored by other states and could seriously affect the immediate future of De La Hoya, the 1992 Olympic gold medal winner.


Review/Television; Bing Crosby's 2 Lives: In Public and in Private
Long before he died at 74 on a golf course in Spain in 1977, Bing Crosby had become a cultural artifact, his career whittled down to lifeless Christmas specials on television.
Bing was in effect dethroned when Elvis became king.
For a new generation, the veteran performer was hopelessly old-fashioned.
Now, helped in large measure by digitally remastered recordings of his early work, Crosby is riding a richly deserved revival.
Two television biographies help explain why.
Currently on the Disney Channel, getting its next play tomorrow night at 10:30, is "Bing! His Legendary Years," narrated with unabashed hero worship by the comedian Dennis Miller, his usual scattershot irony discarded for the occasion.
And Tuesday at 8 P.M. the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network's "Biography" series presents "Bing Crosby: America's Crooner," a documentary that peeks beneath the image at some troubling aspects of the performer's private life.


In School
City schools have too many poor children and too little money to address poverty's woes.
What's a school board to do?
Dump the superintendent!


Merchants Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nora and Its Agency Decide to Part Ways
Nora Beverages U.S.A. and Angotti, Thomas, Hedge in New York said that after four years they had mutually decided to part ways.
As a result, the company, which imports Naya spring water from Canada, has begun a review on its estimated $3 million account.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Coors Light is not an ice beer, but a new commercial gives the Silver Bullet a snowy image.
ICE is often clear.
But a curious television commercial for Coors Light beer tries to cloud that perception.
The commercial, created by Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago, represents an odd twist in the nation's intensely competitive beer market.
It is inspired by what could be the hottest trend since light beer -- or the biggest flop since dry beer.


Patterson Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Felix Houphouet-Boigny, Ivory Coast's Leader Since Freedom in 1960, Is Dead
President Felix Houphouet-Boigny of the Ivory Coast, Africa's oldest and longest-serving head of state and one of the last of a generation of African leaders to guide his people from colonalism, died yesterday.
He was officially said to be 88 years old, but was widely believed to be much older.
His death was announced by Prime Minister Alassane Ouattara in a televised address 33 years to the day after the West African country gained its independence from France.
Mr.
Ouattara said the President had died at 6:35 A.M.
Mr.
Houphouet-Boigny recently underwent surgery for cancer of the prostate, but the cause of death was not immediately known.


Culture Dispute With Paris Now Snags World Accord
With arguments resolved over wheat and corn subsidies, as well as exports of pig meat and skimmed milk powder, the world trade talks came down to this today: Can the United States tolerate France's determination to go on protecting and subsidizing its movie industry in order to stave off a perceived Hollywood onslaught from the likes of "Jurassic Park" and "Terminator 2?"
After almost 23 hours of negotiations with the European Community's chief negotiator on Monday and today, the answer from Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, was no.


Indians Dally on Deal For Mets' Saberhagen
The Indians, despite hours of meetings involving ownership, financial advisers and baseball operations executives, were unable to decide last night whether to complete a trade with the Mets that would send Bret Saberhagen to Cleveland.
The Mets, who 24 hours earlier had felt they were on the verge of making the trade, called it a night after their third phone conversation with the Indians.


Xerox Is Latest To Cut Payroll
The Xerox Corporation is joining a growing list of big companies that are sharply cutting back their payrolls in an effort to become more efficient and improve profits.
Xerox announced that it would cut more than 10,000 jobs, or nearly 10 percent of its work force, over the next three years.


Essay; Hold That GATT
French culture is regularly on display in the architect I. M. Pei's modern addition to the Louvre in Paris.
This week, in another I. M. Pei structure in Beverly Hills -- a tinseltown temple on the corner of Wilshire and Santa Monica Boulevards -- Hollywood financial muscle held a glittering gathering for Bill Clinton.
Afterward, at a $25,000 to $100,000 per mogul-couple dinner to benefit the Democratic Party, Barbra Streisand sang "Can't Help Lovin' That Man of Mine"; Frank Sinatra, whose gangland connections and moll introductions did so much to besmirch the Kennedy escutcheon, was insinuated into the Clinton circle. (Left out in the cold were Julia Roberts and Michelle Pfeiffer, whose agent was humiliated.)


Main Telescope Repairs Are Completed
Wrapping up the most critical repairs to the Hubble Space Telescope with surprising ease and alacrity, the space-walking shuttle astronauts have now given astronomers everything they asked for: two new sets of corrective mirrors designed to overcome the telescope's flawed vision and give clear sight to its two cameras and other scientific instruments.
The remaining question is, Will the repairs do the job?


Corrections
A listing on Sunday in the cultural calendar of the New Jersey Weekly for Handel's "Messiah" at the Three Saints Cultural Center in Garfield misstated the time, the performers and the ticket prices.
The time on Saturday is 8 P.M., not 5; the performers will be the Three Saints Musical Society Chorus and Orchestra, conducted by Peter Jermihov.
Tickets are $22.50, or $12.50 for children and the elderly.


Yankees Using Caution On the Henderson Subject
The Yankees are hesitant to even whisper his name.
He is perhaps the finest leadoff hitter ever, he is the left fielder the Yankees could use and he is available as a free agent.
Everyone knows him, knows his past, knows he could be expensive and knows he could be dynamic or disappointing.
He is Rickey Henderson.
But Dennis Gilbert, Henderson's agent, is making the Yankees cautious.
Gilbert is the same man who wrestled $25.5 million out of the Yankees for Danny Tartabull two years ago.
Now the team would love to trade the frustrating and injury-plagued slugger.
The Yankees do not want to give Gilbert even the slightest advantage by displaying premature interest in Henderson.


U.S. Stand on Israel-P.L.O. Pact: It's Up to Them
After heralding the Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement in September as a historic blueprint for Palestinian self-rule, the Clinton Administration is now calling it a document with loose ends for which the United States bears only limited responsibility.
Granted, the United States remains enthusiastic about the breakthrough between Israel and the Palestinians and has not weakened its resolve to see it put into practice.
Euphoria Evaporates
Secretary of State Warren Christopher has stressed in both private meetings and public statements on his current tour of the Middle East that carrying out the agreement speedily is crucial to stem the current wave of violence in Israel and the occupied territories.
He has also argued that ordinary Palestinians will see an improvement in their lives and gain confidence in their political future only if aid from abroad flows into Jericho and the Gaza Strip as soon as the Palestinians begin administering them.


European Official Urges Cuts In Social Benefits to Add Jobs
In a clear statement that Europe's welfare state will have to change radically if an unemployment crisis is to be overcome, the European Commission today proposed lowering minimum wages and cutting non-wage labor costs like social security payments as a way to create 15 million jobs by 2000.
Presenting a long-awaited policy paper on Europe's soaring unemployment, which now affects 11.3 percent of the work force, close to double the United States rate, Jacques Delors, the president of the commission, made it clear that social welfare programs might have to be trimmed back.


Transactions
Baseball  National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Agreed to terms with Mark Grace, first baseman, on a one-year contract.


Economic Scene; Success for Vietnam may depend on how well it copies China.
BY most accounts -- including the World Bank's -- Vietnam is an odds-on bet to be the next Asian economy to wow the world with double-digit growth.
Apparently the only unanswered question is whether embargo-hobbled American investors will be shut out by Japanese and European rivals.
But a panel of conservative American economists and Vietnamese expatriates, recruited by the Pacific Basin Research Institute and the Donner Foundation, aren't so sure.
Their newly published report offers a cool-eyed view of a nation and economy hobbled by bureaucracy and divided by region.
"The basis for a truly free market is not yet there," said Bui Diem, the director of the institute and once South Vietnam's ambassador to America.


TV Violence and 'Content Neutral' Legislation
To the Editor:
Michael D. Rips's response (letter, Dec. 2) to my Op-Ed piece about the unconstitutionality of legislation designed to restrict the portrayal of violence on television misapprehends a central First Amendment theme.
According to Mr.
Rips, since the time, place and manner of speech may be regulated so long as legislation is "content neutral," Congress may freely ban any portrayal of violence from television at certain hours.
But such a ban, imposed because of Congressional disapproval of programming containing violence, is precisely what the First Amendment does not permit.
It cannot be "content neutral" for Congress to prohibit certain programming because of its content.


Sterling Jensen Dies; Actor and Mime, 68
Sterling B. Jensen, an actor and mime who helped found the Roundabout Theater, died yesterday in the Touro Infirmary in New Orleans.
He was 68 and lived in New Orleans.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his wife, Esther Ewing Jensen.


Ranger Castoffs Lead The Jets
Jets 5, Maple Leafs 4


ARRESTED OFFICIAL HIRED BY PENTAGON
The former acting Army Secretary, John W. Shannon, was hired as a high-paid Pentagon consultant by a friend within weeks after Mr.
Shannon was put on administrative leave because of a shoplifting arrest, the Defense Department said today.
The Pentagon gave Mr.
Shannon a month-to-month contract on Nov. 17 to study Defense Department stock inventories and advise civilian supply officials on what parts and supplies to keep and what to get rid of, said Lieut.
Col.
Stephanie Hoehne, a Pentagon spokeswoman.


Handsome Gifts, Pa-Rum-Pum-Pum-Pum
AT this time of year, when thoughts turn to gift-giving and many people are off and running to department stores and specialty shops, it is often the handmade, well-crafted object that draws the eye -- maybe as an antidote to the high-tech ones.
And in this year in which the White House has acquired works by 65 contemporary craft artists for its new permanent collection, why not celebrate the handmade in other homes as well?
Visually and emotionally, the handcrafted object -- new or old, an artisan's tour de force or a do-it-yourselfer's first project -- offers a satisfying touch.


Eugene B. Power, 88, A Pioneer in Microfilm
Eugene B. Power, a pioneer in the use of microfilm for the storage and reproduction of scholarly information, died on Monday at his home in Ann Arbor, Mich.
He was 88.
He had Parkinson's disease, said Bernie DeGroat, a spokesman for the University of Michigan.


Excerpts From Papers And Letter of Suspect
Following are excerpts from the papers that Colin Ferguson was carrying when he was arrested in the shootings Tuesday night on a Long Island Rail Road commuter train and from a letter Mr.
Ferguson sent to the New York City Police Department on Dec. 3, 1992, with copies to Mayor David N. Dinkins, among others.
The return address on the letter was Mr.
Ferguson, in care of Mark Martin of the Legal Aid Society.
Spelling and punctuation are as they were in the papers and letter.
FROM PAPERS CARRIED BY SHOOTINGS SUSPECT
N.Y.C. was spared because of my respect for Mayor David Dinkins and Comm.
Raymond Kelly, who officially still in office.
Nassau County is the venue Also that Chinese racist Mr.
Sue who will never put me to shame again without cause.
Additional reasons for this: the sloppy running of the #2 train.
It is racism by Caucasians and Uncle Tom Negroes.
Also the false allegations against me by the filthy Caucasian racist female on the #1 line.
. . .
Also, for those corrupt "black" attorneys who not only refuse to help me but tried to steal my car.
Also those so-called civil right leader such as the Rev.
Herbert Daughtry, C. Vernon Mason, and Calvin Butts.
Also the racism of Mark Martin and the Legal Aid Society and court system.
Also racism of Attorney Ms.
Abramson of the law firm of Gaffin &amp; Mayo on Broadway in Manhattan.
. . .
Reasons for this: Adelphi University's racism, the EEOC's racism, workers' compensation's racism, NYC transit police, NYC police, the racism of Gov.
Cuomo's staff and exec. chamber, the racism of the lieutenant governor's staff and exec chamber, that includes Susan (indecipherable) and Carol (indecipherable).
Those filthy swine that live at 226 Martense Street, Bklyn, are not my friends.
Once they hear of this, they will loot all the evidence in my room, such as documents and tapes.
I hate them with a passion.
FROM LETTER  TO COMMISSIONER KELLY  Dear Sir:
Please be advised that Mr.
Colin Ferguson has contacted us, his close friends in the "black" professional community, to advise and assist him regarding his numerous requests for the immediate return of all documents, records, photographs, fingerprints, and negatives, related to his racist and false arrest of Feb. 17, 1992.
This, of course, constituted the first arrest of Mr.
Ferguson's life.
A review of the documents in our possession revealed the racism and corruption within your agency, as you attempt to deny Mr.
Ferguson the fundamental guarantees provided for under our system. . . .
The above mentioned arrest was particularly viscous and racist for the following reasons:
1) Mr. Ferguson had been sitting in the same well defined seat on the #1 train for eight (8) or more stops before his racist caucasian accuser and her racist caucasion female friend boarded the train demanding that Mr. Ferguson move over.
2) The accuser was not denied a seat, since she did sit down. She knew that the row of seats on that train does not accommodate its capacity comfortably, especially in the winter when commuters overdress.
3) The two racist caucasian police officers pushed Mr. Ferguson to the platform violently where he sustained shock and bruises.
4) A caucasian man with a pitbull on the subway platform impersonating a police officer had his dog jump on Mr. Ferguson's chest. He was allowed to go free although thirty or more commuters demanded that he be arrested.
5) The twelve (12) caucasian police officers refused to take the names of the fifteen (15) or so witnesses who came forward for Mr. Ferguson.
6) The N.Y.C. Transit Police has consistently engaged in a racist campaign of targeting "blacks" using the subway system in an effort to improve arrest statistics within the subway, which is then publicized with the hope that more caucasians will utilize the subway system.
7) Copies of Mr. Ferguson's photographs were given to his accuser and her friend by the police officers so that in the event the matter went to trial, the accusers could circulate the photographs to friends, thereby accumulating false witnesses to lie under oath and perhaps for future frame ups.
It should be noted that we have experienced the unpleasant duty of conferencing this matter with a deeply concerned young man, whose attempt to overcome dismay appears frustrated by a course of action calculated to disrupt his life, lend to the furtherance of slander, and libel and effect a future frame up. . . .
We hope that your office recognizes that Mr.
Ferguson's ability to proceed with his normal day to day activities have been tremendously affected. . . .
Yours truly, Approved and accepted by: Colin Ferguson


Theater in Review
Three Short Pieces Sunshine's Glorious Bird The Man in the Moon The Promotion  Performance Space 122 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street East Village Through Sunday Three one-act plays written, directed and performed by John O'Keefe; technical direction and lighting by Sarah Sidman.
Presented by P.S. 122.
John O'Keefe, the writer and performer whose "Shimmer" played to enthusiastic reviews in New York in 1989, doesn't really seem to speak the sentences that make up the monologues of his "Three Short Pieces"; rather, he seems to exude them, as if they were sweat or tears.
A man of both explosive verbal lyricism and concentrated physical intensity, he infuses words with a kinetic, corporeal force that almost never lets up.


An Anguished Season For Knicks' Anthony
Greg Anthony's slide began right after the preseason.
Anthony thought he had a chance to win the starting point-guard position, but Pat Riley chose Doc Rivers.
Disappointed, Anthony lost his concentration and began playing poorly.
It continued, game after game.
Eventually, it was difficult for Anthony to pick up a newspaper, to turn on a radio or television, or to walk into an arena without someone criticizing his play.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
PETS are an integral part of many children's lives.
Yet, the match between the child and the animal can be difficult, as shown by the number of household pets taken to animal shelters by frustrated parents.
To make the relationship work and to have realistic expectations, parents should understand their child's stage of development, the nature of the animal and the profound effects that animal will have on their household.
"It makes me shudder when I hear someone say, 'We're getting our child a pet so that he can learn responsibility,' " said Maureen Fredrickson, the program director of the Delta Society, a national organization in Renton, Wash., that studies interactions between people and animals.


A Lack of Discipline Keeps Math Scores Low
Like the United States, Portugal is trying to improve its students' achievement in mathematics.
In both nations, scores on standardized math tests are significantly lower than they are in other developed countries.
Some reasons given by Portuguese high school teachers and university professors for the nation's low math grades echo those cited by their counterparts in the United States: a lack of discipline among students and teachers and very little support in the home.


Theater in Review
All for One  Ensemble Studio Theater 549 West 52d Street Clinton Through Sunday By Paul Weitz; directed by Kate Baggott; set by David Gallo; lighting by Glen Fasman; costumes by Julie Doyle; technical director, Carlo Adinolfi; production stage manager, Elaine Bayless; stage manager, Mark Roberts; produced by Kevin Confoy.
Presented by Ensemble Studio Theater, Curt Dempster, artistic director; Jacqueline A. Siegel, managing director; Mr.
Confoy, executive producer, in association with Annette Moskowitz, Alexander E. Racolin and Daniel Mayer Selznick.
WITH: Calista Flockhart, Noelle Parker, Liev Schreiber, John Speredakos and Michael Louis Wells.
The fatal flaw of "All for One," Paul Weitz's play about a hotshot young television writer whose two oldest friends visit him in his Pacific Palisades home, is that it is as pat and formulaic as the show that wins him a Golden Orb award for best new television series.


WHERE TO FIND IT
FINDING bed linens that fit perfectly can be a challenge.
Sometimes the problem is size; standard commercial sheets are often too skimpy to fit the latest, extra-deep mattresses.
But linens also should fit the look of the room, complementing the wallpaper, fabrics and furniture.


Sharing Good Will and Food During the Season


DEATH ON THE L.I.R.R.: The Overview; Portrait of Suspect Emerges in Shooting on L.I. Train
The man accused of opening fire on a Long Island Rail Road commuter train and killing five people was arraigned on murder charges yesterday, as officials released a sheaf of handwritten notes in which he vented his rage about everyone from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to the state Workers' Compensation Board to Asians, whites and "Uncle Tom Negroes."
The suspect was identified as Colin Ferguson, 35, a black Brooklyn resident who emigrated from Jamaica in 1982, made the dean's list at Adelphi University in Garden City, L.I., and later worked at a Long Island burglar alarm company.


Clinton Signs Free Trade Agreement


CLINTON PROPOSES TOUGH NEW RULES ON BIAS BY BANKS
The Clinton Administration proposed tough new tests today that are intended to insure that banks end discrimination in their lending to members of minority groups and to people with low and moderate incomes.
The changes are the latest effort by the Administration to broaden access to credit, financial services and investments.
Officials predicted that people and businesses in these groups would gain access that they might not otherwise get to billions of dollars in credit once the proposals take effect in 1995.


Calendar: Buying, Touring, Partying
Gift Collections  Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 935-3960.
Items from 14 cultural organizations will be sold at the society today through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Participants include the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, Studio Museum of Harlem, Small Press Center and Newark Museum.
Admission is $3.
Candlelight Tours  Abigail Adams Smith Museum, 421 East 61st Street; (212) 838-6878.
The museum will offer candlelight tours of its Federal and Empire period rooms, decorated for the holidays in 19th-century style, Wednesday through Dec. 17, from 5:30 to 8 P.M.
There will be crafts for sale, period music and refreshments.
Admission is $5; students and those 65 and older, $4; members, $3; crafts sale only, $1.
Miniature Trains  New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx; (718) 817-8700.
An exhibit, through Jan. 2, features model trains traveling through miniature landscapes, including a small replica of the garden's 1840 snuff mill and a historic New York City square.
Various children's events, including five appearances by Thomas the Tank Engine, will be offered through Dec. 26.
The garden is open Tuesday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Grounds admission is $3; students, those 65 and older and children 6 to 16, $2. 19th-Century Holiday  Old Merchant's House, 29 East Fourth Street between Lafayette Street and the Bowery; (212) 777-1089.
A holiday party with music and tours of the 1832 house, decorated in period holiday decorations, will be held Tuesday from 6 to 8 P.M.
Tickets are $20; reservations required.
Crafts Sale  Elsa Mott Ives Gallery at the Y.W.C.A., 610 Lexington Avenue at 53d Street; (212) 755-4500.
A crafts sale featuring turned-wood bowls, porcelain vases, enamel jewelry and handmade books continues through Dec. 16.
Open Monday through Friday, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.; Saturday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
No charge for admission.


Giuliani Names Albany Adviser As Budget Chief
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday named as his budget director Abraham M. Lackman, a man with a broad knowledge of New York City's finances gained from previous encounters with city administrations -- most of them adversarial.
For the last decade, Mr.
Lackman has been a senior fiscal adviser to the Republican-controlled State Senate, which has often jousted with the Democrats who have long dominated City Hall.
Now he will be the main official dealing with perhaps the most difficult problem facing the Republican-Liberal Mayor-elect -- how to close future budget deficits estimated at $2 billion a year.


MALAYSIA PREMIER DEMANDS APOLOGY
The brickbats are flying once again between two of the most outspoken politicians in the region and a result may be a multibillion-dollar trade war between Australia and Malaysia.
The feud is between Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad of Malaysia, who refused an invitation from President Clinton to attend the Asia-Pacific summit meeting in Seattle last month, and Prime Minister Paul Keating of Australia, who referred to Mr.
Mahathir as a "recalcitrant" for not traveling to Seattle.


U.S. Writing 2,500 Possible Credit-Fraud Victims
The main conference room at the United States Secret Service office here is a mailroom of sorts now, its only table piled with notices to about 2,500 potential and unsuspecting victims of a nationwide credit card and home-equity loan scheme.
For two weeks now, agents have been stuffing envelopes to the 2,500 people with a written outline of the scheme, its origins in a sprawling auto dealership in Springfield, N.J., and an appeal for help with the investigation into the ring behind it.
In the last year, the credit records of all 2,500 have been checked by the Autoland dealership, and investigators want to know specifically whether the people gave written permission for the inquiries.


Dr. Wolfgang Paul, 80, Is Dead; German Winner of Physics Nobel
Dr.
Wolfgang Paul, who won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1989 for his work in isolating ions and electrons and led Germany's prestigious Alexander von Humboldt Foundation for 10 years, died Monday night at his home here.
He was 80.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, Doris.


DEATH ON THE L.I.R.R.: The Suspect; In Notes and Past of Accused, Portrait of Boiling Resentment
The Brooklyn man accused of opening fire on a Long Island Rail Road train Tuesday was an unemployed loner who, within the time of three years, had gone from making the dean's list at a Long Island college to surviving on odd jobs in his Brooklyn neighborhood.
Notes that the police said Colin Ferguson carried in his pocket at the time of his rampage offer a portrait of a man filled with seething resentment: toward the whites and Asians he met and believed were racist; to the black attorneys he said refused to help him, to the elderly woman who rented him a room inside her Brooklyn home.


Robert A. Siegel, 80, Stamp Dealer, Is Dead
Robert A. Siegel, a Manhattan stamp dealer who auctioned off some of the world's rarest and costliest stamps, died on Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 80 and had homes in Manhattan and Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He had a stroke while walking to his Park Avenue business the previous Tuesday, the Robert A. Siegel Auction Galleries said.


CHRONICLE
Why bother to go out to a movie that will soon be shown on television?
"I think it's a bit of an imposition to ask people to come here to see something sitting up that they could see lying down," CATHERINE WYLER acknowledged on Tuesday at the premiere in Washington of a film she produced, "Hot on the Trail, the Search for Sex and Romance in the Old West . . . and the New."


Willem C. Vis, 69, Professor Who Held International Post
Prof.
Willem Cornelis Vis, a legal scholar whose career centered on the peaceful resolution of international disputes, died on Sunday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 69 and lived in Ridgefield, Conn.
The cause of death was cancer, Pace University officials said.


U.S. Role in the U.N.'s Myanmar Resolution
To the Editor:
"Friends of the Slorc" (editorial, Dec. 2) disingenuously suggested that Asian countries like Singapore sought to water down this year's U.N. resolution on Myanmar.
It also accused Western countries of bowing to these pressures.
This is a false picture.
This annual resolution was drafted and coordinated by Sweden.
After much consultation, consensus was reached on a tough resolution that deplored continued violation of human rights in Myanmar and urged its Government to restore democracy.
Unfortunately, the United States sought to undermine the consensus with unacceptable provisions.


Shooting the Breeze With an East River Breeze


Samuel Preston Brown, Engineering Consultant, 80
Samuel Preston Brown, a retired senior partner and chairman of the consulting engineering firm of Coverdale &amp; Colpitts Inc. in New York, died on Monday at the South Port Nursing Center in Port Charlotte, Fla.
He was 80 and moved to Port Charlotte from Short Hills, N.J., three years ago.
A native of Orange, N.J., Mr.
Brown graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1935.
He started a career as a consulting engineer in Manhattan and served as a major in the Army Air Corps in World War II before he joined Coverdale &amp; Colpitts in 1945.
He retired in 1975, several years after the company had been acquired by the URS Corporation.


Flexible Teen Crime Sentencing in Texas
To the Editor:
In your Dec. 3 article "Treating Teen-Agers as Adults in Court: A Trend Born of Revulsion," you did not mention another method that is used to increase punishment for young violent offenders.
Texas has a traditional waiver statute, permitting the juvenile court judge to transfer to criminal court children alleged to have committed a felony when they were 15 or 16 years old.
In addition, under a separate determinate sentencing statute, children from the age of 10 to 16 who are accused of committing certain violent crimes can be tried in juvenile court, but in that proceeding the jury or judge may sentence the youth for up to 40 years in adult prison.


WASHINGTON TOLD TO BOIL ITS WATER
The Environmental Protection Agency today advised 600,000 residents of Washington and nearly 200,000 people in two northern Virginia suburbs to boil their drinking water or drink bottled water for at least the next two days.
The agency issued the order after discovering unacceptable levels of wastes from humans and animals at the Delecarlia water treatment plant in Northwest Washington.


Jim Morrison's Fans Keep His Fire Alight In a Birthday Homage
Gaelle Rabaste, who is 17, was not even born when Jim Morrison died of heart failure from an overdose of drugs and alcohol here on July 3, 1971.
But on the day the lead singer of the Doors would have been 50, she crouched by his tomb, reading his poetry with tears in her eyes.
The grave itself was covered with flowers, love letters, poems and the inevitable bottle of whisky left by the hundreds of young Europeans and Americans who came to pay homage to him on his birthday.
"Move on, move on," security guards kept calling out.
"Give other people a chance."


Belgium; A High School Teacher For Every 6.8 Students
If the sheer number of primary and secondary public school teachers is an indicator of good education, Belgium ought to be a standout.
The small Northern European country, with a population of about 10 million, employs 5.3 percent of its work force as teachers, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
That is more than twice the 2.6 percent for the United States and much higher than figures for the 11 other members of the European Community, which range from 2.4 percent in Britain to 3.6 percent in Ireland.


Theater in Review
The Secret Lives of the Ancient Egyptians Storm Patterns  Cucaracha Theater 500 Greenwich Street, at Canal Street SoHo Through Saturday Two one-act plays; set by Matt Hausmann; lighting by Brian Aldous and Jason Boyd; costumes by Mary Myers; presented by Cucaracha Theater, Richard Caliban, artistic director; Holly Becker, producing director; Hugh Palmer and David Simonds, associate directors.
THE SECRET LIVES OF THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS, written and directed by Mr.
Palmer; music by Dan Levy.
WITH: Nancy Bauer, Sharon Brady, Mark Dillahunt, Kevin Draine, James Godwin, Kirk Jackson, Mr.
Palmer, Thomas Pasley, Glen M. Santiago, Bob Sikoryak and Damian Young.
STORM PATTERNS, written and directed by Mr.
Simonds; music by John Hoge.
WITH: Joseph Fuqua, Joey L. Golden, Jan Leslie Harding, Vivian Lanko, Chuck Montgomery and Adrienne Shelly.
Strong winds and bad odors doom individuals and civilizations in "Storm Patterns," by David Simonds, and "The Secret Lives of the Ancient Egyptians," by Hugh Palmer, one-acts running in tandem.
The playwrights, who are associate directors of Cucaracha, are both involved in the theater's late-night "Underground Soap" series, to which these one-acts are near kin.


As a cost-cutter, General Motors consolidates most of its media buying at one group of agencies.
THE General Motors Corporation, in one of the largest consolidations ever of the media functions on an account, has named the Interpublic Group of Companies to handle the buying of about $800 million of the $1.3 billion it spends annually on advertising.
G.M., the nation's third-largest advertiser behind Procter &amp; Gamble and Philip Morris, said yesterday that it would assign all national television and radio buying, with billings around $500 million, to a new dedicated unit in New York to be headed by Marc Goldstein, who is now a leading media services executive at the Interpublic agency Lintas U.S.A.


Ward, Taylor, Faulk Head A.P. All-America
The Heisman Trophy favorite, CHARLIE WARD, the Lombardi Award winner, AARON TAYLOR, and the three-time pick MARSHALL FAULK head The Associated Press All-America college football team named yesterday.
Faulk made the team for the third straight year, the first player to do that since Georgia's HERSCHEL WALKER from 1980 to 1982.
The San Diego State runner, who will skip his senior season for the National Football League draft, led the nation with 24 touchdowns, was third in all-purpose yards and fifth in rushing.


Theater in Review
The Orphan Muses  Ubu Repertory Theater 15 West 28th Street Chelsea Through Sunday By Michel Marc Bouchard, translated by Linda Gaboriau; directed by Andre Ernotte; set by John Brown; costumes by Carol Ann Pelletier; lighting by Greg MacPherson; sound by Phil Lee and Brian Hallas; production stage manager, Bethany Ford.
Presented by Ubu Repertory Theater, Francoise Kourilsky, artistic director.
WITH: Catherine Curtin, Jacqueline Lucid, Joyce O'Connor and Keith Reddin.
The dysfunctional family, always a flourishing concern of the American drama, is alive and unwell north of the border, too, judging from "The Orphan Muses."


Fabric? Say Kuba or Kente
KUBA cloth.
Kente cloth.
If these are not yet household words, they soon will be, given the growing popularity of African designs for the home.
In 1989, one year after Cheryle Dent and Kim Bressant-Kibwe opened African Home, a store in Brooklyn specializing in objects and textiles made by tribal artisans, they grossed $5,000 in sales.
Last year, they took in $100,000, Ms.
Dent said.
Sixty percent of the customers are African-Americans, but people from other ethnic groups are also buying the baskets, fabric screens and pillows.


Litton to Pay $558 Million For Dresser Stake in Unit
Litton Industries said today that it would pay $558 million in cash and notes to Dresser Industries for its 29.5 percent stake in Western Atlas International Inc.
Litton already owns the remaining stake in Western Atlas, an oil services company.
The deal will give Dresser, an oil services company based in Dallas, a $150 million profit on its Western Atlas stake, which it has held since 1987.


Brodeur's Homecoming A Flourish at the Forum
It was an emotional night at the Forum for Jacques Lemaire and Martin Brodeur, the coach and rookie goaltender for the Devils.
Lemaire was making his first visit as an opposing coach against a team with whom he won eight Stanley Cups.
Brodeur was making his first appearance in the place he always dreamed of playing in while growing up here.
The 21-year-old Brodeur proved that dreams come true, sometimes in remarkable fashion.
With about 20 relatives and friends as witness, Brodeur played an inspired game in leading the Devils to a 4-2 triumph over the Canadiens.


Novell Earnings Fell 1% in Fourth Quarter
Novell Inc., the largest independent provider of network operating system software, said yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings fell 1 percent, despite a 18.9 percent increase in revenues.
Although the results were just one cent a share below Wall Street's consensus estimate, analysts said they increased the concerns about the high levels of inventory at Novell distributors, high levels of accounts receivable and declining profit margins.


Detective in Elite Anti-Mob Unit Is Charged With Selling Secrets to the Mafia
A New York City police detective assigned to an elite Federal-city unit that battles organized crime was charged yesterday with selling confidential information to Mafia figures.
The detective, Joseph L. Simone, was arrested after a sting operation that the Federal Bureau of Investigation said it had pursued to confirm an informer's tip that the 19-year police veteran was leaking information to mobsters about investigative targets and about the identity of at least one Mafia turncoat who was secretly cooperating with the authorities.


Sports of The Times; 'We're Here To Win The Cup'
IN other seasons, the Stanley Cup hung like a guillotine over too many Ranger coaches, just as it has hung since 1940 over the franchise.
Too many Ranger coaches wouldn't acknowledge the pursuit of the Stanley Cup, as if mentioning it might somehow add to the weight of history already knotted to the skates of all those other Ranger teams.
But the pursuit of the Stanley Cup is why Mike Keenan is a different Ranger coach.
And why his Ranger team is different.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.67
3.30
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.08
3.22
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.25
3.33
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.21
5.23
6.38
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.16
6.16
7.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.17
7.17
8.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.53
5.56
6.38
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Fit Punishment for the L.A. Mayhem
For mayhem and cruel assaults on innocent strangers at a Los Angeles intersection last year, Damian Williams has fully earned the maximum available penalty, consecutive sentences totaling 10 years.
Judge John Ouderkirk explained the sentences by replaying the familiar videotape: Mr.
Williams heaving a brick at the truck driver Reginald Denny's head, spitting on his helpless body, dancing for joy and then assailing four equally defenseless passers-by.
The judge accurately called the crimes remorseless and intolerable.


Winnie Mandela Regains Post in Women's Group
Winnie Mandela made a remarkable return to South Africa's political stage today when she regained her position as president of the Women's League of the African National Congress.
Mrs.
Mandela, 59, the estranged wife of the congress's president, Nelson Mandela, lost her senior position in the organization last year after a criminal conviction for her involvement in the 1988 kidnapping of four young men, a crime that opened deep wounds in the anti-apartheid movement.


DEATH ON THE L.I.R.R.: Commuters; The Ride, a Day Later: The 5:33 Will Never Seem the Same Again
Ester Confino sat quietly aboard the 5:33 to Hicksville, recalling her ride 24 hours earlier, when, she said, "the shooting just went on and on and never seemed to stop."
"Logically, I was telling myself it could never happen again," she said.
"But I'm still uneasy."


Corrections
An article and a headline in Business Day yesterday about the elimination of 6,000 jobs referred incorrectly in some copies to the company involved.
It is the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation, not the RJR Reynolds Holdings Corporation.


Lymphoma Found in Azinger's Shoulder
The first hints of pain came in the desert at Palm Springs, during the Grand Slam of Golf last month in California.
Paul Azinger felt the discomfort in his right shoulder blade, and he began to worry that he was about to have a recurrence of the shoulder problems that plagued him during the summer of 1991.
The problem is bigger than that.
Azinger, 33, revealed yesterday that lymphoma, a form of cancer, had been diagnosed in his shoulder.
He has begun treatment at Centinela Hospital Medical Center in Inglewood, Calif., for the disease and is expected to miss six or seven months of competition on the PGA Tour.


Thatcher Denies She Knew Britain Sold Iraq Military Goods in 1988
Former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher testified today that she was unaware that junior ministers in her Government relaxed a ban on sales of militarily sensitive goods to Iraq in 1988, allowing President Saddam Hussein's Government to buy British weapons-making equipment in the years before the Persian Gulf war.
Testifying for the first time in an official inquiry into the sales, Lady Thatcher said she wished she had been informed of the change.
But she said she viewed the shift even now as technical, limited in effect and not a fundamental policy change that required her approval or public disclosure.


A Problem of Perception and Receptions
One longtime Giants veteran was asked about tight end Derek Brown.
The player stuck his finger out and then pointed to his chest; more specifically, to his heart.
And some on the team think that's the problem with Brown, that he has all the talent in the world but lacks the inner fire to mold it.
It may be an unfair accusation, since Brown is only in his second season and has been playing behind tight end Howard Cross, who is one of the best in the league.
So maybe, some argue, Brown hasn't had the time to develop his talent and it's harsh to be so critical of him.
Maybe people are being impatient with him.


A Profitable Xerox Plans to Cut Staff by 10,000
Despite being consistently profitable, the Xerox Corporation said yesterday that it would cut more than 10,000 jobs, or nearly 10 percent of its work force, over the next three years to improve productivity.
Xerox thus becomes the latest big company to try to improve the efficiency of its operations by dismissing large numbers of people.
Earlier this week RJR Nabisco said it would eliminate 9 percent of its work force.
Since Sept. 1, more than a dozen big companies have announced plans to cut 5 percent or more of their jobs.
And in the last year, giants like I.B.M.  and General Motors have said they will shed tens of thousands of workers. 'Lean and Flexible'
But in contrast to companies like I.B.M. and G.M., which were seeking to stem huge financial losses, Xerox takes its place among financially sound companies seeking higher profits through mass layoffs.


Topics of The Times; Tokens of a Somebody
In theory, you are already a Somebody if the publishers of "Who's Who in America" include you in their fat red directory.
The 1994 edition, just out, has more than 82,500 entries, described as "leaders, innovators and decision makers in every important field." Is that not enough to satisfy the ego of any biographee?
Apparently not, because a glossy pamphlet arrived the other day from the "Who's Who" people offering a dozen "distinctive items" to celebrate "your achievements." A crystal paperweight from Tiffany's, engraved with your name and the edition it appears in, sells for $115.
A brass one engraved with your whole "Who's Who" biography -- if it's three and a half inches or less, which disqualifies David Rockefeller -- goes for $65.


Cloven Nationalism
To the Editor:
The review of William Pfaff's book "The Wrath of Nations" (Nov. 30) discusses whether Communism and Nazism were examples of nationalism or internationalism.
Nationalism comes in two varieties.
The first asserts a right to run one's own country for one's benefit; the second claims a right to run someone else's country for one's own benefit: not a bad definition of imperialism.
The imperialist expansionism that Communism and Nazism engaged in represented nationalism of the second kind, far removed from any liberating internationalism.
JOSEPH M. DIAMOND Brooklyn, Dec. 1, 1993


Sale Is Set Of Exchange
The New York Cotton Exchange said yesterday that it had agreed to purchase the New York Futures Exchange, a subsidiary of the New York Stock Exchange.
The purchase ends a 14-year effort by the New York Stock Exchange to run a successful financial futures trading market in competition with the Chicago Merchantile Exchange.


Public &amp; Private; The Other Side
In the apartment a man and woman decorated a Christmas tree.
They looped strands of lights around the branches, stood back to consider the effect, plugged them in so that colored stars danced in the darkness.
From across the street we could see them, two panes of glass and a swath of asphalt away.
We mourned our friend while those two strangers went about a different ritual.
Monday would have been Jeff Schmalz's 40th birthday, and he had intended to spend it dining well, as was his wont, at Chanterelle.
His memorial service was held at the restaurant instead.
His friends and colleagues remembered him as a superb reporter and editor.
And they spoke of the extraordinary work he had done, these last few years, as a gay man with AIDS covering the epidemic for The New York Times.


Can Unions Run United Airlines?
As the unions for United Airlines strive to conclude their six-year effort to buy the company with negotiations this week in New York and wrap up the host of financial questions, one overarching question remains: Can employees really take over a business that is so big and so complex?
While there are few parallels in the airline industry, workers have taken over companies in a variety of industries.
And as those experiences suggest, making employee ownership work is difficult, but possible.
Some of the employee-owned companies, like the Avis car-rental company, have prospered.
But in the case of United, skeptical investors and analysts fear, as Samuel C. Buttrick, an airline analyst at Kidder, Peabody, said, that "the interest of minority shareholders would get lost to job preservation issues."


ASA
Falling oil prices tend to make gold bugs frown.
Oil prices are seen as an indication of current inflation, and gold prices a harbinger of future inflation.
But yesterday the logic was lost on investors as oil fell and gold rose.
Shares of oil companies weakened, but ASA Ltd., a fund that invests primarily in South African gold mining stocks, soared.


Accounts
*
Zurich-American Insurance Group, Schaumburg, Ill., has placed its account in review after BBDO Chicago, which handled it for the last eight years, resigned.
A spokeswoman said Ayer Inc., Chicago, was one of the Midwestern shops being considered for the account, with billings estimated at $1 million for 1994.
A decision is expected next month.


Where Law and Order Is the School Rule; In Bedford-Stuyvesant, a Principal Imposes Standards and Finds Fewer Troublemakers
Frank Mickens was frisking boys, peeking into backpacks and ordering caps off at Boys and Girls High School the other morning.
"Come on, let's go, team, let's go," the principal barked as students briskly filed past.
Stragglers soon found themselves in detention hall, where they were required to copy seven pages from the dreariest of textbooks.


CHRONICLE
Ever yearn to aim a jab at GERALDO RIVERA?
Now it may be possible: the television talk show host said yesterday that he would open his own boxing club in February.
Called the Broadcast Boxing Club, it will take over the former premises of an exercise studio run by Radu, the celebrity trainer, at 41 West 57th Street.
"I fought as an amateur in the 1970's and I've always loved boxing," said Mr.
Rivera, who will be partners in the venture with Doru Corbeanu, a former middleweight and cruiserweight champion of Romania.


Asians and Latins Object to GATT Deals
Asian and Latin American nations objected angrily today to trade compromises reached this week between the United States and the European Community, but appeared unlikely to block completion of the world trade talks.
Diplomats from these regions contended that the deal would unfairly punish other countries, particularly developing countries.


Paris Journal; France Finds Room in Its Heart for the Homeless
On these wintry nights, when cafe lights switch off and the city turns inward, Pierre Jeannot can be found at Austerlitz Station, waiting for the last train leaving Paris.
Not that he is going anywhere.
The 12:58 A.M. to Etampes is his mobile winter home.
He tries to sleep as the train trundles south for an hour, waits at the terminal and returns to Paris before dawn.


Market Place; Contrarians bet on out-of-favor National Medical Enterprises.
NATIONAL MEDICAL ENTERPRISES, the big hospital chain, has already paid out millions of dollars in settlements from civil suits stemming from practices at its hospitals and could face criminal charges.
So it is no surprise that it is generally out of favor on Wall Street.
But a few contrarians are starting to recommend the stock.
"The worst of the bad news is behind it," said Helen O'Donnell at Paine Webber Securities.
She upgraded National Medical Enterprises shares to "attractive" from "neutral," adding the caveat, for "risk oriented" investors.


Bond Firms Disclose Guides For Banning Political Gifts
The leading firms in the municipal bond business announced their guidelines yesterday for putting into effect the ban on political contributions that they endorsed in mid-October.
While the guidelines are stiff, they still allow flexibility by individual firms in determining who can and cannot make political contributions to politicians who select municipal bond underwriters.


Thousands in Haiti Ask Asylum in the U.S.
Feeling betrayed by unkept United States and United Nations promises to return democracy to Haiti and worn down by repression, thousands of people have besieged Haiti's three refugee processing centers seeking political asylum in the United States, diplomats and Haitian applicants said.
In the weeks following the failure of a United Nations-backed plan to restore to power the country's ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, as many as 800 would-be refugees a day have descended on Port-au-Prince's refugee processing center, more than four times the number six weeks ago.


Vallone Calls For Licensing Van Services
The Speaker of the City Council indicated yesterday that private vans, which provide bus service to many New York City neighborhoods -- illegally -- should be allowed to operate with licenses from the city and in some cases in direct competition with existing Transit Authority bus lines.
The support of the Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, bolstered a bill passed, 8 to 1, by the Council's Transportation Committee that calls for the regulation and licensing of livery vans and their drivers.
The bill is expected to be passed by the full Council.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  SEEKING TO END MEXICAN DOUBTS  Seeking to dispel doubts about the fairness of Mexico's political process, the governing party's new presidential candidate has promised to issue detailed fund-raising and spending reports and take other steps to insure the credibility of the elections next year.
A3  HEAVY SENTENCES FOR NEO-NAZIS  A German court handed down heavy sentences in Berlin against two young neo-Nazis who last year hurled firebombs at two houses where Turks lived, killing a grandmother and two girls.
A9


Review/Dance; Old 'Revel,' New Site, High Spirit
The holiday season grew more festive on Monday night with the presentation of the "Winter Revels" in the Main Auditorium of the American Museum of Natural History.
This program of songs, dances, readings and dramatic sketches is now in its 15th year.
But this was the first time it was held at the museum, which proved a splendid site for such a communal event.
Like "Winter Revels" in the past, this one was based largely on folklore of the British Isles.
John Langstaff was the artistic director, Cecil MacKinnon the stage director and Jerome Epstein the music director.


Getting a Peek Behind The Castle Walls
THE 1,000-room Potala Palace, overlooking Lhasa, the capital of Tibet, has golden roofs visible for 12 miles.
It was on one such roof that the young Dalai Lama stood, watching wistfully through his telescope as children played on the streets below.
Considered a deity and a king, he could never join them.
The Potala, left, along with Versailles and the Hearst castle in San Simeon, Calif., are among the 12 extraordinary homes featured in "Living in a Dream: Great Residences of the World," which was published in the United States this month by Simon &amp; Schuster.


Founder Set To Return to Karcher Inc.
Carl N. Karcher, ousted as chairman of Carl Karcher Enterprises Inc. in October, reached an agreement today with the company's board to return to the fast-food chain he founded 52 years ago.
Mr.
Karcher will become chairman emeritus of the Carl's Jr. chain.
Spokesmen for Mr.
Karcher characterized today's action as a "triumphant return to power" for the 76-year-old patriarch, but industry analysts characterized his new role as largely ceremonial.


International Report Card Shows U.S. Schools Work
In contrast to studies that have painted grim portraits of American education, a new report finds that compared with other industrialized nations, the United States does a reasonably good job of educating its citizens and preparing them for work.
The report, issued yesterday by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, based in Paris, indicated that American students lag only slightly behind their counterparts around the world in math and science and that a higher than average percentage of American students get college educations.


The Shriveling of the Liberal Arts Tradition
To the Editor:
The article "Universities Seek Ways to Get Their Stars to Teach" (Nov. 29) is an excellent summary of how large universities are responding to the charge that they don't pay enough attention to teaching undergraduates.
I suppose it might be mentioned that the universities went through similar contortions and charades 20 to 25 years ago, although without any lasting remedies.
Most of these efforts turn out to be mere window dressing that is taken down as soon as nobody is looking.


Blast Trial Witness Points To Suspects on 2d Attempt
A witness at the World Trade Center trial who failed to recognize two defendants in court while testifying for the prosecution on Tuesday changed his mind yesterday and pointed out one of the suspects while he was being cross-examined by the suspect's lawyer.
Then, later, asked by a prosecutor if he had had a better chance to look around the courtroom at Federal District Court in Manhattan after his misidentification on Tuesday, the witness, Willie Hernandez Moosh, picked out the other man whom he had failed to recognize.


Topics of The Times; Underground Stereo
Beneath the streets of New York City, subway platforms provide a free stage and a constantly changing audience for struggling musicians -- good, bad and awful.
Last week in the Times Square station there was an accordion-violin duet of rare delight.
The accordion and the violin are not a common combo, but there they were, two young men in jeans, the accordionist on the uptown platform and, some 30 feet away, the violinist on the downtown platform.
Were they strangers who just happened on each other?
Or partners with a novel idea?
Either way, it worked.


Government Denies Bonus to Nuclear Site Manager
In a rebuke of its largest contractor, the Energy Department said yesterday that Westinghouse would receive no bonus for its management of the Hanford nuclear reservation for the six months ending Sept. 30.
It was the first time since the fee system was instituted at the Washington State site in 1976 that a contractor did not receive a bonus.
The department's decision comes in the aftermath of a worker's death after a steam pipe ruptured.
During the same period, a technician working at a waste tank filled with hazardous material tied a rope around a rock and lowered it down a pipe to try to clear a blockage; the result was additional radiation exposure, among other problems.
The technician was apparently frustrated with safety procedures.


Bridge
One of the most difficult playing problems at the Fall Nationals in Seattle last month is shown in the diagramed deal.
Three no-trump was an easy contract, but some North-South pairs reached six diamonds, which was by no means unreasonable.
In the diagramed auction West tried to crowd the auction with a pre-emptive jump to three spades, trading on the vulnerability.
The double was negative, and when South jumped to five diamonds, North raised.


Energy Dept. Will Spur Search for Oil and Gas
In a proposal to spur the domestic energy industry and reduce dependence on foreign oil, the Department of Energy will announce initiatives today to encourage greater use of natural gas, the opening of Federal lands for oil and gas exploration, and expanded drilling in the Gulf of Mexico.
Secretary of Energy Hazel R. O'Leary acknowledged in an interview yesterday that the plan contained no quick fixes for an industry that has lost about 400,000 jobs in the last decade and that is spending less money at home and more overseas on exploration and production.


Bogdan Raditsa, Writer and Diplomat, 89
Bogdan Raditsa, a Croatian writer, former Yugoslav diplomat and professor emeritus at Fairleigh Dickinson University, died on Sunday in St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 89.
For 15 years starting in 1928 Mr.
Raditsa was an official of the Yugoslav foreign service in Geneva, Washington and New York.
He settled here in 1943 working as a freelance writer, and in 1950 became a lecturer in European history at Fairleigh Dickinson.
He retired as a full professor of history in 1975.


No Headline
"I didn't think I was going to get out. I was very panicky. I ducked back down in the seat. The guy was moving in my direction, shooting again." -- KEVIN ZALESKIE, who survived the attack on a Long Island train.  [ A1:3. ]


Dow Hits a High Again on Healthy Volume
The Dow Jones industrial average set another record yesterday, pushed higher by big price jumps in shares of companies whose fortunes are tied to an improving economy.
Aside from these cyclical stocks, rising prices for a range of industrial materials were a boon for mining and commodity stocks.


PACT WITH RUSSIA BEDEVILS GEORGIAN
When the Government was on the verge of being overthrown by insurrectionists loyal to an ousted President, the Georgian leader, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, appealed to Russia for help.
In exchange, he agreed to bring Georgia into the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Russian-dominated organization of former Soviet republics -- something Georgia had resolutely refused to do.
Soon, Russian troops here came out of their barracks, and the marines landed at the port of Poti.
Within less than a month the civil war was over, with Mr.
Shevardnadze victorious.


Hollywood Braces For Look Into Mirror Of 'Sunset Boulevard'
"Sunset Boulevard" is coming home this week.
The United States premiere of Andrew Lloyd Webber's new musical, based on the classic 1950 film, is to be on Thursday night at the Shubert Theater in Century City, after nearly two weeks of sold-out, glitzy previews, a torrent of publicity and a palpable sense that the story of a has-been movie star named Norma Desmond is probably going to hit too close to home around here.
"An awful lot of Norma Desmonds are going in and out of our door," Mr.
Lloyd Webber said the other day as he prepared for the opening of the musical, which will probably be presented in New York late next year.


Giuliani Favors Linking Debates And Public Campaign Financing
Leading off hearings on the effectiveness of the city's five-year-old campaign finance program, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he favored requiring candidates who receive public money to debate each other, even though he and Mayor David N. Dinkins never debated before this year's election.
The Mayor-elect also proposed limiting how much money candidates are allowed to spend on bookkeeping and legal costs under the campaign finance rules.
Under the current guidelines, these expenses do not count toward the spending limit of $4 million per election for each candidate.


In Memory of One of the Fab Four


A Quick Slide From a Good Job to a Soup Kitchen
When David R. worked in Manhattan as a data processing auditor, he used to feel a gulf between himself and the hungry, shabby, often desperate people he saw sleeping on the sidewalks or holding out their hands.
No longer.


Remembering Century-Old Dreams
THE Beaux-Arts buildings of the Chicago World's Fair of 1893 (also called the World's Columbian Exposition) were ephemeral structures.
Built of timber coated with white plaster, most of the 244 buildings were destroyed by a series of fires in 1894.
Only one, the Palace of Fine Arts, built of masonry and brick, still stands.
Remodeled, it is now the Museum of Science and Industry, at 57th Street and Lake Shore Drive.


TriBeCa in Miniature, Graffiti and All
"I ALWAYS disliked dollhouses," said Jane Freeman, a Manhattan artist.
"But I like constructions and environments." In 1986, after rereading Charlotte Bronte's "Jane Eyre," she recreated, in miniature, six rooms from Thornfield mansion.
In 1990, she started making miniature buildings and streetscapes using found or very cheap objects.
"I compress and contract a fragment of life in a diorama," Ms.
Freeman said.


Coach Indicted
A suspended track coach from Montclair State College was indicted in Trenton, N.J., yesterday on charges of sexually assaulting a female team member.
JOHN BLANTON, 38, of Orange, N.J., faces 20 years in prison if convicted on the charges of second-degree sexual assault and second-degree official misconduct.
The only details provided in the indictment were that the alleged assault took place Feb. 24 in Little Falls and in South Brunswick, N.J.
Blanton, suspended since Sept. 24, is accused of using force or coercion.
He will be issued a summons to appear in court, but an arraignment date has not been set, said JAMES MULVIHILL, director of the state's Division of Criminal Justice. (AP)


Clinton Aide Says Polls Had Role in Health Plan
An adviser to President Clinton said today that the Administration made a major policy decision on how to finance its health care plan after officials examined private polls showing that a new tax would be unpopular.
The adviser, Stanley Greenberg, who conducts polls for the White House, said Mr.
Clinton's decision came on one of the most important aspects of the health care plan: how to pay for insurance coverage for all Americans.
White House officials rejected a proposal to pay for the coverage with a new value-added tax, or VAT, a kind of national sales tax that is used in many European countries.


Market Place; Contrarians bet on out-of-favor National Medical Enterprises.
NATIONAL MEDICAL ENTERPRISES, the big hospital chain, has already paid out millions of dollars in settlements from civil suits stemming from practices at its hospitals and could face criminal charges.
So it is no surprise that it is generally out of favor on Wall Street.
But a few contrarians are starting to recommend the stock.
"The worst of the bad news is behind it," said Helen O'Donnell at Paine Webber Securities.
She upgraded National Medical Enterprises shares to "attractive" from "neutral," adding the caveat, for "risk oriented" investors.


A Judge Upholds Confidentiality for S.&amp; P.
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, the rating firm, is covered by the same constitutional protections as journalists, and is not required to disclose its notes and records of meetings with companies, according to an opinion issued Tuesday in Federal District Court in New York.
The opinion by Judge Loretta A. Preska concerned efforts by S.&amp; P. to avoid turning over to the Pan Am Corporation the records of meetings between the rating agency and Delta Air Lines.
Pan Am, now defunct, is suing Delta because in 1991 Delta backed out of a commitment to finance Pan Am's reorganization.


Gifts With a Personal Touch, Pa-Rum-Pa-Pum-Pum
As crafts gain fans even in the White House, handmade presents abound in shops coast to coast, from picket-fence bookends to cowrie-shell baskets.


Holtz Remembers '89
LOU HOLTZ has been waiting four years.
He was asked yesterday, during an appearance in Manhattan to promote the Cotton Bowl between his Notre Dame team and Texas A&amp;M, about a scenario that could give his once-beaten team the national title:
*Notre Dame defeats Texas A&amp;M in the Cotton Bowl.
*Florida State defeats undefeated Nebraska in the Orange Bowl.


METRO DIGEST
DEATH ON THE L.I.R.R.
NOTES FOUND ON SUSPECT SET FORTH MANY HATREDS The man accused of opening fire on a Long Island Rail Road commuter train, killing five people, was arraigned on murder charges as officials released notes in which he vented his rage about everyone from Governor Cuomo to the state Workers' Compensation Board to Asians, whites and "Uncle Tom Negroes." A1.
Aboard the train, an instantaneous scramble of terror and fear.
A1.


Interviews With Dancers
"Breaking Ground," a series of interviews with dance figures, is to begin tonight at 8:15 in Buttenwieser Hall at the 92d Street Y, Lexington Avenue at 92d Street.
Erick Hawkins and Lucia Dlugoszewski are to be interviewed by Deborah Jowitt, the dance critic of The Village Voice.
Ms.
Jowett will interview Judith Jamison on Jan. 11 and Merce Cunningham on March 21.
Individual tickets are $16; $10 for students; $42 for a subscription.
Information: 996-1100.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Bruce Hornsby The Paramount
Is Bruce Hornsby a jazz pianist who dabbles in folk-rock or an iconoclastic folk-rocker who has dragged the piano into a guitar-oriented idiom?
In his two-and-a-half-hour concert on Tuesday evening, he was both.
For the first half of the evening, the singer, songwriter and keyboardist from Williamsburg, Va., and his six-member band played a set in which many of his songs became launching pads for eclectic jazz improvisations.
For the second half of the program, which was chosen from requests, the same musicians offered engaging, easygoing folk-rock, spiced with oldies.


Hawks Plunging Ahead With an 11-Game Streak
Hawks 105, Pistons 97
The Atlanta Hawks won their 11th straight game, one shy of the franchise record, as Dominique Wilkins scored 20 points in a 105-97 victory last night in Auburn Hills, Mich., that extended the Detroit Pistons' losing streak to seven games.
It is the Hawks' first 11-game winning string since the 1986-87 season.
They won 12 in a row from Dec. 8, 1968, to Jan. 3, 1969 the team's first season in Atlanta after having moved from St.
Louis.
Jazz 113, Bullets 91
Karl Malone had 27 points and 14 rebounds as Utah beat visiting Washington for its fifth straight victory and the Bullets' fifth consecutive loss.
Tom Chambers added 24 points for the Jazz.
He had 5 points during a 16-4 run as Utah pulled away from a 77-75 lead.
SuperSonics 109, Spurs 107
Gary Payton scored 25 points and visiting Seattle improved to 15-1, stopping San Antonio's eight-game winning streak.
The Sonics won their fifth in a row and became the 13th team in National Basketball Association history to win 15 of its first 16 games.
Seattle held the Spurs to 2 points in the first four minutes of overtime.
David Robinson had 39 points and Dale Ellis 20 for the Spurs.
Ricky Pierce added 24 for the Sonics.
Celtics 129, Kings 115
Sherman Douglas had a career-high 21 assists as Boston defeated Sacramento, the Kings' eighth straight loss and their 15th consecutive defeat at the Boston Garden.
The Kings have not won in Boston since Jan. 17, 1979.
Douglas, who also scored 18 points, tied Bob Cousy for the third-best passing game ever by a Celtic.
Cousy had 21 assists against St.
Louis in 1960.
The only better assist totals were by Cousy (28) in 1959 and Nate Archibald (23) in 1982. 76ers 95, Bulls 88
Dana Barros scored 6 of his 20 points in overtime and Shawn Bradley played the best game of his rookie season, helping Philadelphia beat Chicago at the Spectrum in Philadelphia.
The 76ers snapped a four-game losing streak and stopped Chicago's four-game winning string.
Bradley had 17 points, 10 rebounds and 6 blocked shots.
Shooting only 30.8 percent from the field going into the game, Bradley made 7 of his first 12 before missing 5 of his last 6.
Trail Blazers 114 Timberwolves 111
Cliff Robinson scored 31 points and the Portland beat Minnesota in Minneapolis despite the best game of Isaiah Rider's brief professional career.
Rider, the fifth pick in last June's draft, started in place of injured guard Doug West and scored 30 points, the most by a Minnesota player this season.
Terry Porter had 25 points, including 6 of the last 7 points for the Blazers.
Portland improved to 9-0 over the years in Minnesota.
Clippers 100, Bucks 97
Danny Manning scored 24 points before leaving on a stretcher with two minutes left because of severe leg cramps, and the visiting Los Angeles Clippers beat Milwaukee.
Manning, who had a career-high 43 points in Tuesday night's loss in Chicago, helped the Clippers overcome a 9-point lead in the fourth quarter.
He could not continue because of his leg problems, but Los Angeles went on to the victory.


DEATH ON THE L.I.R.R.: The Victims; 5 Everyday People, by Chance Or Ritual, Riding in Car No. 3
They wore the weary faces and rumpled suits of the end of the day: A father and son traveling home together from jobs at a Manhattan financial firm.
A middle-aged man catching his usual train home to the daughter he adored.
A young lawyer, newly admitted to the bar, on the last leg of a circuitous journey back to her house and husband.
Theirs were everyday faces from the most extraordinary of evening rushes, a cross-section of people who by chance or nightly ritual were sitting in a car on the Long Island Rail Road and were killed or seriously wounded in a few minutes of gunfire.
And today, as word spread about who had not made it home, neighbors and relatives could do little more than rage and wail and remember.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Bachir Attar and Trilok Gurtu Bottom Line
Bachir Attar performed alone on Sunday night.
Usually, he leads the 20-member Master Musicians of Jajouka, whose age-old Moroccan traditional music, for drums and ghaitas (double-reed pipes), rocks hard and sends listeners into ecstatic trances.
On his own, Mr.
Attar performed more introspective music, different from the Master Musicians' recordings and from most of his own recent album, "The Next Dream" (CMP).


Senator Hutchison of Texas Re-Indicted in Felony Case
A grand jury indicted Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison of Texas today for a second time, lodging virtually the same charges against her that were thrown out on a legal technicality six weeks ago.
The indictments, which date to her tenure as State Treasurer, involve allegations that she used the office's staff and equipment for political chores.
In June, Mrs.
Hutchison, a Republican, vaulted from the state post to the Senate when she won a landslide victory in a special election to fill the seat vacated by Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, a Democrat.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Big Man, Long Shots  Two 3-pointers by 6-foot-9-inch center Dwight Stewart started a 17-2 run and defensive ace Corey Beck contributed two big steals down the stretch as No. 1 Arkansas beat Memphis State, 96-78, last night in Memphis.
The Razorbacks (4-0) led 42-40 at halftime, but it was 59-42 just over five minutes into the second half.
Memphis State (2-1) closed within nine a few times, but a 3 by Stewart stopped one run, Corliss Williamson's two free throws squelched another and Clint McDaniel's 3-pointer ended the last at 79-67. (AP)


DEATH ON THE L.I.R.R.: The White House; Moved by Killings, Clinton Urges Action on Gun Legislation
President Clinton said today that he had instructed the Attorney General to review a proposal by Mayor-Elect Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York that would set up a national uniform licensing system for gun buyers that would include background checks, tests and required renewals every two years.
Talking about the New Yorkers shot at random by a gunman on a Long Island Rail Road train on Tuesday night, Mr.
Clinton said that he hoped that this "terrible human tragedy" would "give some more impetus to the need to act urgently to deal with the unnecessary problems of gun violence in the country."


THE WEAPON
The gun used in the shooting on the Long Island commuter train, a 9-milimeter Ruger, appears to have been purchased legally by the suspect in Southern California last May after a 15-day waiting period.
Page B10.


Sampras Said No
MICHAEL CHANG was turned down because he doesn't play well on grass, but Davis Cup captain TOM GULLIKSON said he wasn't playing favorites in selecting TODD MARTIN as his No. 2 singles player (to JIM COURIER's No. 1) for the United States' opening-round series against India March 24-26.
Gullikson has worked with Martin over the last three years in the United States Tennis Association Player Development in Florida, but he jumped from 87th to 13th in the rankings last year and is also 8-2 on grass.


Beside the Gathers Grave, a Cousin's Tombstone Soon
The grave of Joseph Lee Marable, age 17, had been dug at the Mount Lawn Cemetery earlier in the morning on this cold but sun-bright winter day, dug while trucks rumbled along nearby 84th Street.
It had been dug beside the tombstone of his first cousin, Hank Gathers, the all-America forward who died at age 23.
Each had collapsed while playing basketball -- Gathers in a game three years ago for Loyola-Marymount University of Los Angeles, Marable while participating in tryouts for his high school team, William Penn.
A mound of dirt under the maroon canopy at Mount Lawn now awaited the funeral cortege -- and Joseph Marable's coffin.
Young Joe, or Joe-Joe, as some called him, or Muddy, another nickname because he frequently got dirty as a child, or Doc, as some basketball-playing friends referred to him because of his hook shot that was said to resemble Dr.
J's, died last Tuesday.
Marable, a 5-foot-10-inch 11th grader, collapsed just five minutes into a full-court game.


Review/Ballet; Wasserstein's 'Nutcracker' Plumbs Renewal of Seasons and the Heart
"The Nutcracker" is a familiar holiday ballet.
Yet the new staging of this classic, which American Ballet Theater has introduced at the Orange County Performing Arts Center, has been awaited with unusual curiosity.
What makes this version out of the ordinary is that Kevin McKenzie, the company's artistic director, has choreographed it to a new story outline devised by the Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright Wendy Wasserstein.
In such works as "Isn't It Romantic?," "The Heidi Chronicles" and "The Sisters Rosensweig," Ms.
Wasserstein has displayed a distinctively 20th-century urban American sensibility.
No wonder balletgoers wondered what she would do with "The Nutcracker," a wordless fairy tale about a little girl's dream journey after a Christmas Eve party.


Drug Sales On 9th Ave. Began Inquiry
A block association's complaints about drug sales on the West Side provoked an intricate investigation that ended with the unmasking of an international conspiracy that funneled more than 400 pounds of heroin into New York and other states, the authorities said yesterday.
The inquiry, which began three years ago to eliminate low-level dealers, resulted in the indictments of 66 people who the authorities said ran 15 drug networks, were linked to four Mafia families and acquired $144 million in assets through illicit profits.


Clinton Hosts Hanukkah Celebration at the White House


Mexican Candidate Pledges Campaign Changes
Seeking to dispel doubts about the fairness of Mexico's political process, the governing party's new presidential candidate has promised to issue detailed fund-raising and spending reports and take other steps to insure the credibility of elections next year.
In an interview Tuesday, the candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio Murrieta, outlined a campaign strategy that seemed less about winning than about routing the memory of a 1988 vote that many Mexicans believe President Carlos Salinas de Gortari won by fraud.
Mr.
Colosio is the overwhelming favorite in the election, scheduled for next August.


Russians at the Crossroads of Business and Ballots
This is Russia's first modern political campaign, and here in freezing Tomsk, 1,800 miles from Moscow, Russians are discovering the political power of big business.
This huge Siberian province, larger than Germany but with only a million people, is dominated by oil, timber and military industries, which in the past were largely inseparable from the Soviet Communist Party.


Cornell Reinstates Two Women's Sports
Bowing to the recent winds of legal precedent, Cornell agreed yesterday to reinstate women's gymnastics and fencing as full varsity sports rather than mount a protracted court fight it seemed certain of losing.
"I feel like doing flip-flops," said Jennifer Schuck, the 20-year-old junior gymnast who gave her name to Schuck v.
Cornell, the sex discrimination suit she and other members of the women's gymnastic and fencing teams filed last summer in Federal District Court in Syracuse.


Corrections
An article last Thursday about a civil suit in Manhattan to determine the value of Andy Warhol's estate misstated several facts and omitted others.
The motion for mistrial was brought not only by the Andy Warhol Foundation but also by the state Attorney General's office, and both asked Surrogate Eve Preminger to pass the case to a different judge.


In Brooklyn, 'Wonderful Things'
Imagine a coffin for an ibis, made of gilded wood, silver, gold and rock crystal.
Imagine a tomcat dressed in a chiton, which is similar to a tunic, and striding upright on little cat's feet.
Imagine the head of a hippopotamus, big as the tip of one's thumb, carved from black hematite.
Actually, they don't have to be imagined.
They can be seen.
All you have to do is get on the New York City subway, and get off at Eastern Parkway.
The Brooklyn Museum has long had a great collection of Egyptian art.
Now that the museum's West Wing has been redone to dazzle, it also has a great space in which to display it.
This dazzle, however, is not glitz.
This dazzle has to do with light, simplicity and elegance.


DEATH ON THE L.I.R.R.: The Confrontation; 3 Credited In Capture Of Gunman
Michael O'Connor, one of the three men who disarmed a gunman on the Long Island Rail Road, said today that he did not focus on the risk of being shot at point-blank range when he and two other men pinned the gunman down.
Mr.
O'Connor, 32, said he huddled with Kevin Blum, another of the three heroes of the 5:33 to Hicksville, on a pile of terror-stricken passengers at the far end of the train as the gunman, whom the police identified as Colin Ferguson, approached.
He had already fired at least 30 shots, repeating, "I'm going to get you," as he made his way toward the passengers massed at the other end of the train, Mr.
O'Connor said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FORD MOTOR CO., Dearborn, Mich., has awarded the Kelsey-Hayes Group a contract to develop braking systems for sport-utility vehicles and pickup trucks starting with the 1997 model year.


Lott Leads Jets in Pessimism As They Head Down Stretch
Immediately after the Jets dropped a 9-6 stinker to the Indianapolis Colts last Sunday, a sullen Ronnie Lott said that the team was out of the playoffs.
A couple of his more optimistic teammates said that Lott was reacting to a tough loss after five straight victories.
But with three days to digest the loss and reflect on his team's standing -- 7-5 with four games left and in a four-way race with the Raiders, the Broncos and the Steelers for two wild-card spots -- Lott wasn't backing one millimeter away from his post-game comment.


DEATH ON THE L.I.R.R.: The Rampage; Gunman in a Train Aisle Passes Out Death
When the gunman emptied his first clip into passengers at the rear of the car and stopped to reload, Kevin Zaleskie, crouching in panic a few seats farther along, realized he had one small chance to flee before aim was taken at him as the stalker worked the aisle, shooting to the right, then to the left, as methodical as if he were taking tickets.
"I got up to run, but the aisle was jammed with someone," Mr.
Zaleskie, a financial analyst for I.B.M., said today, recalling what he thought would be the violent ending of his life amid the most banal routine of commuting home.
"I didn't think I was going to get out. I was very panicky. I ducked back down in the seat. The guy was moving in my direction, shooting again." A Ticket and a Gun
The rampage by the gunman aboard the 5:33 evening commuter train from Pennsylvania Station had moved Mr.
Zaleskie and 80 other passengers in the third car from the easiest of lulling habits to an instantaneous scramble of terror and fear.


2 HOSPITALS FELT PRESSURE TO UNITE
Under great economic and political pressures to overhaul health care, two prestigious teaching hospitals here, the Brigham and Women's Hospital and the Massachusetts General Hospital, said today that they had agreed to merge.
The merger was approved by a vote of the boards of both hospitals today.


PBS Plans To Expand Children's Programs
The Public Broadcasting Service announced a new programming initiative for children yesterday designed to better prepare them to start school.
The project, called "Ready to Learn," will include a regular series of program messages in between PBS's lineup of children's shows, directed at both children and what PBS executives called "caregivers." The messages will reinforce the lessons of the programs children have just seen, and might include brief segments illustrating concepts like trust or perseverance.


Executive Changes
AMES DEPARTMENT STORES INC., Rocky Hill, Conn., appointed Eugene E. Bankers senior vice president of marketing.
AVIALL INC., Dallas, the spinoff of Ryder System Inc.'s aviation services business, named Marshall B. Taylor president and chief executive.


Books: Current Crop to Vintage Works
I LIKE to drop by the big book stores this time of year and pretend I'm from Mars.
I stand in front of the garden section, staring at the coffeetable books, to see what interests mainstream humans.
This year it's organic gardening! Cutting gardens! Decorating with flowers!


Rangers Can't Top the Team at N.H.L.'s Bottom
It wasn't supposed to be a punishment.
The Rangers were told to put in a full workout on the exercise bikes after last night's game at Madison Square Garden, everyone from Mark Messier to Mike Richter dripping sweat in a tiny room off the main locker area.
Still, in a small corner of his frustrated heart, in must have pleased Ranger Coach Mike Keenan to see his players sweat after their performance last night.
The night before they were to begin a three-day mini-vacation -- something of a reward for their recent stellar performances -- the Rangers let the worst team in the National Hockey League take them to overtime, and walk away with one of what should have been 2 easy points for New York.


Industry Set to Issue Video Game Ratings As Complaints Rise
Amid growing concern about blood and sex in home video games, and growing pressure for Government intervention, several of the country's biggest game companies and retailers will announce plans on Thursday to establish an industry-controlled ratings board similar to the one used for rating movies.
The effort is being led largely by Sega Enterprises, the second-largest video game company in the United States.
It includes Nintendo of America, the biggest company, and retailers like Sears and Toys "R" Us.
The plan is an attempt to head off legislation that would establish a stricter rating system.
A Senate hearing on that legislation is also scheduled for Thursday.


New Study Challenges Theory on Climate Change
New research casts doubt on a much publicized analysis of ice extracted from the Greenland ice sheet that seemed to show rapid fluctuations of climate during the warm period that preceded the last ice age, from 115,000 to 135,000 years ago.
The earlier findings, announced in July, seemed to suggest that climactic changes in the current warm period, which began 10,000 years ago, could also be far more rapid -- in spans of decades or less -- than had been thought if the climate gets as warm as it was then.


ITT Plans to Spin Off Forest Products Subsidiary
Seeking to rid itself of a volatile business that was dragging down earnings, the ITT Corporation announced yesterday that it would spin off its forest products subsidiary to the company's shareholders.
ITT said the subsidiary, ITT Rayonier Inc., would become an independent company worth $700 million to $800 million.
The division, which produces and sells timber, wood products and pulp, had income of $112 million on revenues of $719 million -- about 5 percent of ITT's total revenues -- for the first nine months of 1993.


Bonn Backs Financing of High-Speed Train
After years of debate, German plans to build the world's first magnetic-levitation train line linking two cities moved closer to realization today when the Cabinet approved a new financing plan for a $5.1 billion route between Hamburg and Berlin.
The Government would pay an estimated $3.2 billion to build the right-of-way.
A consortium of industries and financial institutions would put up $1.9 billion to construct and operate the trains, called the Transrapid, which travel on a cushion of air at speeds of up to 250 miles an hour.


Market Place; Contrarians bet on out-of-favor National Medical Enterprises.
NATIONAL MEDICAL ENTERPRISES, the big hospital chain, has already paid out millions of dollars in settlements from civil suits stemming from practices at its hospitals and could face criminal charges.
So it is no surprise that it is generally out of favor on Wall Street.
But a few contrarians are starting to recommend the stock.
"The worst of the bad news is behind it," said Helen O'Donnell at Paine Webber Securities.
She upgraded National Medical Enterprises shares to "attractive" from "neutral," adding the caveat, for "risk oriented" investors.


Zuckerman Sees Politics In a Deadline
Disagreement over the meaning of a few cryptic words during a telephone conversation between Mortimer B. Zuckerman, developer of the New York Coliseum, and Norman Stiesel, First Deputy Mayor of New York City, last month is at the heart of a debate over whether the Dinkins administration was settling a political score when it gave the developer a deadline for closing the deal to develop the site.
The Daily News, which Mr.
Zuckerman bought earlier this year, endorsed Mr.
Dinkins's rival in the mayoral campaign, Rudolph W. Giuliani.


Israel Reinforces Troops In Occupied Territories
Five days before Israel is scheduled to begin pulling back its forces in the Gaza Strip and part of the West Bank, it went in the opposite direction today, significantly bolstering troop strengths in an effort to control a recent surge of violence.
Despite the reinforcements, Palestinian gunmen shot and seriously wounded an Israeli who was shopping in Bethlehem across from the traditional burial place of the biblical matriarch Rachel.


Review/Dance; An Arrow in a Snowfall of Feathers
"Wind," which received its New York premiere on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater, is the latest of Eiko and Koma's dance-theater essays on the cyclical and eternal verities of the universe.
Here, too, rebirth is sought or promised after a nameless cataclysm.
But "Wind" is only partly successful as its husband-and-wife team of choreographers and dancers eventually fall back too easily on past formulas.


Sheik Is Allowed To Select Lawyer
A blind, robed Muslim sheik's verbal jousting in court with a Federal judge resulted yesterday in the sheik winning the power to choose his own lawyer for his trial on bombing- and assassination-conspiracy charges.


Anthony J. Travia Sr., Assembly Speaker, 82
Anthony J. Travia Sr., a former Speaker of the New York State Assembly and a retired United States District Court judge, died on Tuesday at Vassar Brothers Hospital in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
He was 82.
Mr.
Travia was a Democrat who represented Brooklyn in the Assembly beginning in 1944 and served as minority leader from 1959 to 1965, when he was elected Speaker of the Assembly.
He served as Speaker until 1968.


Whitman Seeks Extra Month to Prepare a Budget
Gov.-elect Christine Todd Whitman said today that she would ask the Legislature for an extra month to introduce her first budget, giving her more time to find the more than $500 million in budget savings she will need to finance her promised tax cuts.
State law requires the Governor to give the budget to the Legislature by Feb. 15.
But a delay until March 15 has become routine for new governors and was granted to both Gov.
Jim Florio and former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean.


The Shriveling of the Liberal Arts Tradition; In Defense of Bellow
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 29 article on steps universities take to get their "stars" to teach was hardly fair to use Saul Bellow as a springboard into a discussion of professorial unavailability.
Mr.
Bellow was born in 1915, and at age 78 he might be forgiven for not being available to teach the disappointed student you cite.
In addition to his seniority, it might have been noted that much of the teaching that occurs in the Committee on Social Thought -- Mr.
Bellow's department at the University of Chicago -- does not take place in formal courses, but in small tutorials that are often the preserve of advanced students who wish to study a particular subject or author and who have themselves proposed the tutorial.
The special provisions for faculty appointment in that department do not require regular offering of formal courses.


Court Weighs Abortion Protest Curbs
The argument that abortion clinics can invoke the Federal racketeering law to sue violent anti-abortion protest groups got a receptive hearing at the Supreme Court today.
As their past decisions indicated, the Justices appeared reluctant to write into the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act any limits that Congress did not put there when it passed the law in 1970.
The question for the Court today was whether the racketeering law, known as RICO, requires proof that the defendants -- in this case, Operation Rescue and a coalition of clinic protest groups called the Pro-Life Action League -- were motivated by a desire for economic gain.


New York State's Two-Track Strategy to Improve Rail Service
To the Editor:
It's unfortunate John L. Rose ("Don't Hitch Faster Train Service to Fantasies," letter, Nov. 27) didn't bother to read your entire Nov. 10 news story on Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposal to build the world's first magnetically levitated train system from New York City to Boston via Albany before concluding that the state was overlooking improvements to existing rail.
He would have learned that the Governor and I are pursuing a two-track strategy that includes $992 million for upgrading Amtrak rail lines between New York and Buffalo to achieve speeds of up to 125 miles per hour.
We also support continued improvement of the Northeast Corridor rail lines from Washington D.C. to Boston through New York City.


New Analysis Finds Higher Costs in Health Plan
A comprehensive analysis of President Clinton's health plan finds that it would reduce the Federal budget deficit, as Mr.
Clinton said, but that the costs to Government and business would be higher than advertised by the White House.
In the most complete independent analysis of Mr.
Clinton's plan, Lewin-VHI, a respected nonpartisan consulting concern, said today that insurance premiums for the wide range of health benefits promised by Mr.
Clinton would be higher than estimated by the White House.
Under the Clinton plan, employers would pay at least 80 percent of such premiums, and consumers would generally pay the remainder.


Police Request May Have Aided Kidnapper
Law-enforcement officials said today that a request to withhold information from reporters had prompted them not to broadcast a description of the abductor of a 12-year-old girl to all patrol cars, even as two deputies were routinely questioning a man who fit that description after his car became stuck.
That man, Richard Allen Davis, a 39-year-old twice-convicted kidnapper, has since confessed to the kidnapping and killing of the girl, Polly Klaas.
She was abducted on Oct. 1 from a slumber party at her home in Petaluma, about 16 miles south of here.


Thompson Names A Group President
Ron Burns, chief executive at J. Walter Thompson North America in New York, has been named to the additional new position of group president.
Mr.
Burns, who is 49, continues as co-head of the New York office with Jim Patterson, chairman and chief creative officer of Thompson North America.
In addition, Mr.
Burns's responsibilities as director-in-charge of the agency's North American region have been increased as a result of the approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement; he will now work with John Holmes, president of the Latin American region, to insure that multinational business integrates the agency's Mexican operations.


Fight Is Off; Reason Is Not In
Yes, Oscar De La Hoya pulled out of tonight's return of the sweet science to the Paramount, the arena alongside Madison Square Garden.
The reason, however, is in doubt.
His lawyer told the State Athletic Commissioner, Randy Gordon, that "his heart isn't in it" because he wants to drop his managers and bring in new ones.
And Michael Norris, who is acting as De La Hoya's new attorney, said his fighter could have a ligament tear in his his left hand.


Players Still Waiting For Owners' First Pitch
A year and a day after the owners voted to reopen their labor contract with the players and 23 days before the entire agreement expires, negotiations for a new agreement remain nonexistent.
But despite the owners' silence, the players will proceed with their part of the labor process, the head of the union said today.
Donald Fehr said the Players Association executive board would formulate a general outline of the union's proposals this week.
Then the players will present specific proposals to the clubs early next year in what they disappointedly expect to be business-as-usual bargaining.


INSIDE
A Promise From Mexico
Seeking to end doubts over the fairness of Mexican politics, the ruling party's presidential candidate promised financial reports.
Page A3.
Tough Terms for Neo-Nazis
A German court handed down heavy sentences against two young neo-Nazis who last year hurled firebombs at houses of Turkish families.
Page A9.
Making Vans Legal
Vans that serve as buses in New York City should be legalized, the City Council Speaker indicated.
Page B1.
U.S.
Law and Clinic Violence
The argument that abortion clinics can use the Federal racketeering law to sue protesters got a receptive Supreme Court hearing.
Page A18.
Pricing the Health Plan
A new analysis of the Clinton health plan found that it would cut the budget deficit, but that the costs would be higher than advertised.
Page A20.
Hubble Success Continues
Installation of lenses to correct the telescope's flawed mirror completed the critical repair work.
Page B20.


Mr. Clinton Spins the Lobby Door
That revolving door Bill Clinton promised to put his foot to is still spinning.
Just the other day it propelled two influential White House aides into top jobs at major lobbying and public relations organizations.
There is no way that this squares with Mr.
Clinton's campaign pledge to halt the flight "from public service to private enrichment." Instead of the promised end to business as usual, this Administration has come up with an income enhancement plan for well-connected Democrats.
One is Howard Paster, a former boss of the Washington office of Hill &amp; Knowlton, a powerful public relations and lobbying firm, who became Mr.
Clinton's chief liaison with Congress and now returns to private life as chairman of Hill &amp; Knowlton.
The other is Roy M. Neel, most recently deputy White House chief of staff, who has accepted a job as president of the lobbying arm of regional and local telephone companies.


NORTH KOREA SHIFT STIRS SPECULATION
In the midst of its nuclear standoff with the United States, North Korea said Wednesday that it had removed its most prominent advocate of opening its economy to the West.
By some accounts, the official, Kim Dal Hyon, is in line to become the country's next Prime Minister when the country's Supreme People's Assembly meets in Pyongyang beginning today.
His ascendency would suggest a new direction for the country, one that moves away from the national mythology of "juche," a philosophy of self-reliance that has spurned contact with or help from abroad.


A Method of Teaching That Produces Readers
France, whose schoolchildren read better than students in most other developed countries, spent most of this century testing different teaching methods before concluding a decade ago that the teacher probably knows best.
In a nation as centralized as France, it is something of an anomaly that primary school teachers are allowed to decide how to teach their 6-year-olds to read -- as long as they can read by age 7.


GERMANS SENTENCE 2 IN FIREBOMBING
A German court handed down heavy sentences today against two young neo-Nazis who last year hurled firebombs at two houses where Turks lived, killing a grandmother and two girls.
The firebombing, in the western town of Molln, brought national outrage and was quickly followed by a police crackdown on neo-Nazis and a series of candlelight protests against racism in which hundreds of thousands of Germans took part.


Snowboarders Come To the Rescue of Skiers
He cuts an unusual figure on an Alpine slope.
Despite his official navy blue and purple jacket, the ski patroller is not wearing skis.
His boots instead are buckled to a snowboard, that wide, single-stance snow surfer adopted by the young and snubbed by the old.
The patroller in the blue jacket is Steve Draisey, a 17-year veteran of the National Ski Patrol who works at Jiminy Peak, a small ski area in Hancock, Mass.
Draisey, a 41-year-old skier who began patrolling on a snowboard three years ago, said that he met resistance at first.


2d Surgery for Wolford
Tackle WILL WOLFORD, who underwent surgery on his left shoulder last winter, will have a similar operation on his right shoulder within the next week and will be out the rest of the season, the Indianapolis Colts said yesterday.
They play the Giants at Giants Stadium Sunday.(AP)


N.H.L. Files Licensing Suit
The National Hockey League filed a lawsuit against the N.H.L.
Players' Association in Federal court in Manhattan yesterday seeking a declaration on the right to use players' names on N.H.L.-licensed jerseys.
The jerseys have been marketed by the league for more than two decades.
According to an N.H.L. news release, the suit was brought in response to recent threats by the Players Association, which acknowledges having sent a letter to all the teams in the league and a few hundred sports retailers in North America threatening legal action if the association was not given a fee for the use of players' names on the jerseys.


For Refugees, Help With Double Burden of Child-Rearing
DANH HUM THI, a Cambodian refugee living in the Bronx, thought that being a good mother in America meant feeding her children junk food so they would grow up round and healthy, like American children.
A neighbor, Yin Sok, complained that her own teen-age son refused to obey her because he spoke English well and she didn't.
Another refugee, Sok Teang Pin, could not bring herself to say no to her children because she wanted to make up for years of suffering in their flight from Cambodia.
Such were the problems these women learned to solve at an unusual class for parents who survived the Cambodian killing fields, people for whom the normal stresses of parenthood and migration are compounded by their memories of torture, starvation and loss.


Tunnel Victim's Kin File Suit in Accident
The collapse of a 16-ton winch into a New York City water tunnel in which a worker was killed occurred because another worker failed to insert rods that hold the winch and supporting platform in place, a lawyer for the dead man's family asserted yesterday.
"There were no rods that locked down this winch," said the lawyer, Leonard L. Finz, who called a news conference at his office in lower Manhattan to announce a $100 million lawsuit against New York City on behalf of the deceased worker, Anthony Oddo, his wife, Angela, and their 2-year-old son.
"They were not there. They were not put into place."


15-0 Run Ends Bid For Upset By Pirates
Four days after suffering a heartbreaking loss to St.
John's at Madison Square Garden, Seton Hall returned home to Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight to face undefeated Connecticut.
There were times when it seemed as if Seton Hall might pull off a huge upset without its starting point guard, Danny Hurley, who was sidelined with the flu.
But it was only a mirage.
Connecticut is as good as advertised, and unfortunately for Pirates fans, Seton Hall is as bad.


Ranger Castoffs Lead The Jets
Jets 5, Maple Leafs 4


Critic's Notebook; Another Round on TV Violence
When it comes to television, violence remains hot stuff, either as a component of entertainment programming or as a subject for hand-wringing special reports and documentaries, most of which are sure to insist that television alone cannot be blamed for all of today's violence, especially its escalation among the young.
Other culprits are righteously invoked: family disintegration, poverty, overcrowding, hunger, drugs, easy access to guns.
The numbing mantra goes on; the headlines about violence proliferate.
Don't misunderstand.
Some of these television essays are valuable, if only as road markers indicating where we stand, or crawl, as a society.
Tonight at 9 on MTV, for instance, "Generation Under the Gun" interviews teen-agers in New York, New Orleans and Omaha about the role of guns in their lives.


Books of The Times; The Limits of Expertise In U.S. Foreign Policy
The Arabists The Romance of an American Elite By Robert D. Kaplan Illustrated. 333 pages.
The Free Press/Macmillan. $24.95.
"In the late 19th and 20th centuries an Arabist was merely a student of Arabic, like a Hellenist or a Latinist," writes Robert D. Kaplan at the outset of his intriguing new history, "The Arabists: The Romance of an American Elite." "But with the birth of Israel in 1948, the term Arabist quickly gathered another meaning."


One Candle Down, Seven to Go


CHRONICLE
At a traditional Marine Corps "dining in," or formal dinner, the rules of deportment and discussion are rigid.
Absolutely no talk of politics, religion or sex is allowed, for example.
Don't rap on your glass for attention.
Don't drink the port wine until the toasts.
Violate the rules and risk a penalty.
VINCENT SARDI JR., a retired major in the Marine Corps Reserve, and Capt.
ROSE-ANN SGRIGNOLI of the Marines, organized a dining-in benefit the other evening at Sardi's restaurant, for the Marine Corps Reserve Toys for Tots program.
Fines were imposed all evening for the cause.


DEATH ON THE L.I.R.R.: The Weapon; 16 Days in California and a Fateful Purchase
On a spring day nine months ago Colin Ferguson walked into a hunting and fishing store in Southern California to buy the 15-shot semiautomatic pistol that the police say he used Tuesday evening in his deadly march through a Long Island commuter train.
He selected a bulky Ruger P-89, a weapon designed for the military, gave his real name, supplied a California driver's license with a Long Beach address, affirmed that he was not a convicted felon or a mental patient and was told he could pick up the weapon after a waiting period of 16 days.
Fifteen days were imposed by the state of California and one was added for good measure by the gun store, Turner's Outdoorsman, which has 14 outlets.


Cubs Retain Grace
First baseman MARK GRACE, the Chicago Cubs' most consistent player over the past six years, agreed yesterday to a $4.4 million, one-year contract, a raise of $1.3 million.


Top Delaware Court to Hear Paramount's Appeal Today
Paramount Communications Inc. and its two rival suitors will wage their takeover battle in Delaware's Supreme Court today.
But legal experts and traders said yesterday that they were uncertain if a ruling would mean the end of the fight.
The court is to hear an appeal of a decision last month by the Delaware Chancery Court holding that Paramount had put itself up for sale by agreeing to sell to its handpicked merger partner, Viacom Inc.
Paramount has argued that the move was a strategic one that precluded its being put on the auction block.


Review/Theater; A Memoir, This One Upbeat
"Pretty Fire," presented by the Manhattan Theater Club, has reopened at the Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College, 68th Street (between Park and Lexington Avenues).
Following are excerpts from Mel Gussow's review, which appeared in The New York Times on April 16.
Emerging from her secure, middle-class background with her individuality intact and with her imagination nurtured into creativity, Charlayne Woodard has turned her early life into a vivid one-woman play.
In "Pretty Fire," she offers audiences intimate entree into formative experiences.


Corrections
The Theater in Review column yesterday misstated closing dates for five plays.
The closing is Dec. 19, not this Sunday, for "The Orphan Muses" at the Ubu Repertory Theater, 15 West 28th Street; "Three Short Pieces" at Performance Space 122, 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, and "All for One" at the Ensemble Studio Theater, 549 West 52d Street.
The closing is Dec. 18, not tomorrow, for "The Secret Lives of the Ancient Egyptians" and "Storm Patterns" at the Cucaracha Theater, 500 Greenwich Street, at Canal Street.


NATO and Russia Clash on Future Alliances
Divergent Russian and NATO visions of the future of European security clashed today as President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia repeated his opposition to any eastward expansion of the Atlantic alliance and top NATO officials said the door must be left open for the eventual admission of new members.
At a meeting here with the NATO Secretary General, Manfred Worner, Mr.
Yeltsin outlined a Russian view that NATO membership for Eastern European countries that want to join the alliance, like Poland or the Czech Republic, would be unacceptable to Moscow, Russian and NATO officials said.


N.H.L. Weighs Shootout
Tie games in the National Hockey League could be decided by a shootout pitting solo skaters against goalies, according to a proposal discussed today at the Board of Governors meeting.
Commissioner Gary Bettman said a committee would be appointed to study the plan and a vote is possible by the summer meetings.
If approved, the shootout might be implemented next season.
Tie games in the regular season are currently followed by a five-minute, sudden-death overtime.
If neither team scores, each team gets one point in the standing.
Under a shootout formula, the winning team could get two points and the losing team one.
The concept has been used in minor hockey leagues and in soccer.


METRO DIGEST
M.R.I. SCANNER INDUSTRY FACES SHAKEOUT
As more patients move into health maintenance organizations and the nation looks hard at reining in the cost of care, investors in magnetic resonance imaging scanners and other profit-making medical ventures are finding that the bloom is wilting.
A1.
Reacting to polls that show Americans more fearful of violent crime and to Tuesday's carnage on the Long Island Rail Road, the Clinton Administration tentatively embraced a proposal to require all gun owners to be licensed.
A1.
The Clinton Administration said that 159,000 miles of highways, including many roads in the New York City area, would qualify for more than $14 billion in improvements.
A24.
NEW YORK CITY 20 CHARGED IN THEFTS FROM PARKING METERS
Six years after New York City created a unit to prevent thefts from parking meters, 20 members were charged in the theft of $1 million in quarters.
One collector boasted that he had stolen $45,000 in two years, officials said.
A1.
SEEKING WAYS TO PREVENT SEXUAL ABUSE
The city's Board of Education established a 50-member commission to find new ways to track, investigate and prevent sexual abuse of children by school staff members.
B3.
Mayor-elect Giuliani called on New Yorkers to give more support to the police. B3.
The jury in the World Trade Center bombing trial listened to a message left by an unidentified caller to the "News Tips" line of The Daily News on the day after the explosion.
B3.
Five city officials were fined $7,500 each for failing to provide adequate shelter for more than 1,000 homeless families in recent months.
B3.
After kidnapping a 5-year-old boy from the hands of his grandmother on a street in Queens and demanding a $500,000 ransom, three men took him to a prearranged meeting place last night and were arrested, the police said.
B4.
A student protest over conditions at Sarah J. Hale High School in Cobble Hill, Brooklyn, resulted in injuries to three police officers and the arrests of four students, the police said.
B5.
Two businessmen were indicted on murder and racketeering charges for what Federal authorities said were their activities as "top leaders" of a violent crime gang based in Chinatown.
B7.
REGION L.I.R.R.
RAMPAGE: ASKING WHY
Two days after an angry gunman opened fire on a crowded railroad car, investigators were still trying to determine why the suspect, Colin Ferguson, after years of simmering rage, apparently decided to vent his wrath on the 5:33 train to Hicksville, L.I.
B8.
In the year he spent at Adelphi University, Mr.
Ferguson appeared obsessed with racism, people who knew him recalled.
B8.
At Hoboken, N.J., where 25,000 commuters file out of buses and railroad cars every day, riders seemed to believe that a similar rampage might as easily have happened there.
B8.
A gunman shot four people inside a grocery store in Yonkers, killing at least one of them, the police said.
B6
New Jersey's 12 gambling casinos lost another round in their fight to legalize sports betting.
B9.
Neediest Cases B4


Mass Murder on the 5:33
Consider some multiple murders, committed over the last few years, and the headlines that might describe them: Deranged Gunman Kills 22 in Killeen, Tex.
Deranged Gunman Kills 5 in Stockton, Calif., Schoolyard.
Deranged Gunman Kills 8 in San Francisco Office Tower.
And earlier this week: Deranged Gunman Kills 5, Wounds 18 on Commuter Train in Garden City, L.I.
Multiple murders by emotionally disturbed gunmen have become more common in America.
Incidents in which four or more people are murdered now occur about 30 times a year, according to James A. Fox of Northeastern University's School of Criminology.
A frequent form of mass murder is the "category killing," in which victims are chosen by race, nationality, gender or occupation.
The Long Island killings were animated by racial hatred, in addition to mental instability.


Holiday Noises, Joyful and Otherwise, on Disk
Here are reviews of 21 Christmas albums selected by New York Times pop critics.
The suggested list prices are given. (An introduction by Jon Pareles appears on page C1.) Aaron Neville
"AARON NEVILLE'S SOULFUL CHRISTMAS" (A&amp;M 31454 0127 2, cassette $10.98, CD $15.58).
The great New Orleans soul tenor, with a vibrato that seems to float down from heaven, has made a nearly perfect Christmas record in which the innately devotional quality of his singing attains sublime heights.
The most incandescent moments include versions of "The Christmas Song" and "White Christmas" in which his voice hovers angelically over a bed of strings.
"O Little Town of Bethlehem" and "Silent Night," in which a choir joins the orchestra, are equally fine.
The album gracefully acknowledges the singer's roots in 1950's rock-and-roll with its doo-wop-flavored versions of "Please Come Home for Christmas," "O Holy Night" and "Bells of St. Mary's." Its mischievous revival of the racy rhythm-and-blues hit "Such a Night" adds just the right note of levity.
STEPHEN HOLDEN


Turnabout Isn't Even Fair Play For Devils
Coach Jacques Lemaire of the Devils looked on in disbelief from behind the bench.
How could a team that played so well on the road a night earlier play so awfully at home?
All the inspiration and emotion that marked New Jersey's 4-2 victory in Montreal in Lemaire's first visit back there on Wednesday night was nowhere to be found in tonight's 3-2 loss to the Quebec Nordiques at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Report Sees Explosion Risk at Energy Dept. Plants
Eleven nuclear processing factories in six states may be vulnerable to the same kind of chemical explosion that spread radioactive contamination in a wide area around a Russian plant last April, according to a report by the staff of the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee.
The April explosion, which contaminated nearly 50 square miles around the Siberian city of Tomsk-7, involved chemical compounds that are used in American plants run by the Department of Energy, according to the report.
At most of those plants, plutonium for bombs is separated from other materials in processing tanks.


Abroad at Home; An Uncomfortable Life
Hisham Mubarak is a young Egyptian lawyer who could live a comfortable life in the gracious world of Cairo professionals.
Instead he has taken on the job of opposing the brutal tactics used by the Government against its suspected enemies.
That is unwelcome, sometimes dangerous work in Egypt.
In 1989 Mr.
Mubarak helped defend steelworkers who had been arrested for striking.
He was then himself arrested, held for two weeks and beaten so badly that he bled from his right ear and suffered permanent hearing loss.


Holiday Noises, Joyful and Otherwise, on Disk
Here are reviews of 21 Christmas albums selected by New York Times pop critics.
The suggested list prices are given. (An introduction by Jon Pareles appears on page C1.) Alan Jackson
"HONKY-TONK CHRISTMAS" (Arista 18736-2, cassette $10.98, CD $15.98).
With a lean, easy-swinging country band, Alan Jackson sings not typical Christmas songs, but country songs about Christmas.
The album includes weepers like the title song ("It's gonna be a honky-tonk Christmas/For these silent nights are killing me"), new-country carols ("The Angels Cried"), a twangy come-on ("I Only Want You for Christmas"), duets with the Chipmunks and Keith Whitley, and a closing singalong, "Please Daddy (Don't Get Drunk This Christmas)." Stylized as it is, "Honky-Tonk Christmas" gets close to some seasonal feelings most Christmas albums wouldn't touch.
JON PARELES


Review/Music; The Manhattan School Displays Kurt Weill's Political Style
Ferruccio Busoni is once supposed to have scoffed at his pupil Kurt Weill, asking, "What do you want to become, a Verdi of the poor?" Whereupon Weill replied, "Is that so bad?"
In the 1920's, Weill was apparently following that ambition.
Music dramas like "The Threepenny Opera" and "Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny," instead of speaking on behalf of the middle-class audience, attacked that audience and its sentimental approach to life while courting its acclaim.
Weill meant to subvert while entertaining; that cultural tradition still flourishes.


British Paper and Science Journal Clash on AIDS
As the fattest and most popular of London's Sunday newspapers, The Sunday Times has come to relish a reputation as a newspaper committed to challenging the conventional wisdom.
But the newspaper's latest crusade -- a series of prominently displayed articles boldly arguing that the AIDS epidemic in Africa is a myth and strongly suggesting that H.I.V. is not the way the the disease spreads -- has provoked bewilderment and anger among some Government health officials, AIDS organizations and many scientists.
Some critics have accused The Sunday Times of betraying the public trust and misleading its four million readers.


G.T.C. Transcontinental reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Film; It's Wayne and Garth, Schwinging Once Again
Time has caught up with Wayne (Mike Myers) and Garth (Dana Carvey), even if it hasn't actually made them any smarter.
In "Wayne's World 2," they begin to feel a strange aging sensation, "like I'm in a John Hughes rite du passage movie," as Wayne grandly describes it.
Spurred on by this, Wayne begins searching for the meaning of his life.
He finds it through the help of Jim Morrison, who appears to him in a dream.
According to the film, Jim Morrison spends his time with Sammy Davis Jr. when he isn't busy giving Wayne advice.
"Wayne's World 2," a very good-humored sequel for anyone in tune with its subject, sends Wayne and Garth back through the mists of rock-and-roll history at Morrison's suggestion.
He has advised them to stage Waynestock, a retro-style outdoor rock concert.
This is terribly confusing for Garth, who always thought the peace sign and the Mercedes-Benz logo were identical.
Even more bewilderingly, Wayne and Garth stumble across ancient rock artifacts as they try to plan the show.
Showing a worn old "Frampton Comes Alive" LP to his girlfriend, Cassandra (Tia Carrere), Wayne explains: "If you lived in the suburbs, you were issued it. It came in the mail with samples of Tide."


No Headline
"We need to send the signal that two-parent families are vitally important." -- DAVID T. ELLWOOD, an assistant secretary of Health and Human Services, urging a change in welfare rules.  [ A18:4. ]


2 Businessmen Indicted as Heads Of a Crime Gang in Chinatown
Two prominent businessmen were indicted yesterday on murder and racketeering charges for what Federal authorities said were their activities as "top leaders" of a violent crime gang based in New York City's Chinatown.
They are also officers of two Chinatown tongs -- influential business and fraternal organizations -- whose buildings were used as a headquarters that enabled the the gang to "thrive and prey upon Chinatown businesses," Federal prosecutors charged.
The prosecutors also said the businessmen "relied on the gang's use of violence to maintain the prestige" of their tongs.


Wordperfect Appoints A New Chief
The Wordperfect Corporation, the fourth-largest personal computer software company, said today that its president and chief executive, Alan Ashton, would step down and be replaced by the company's senior vice president of sales and marketing, Adrian Rietveld.
Effective Jan. 1, Mr.
Ashton, who is 51, will join the co-founder, Bruce Bastian, 45, as a co-chairman of Wordperfect's board, focusing on long-term strategic issues.
Wordperfect, based in Orem, Utah, is also forming a new office of the president, composed of Mr.
Rietveld; John C. Lewis, currently senior vice president, and R. Duff Thompson, currently senior vice president and general counsel.


Last Chance
Closing This Weekend  "THE LIGHTS," Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, Lincoln Center.
A drama by Howard Korder about a young man and his girlfriend, who yearn for a better life in a large city.
Closes Sunday.
Tickets: $37.50.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"THE SWAN," Papp Public/Martinson Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
A drama by Elizabeth Egloff about a swan that changes into a man and a woman who must choose between him and her lover.
Closes Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $27.50.
Information: (212) 598-7150.


Holiday Noises, Joyful and Otherwise, on Disk
Here are reviews of 21 Christmas albums selected by New York Times pop critics.
The suggested list prices are given. (An introduction by Jon Pareles appears on page C1.)  "HAPPY HOLIDAYS: WARM AND WONDERFUL CHRISTMAS FAVORITES" (Capitol 07777 89587 2 7, cassette $10.98, CD $15.98).
All 18 songs on this anthology come from Capitol's archives and were recorded between 1949 and 1967.
While the anthology omits obvious holiday classics on Capitol by Nat (King) Cole, Frank Sinatra and Judy Garland, among others, it unearths quite a few obscure nuggets.
Among the brightest are Peggy's Lee 1960 version of "The Christmas Song," Margaret Whiting's 1949 "Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas" and Lena Horne's 1966 "What Are You Doing New Year's Eve?" The album also has its share of fatuity by performers like the Lettermen (a bland "Christmas Waltz") and Dean Martin (a terminally blase "White Christmas").
STEPHEN HOLDEN


William Schanz, 70; Founded a Cruise Line
William Z. Schanz, co-founder and head of Regency Cruises, died on Wednesday at Bellevue Hospital Center.
He was 70.
Mr. Schanz had a stroke while working in his Manhattan office, said his wife, Olga.


Panel Named To Prevent Child Abuse In Schools
Following a series of troubling reports of sexual abuse in public schools nationwide, the New York City Board of Education yesterday established a 50-member commission to find new ways to track, investigate and prevent sexual abuse of children by school staff members.
Ramon C. Cortines, the Schools Chancellor, said he hoped the commission would develop a "model program," including the training of students, teachers and parents, to confront the problem.


Frederick D. Forsch, Investment Banker, Churchill Expert, 78
Frederick D. Forsch, a retired New York investment banker who amassed one of the best collections of Churchill memorabilia outside official British and American archives, died last Friday at the Amsterdam Nursing Home in Manhattan.
A resident of Manhattan, he was 78.
The cause was complications from diabetes, his family said.


Seles Speaks Out
MONICA SELES, shocked that the man who stabbed her was set free, still hopes to make her return to tennis next month at the Australian Open, which she has won the past three years.
In her first interview since her attacker escaped a prison term, Seles told CNN yesterday that "when my brother first told me the sentence, I thought he was joking. I was stunned."
"Everyone expected him to get at least 10 or 15 years," she said.
"It was obvious what he did to me. It was on tape. The state is appealing. There's nothing I can do at this point."


5 New York City Officials Fined in a Homeless Case
A state judge yesterday fined five New York City officials $7,500 each for failing to provide adequate shelter for more than 1,000 homeless families in recent months.
The ruling was the third time in a year that the judge has found city officials in contempt of court for leaving families to sleep for days on chairs, floors and tables in city offices.
But it was the first time that Justice Helen E. Freedman took the unusual step of levying fines against individual city officials in the case.


Domino's Pizza Sets Shop for Northeast
Domino's Pizza Inc., Ann Arbor, Mich., said yesterday that it had named Ross Roy Communications of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., to handle advertising for the chain's Northeast region, which had been at Freed &amp; Associates of Baltimore for the last year.
Billings were estimated to exceed $5 million.


No Headline
Bob Woolf started as a sports attorney in the mid-1960's, when team officials thought intruders to the player-signing process were like harbingers of a plague.
But over nearly 30 years, Mr.
Woolf, who died last week at the age of 65, emerged as the first of a generation of agents and lawyers who altered the way athletes are paid -- from five-figure salaries in the 1960's, before free agency, to almost $100 million for multiyear contracts today.
Almost every player has an agent or lawyer in tow nowadays.
So it's almost shocking to recall that Mr.
Woolf's first negotiation with a team was by proxy, in 1966.
Earl Wilson, then a pitcher with the Detroit Tigers, did the talking with the general manager, Jim Campbell.
But when Mr.
Wilson hit a rough spot he called for advice from Mr.
Woolf, who waited in the pitcher's apartment.


Administration Floats Proposal For Licensing All Gun Owners
Reacting both to polls that show Americans ever more fearful of violent crime and to Tuesday night's carnage on the Long Island Rail Road, the Clinton Administration today tentatively embraced a proposal to require all gun owners to be licensed.
The plan, the details of which will not be settled for many weeks, was announced by Attorney General Janet Reno, who had been ordered by President Clinton to study the idea only on Wednesday.
Other than signing the Brady bill mandating a waiting period for purchases of handguns and supporting a plan to restrict the sale of assault rifles, the President has so far moved cautiously on gun control.


JUDGE DENIES REQUEST TO HALT GREEN POINT MEETING
A Federal judge in Brooklyn denied a motion yesterday to halt the planned vote today by depositors on the plan by Green Point Savings Bank to convert from a mutual savings bank to a stock institution.
The motion for the temporary injunction was sought by a group of depositors who opposed the conversion.
Judge Sterling Johnson Jr. denied the request.


20 in Meter Anti-Theft Unit Accused of Stealing
Six years after New York City created a unit to prevent thefts from parking meters, 20 members of the group were charged yesterday with stealing $1 million in quarters in the last two years.
The unit is a part of the city's Department of Transportation, which was hit by two separate charges of irregularities last month.
The city's Investigation Department said it had uncovered hundreds of thousands of dollars in thefts and frauds by the street repaving division in Brooklyn and mismanagement of a $23.7 million project to repave 14th Street in Manhattan.


Lotus Agrees With I.B.M. On Software
The Lotus Development Corporation's stock rose yesterday on an analyst's report that the company had renegotiated a little-known, two-year-old agreement with I.B.M. that required Lotus to turn over as much as one-third of its revenues from its hot-selling Notes software.
The report from Terence M. Quinn, an analyst with Furman Selz Inc., suggested that Lotus could realize at least $60 million in additional Notes revenues in 1994, as a result of the new agreement with the International Business Machines Corporation.
The company's stock rose 87.5 cents, to $52.625, even as most technology stocks slid.


Public Judges as Private Contractors: A Legal Frontier
Lawyers in Connecticut who might come before Judge Thomas H. Corrigan in Hartford Superior Court by day can now hire the judge by night for private mediation work here in a suite of offices in a renovated factory building.
Can't agree on Judge Corrigan?
No problem.
The lawyers could also choose Judge Donald T. Dorsey, or Judge Robert D. Glass, or Judge Frederica S. Brenneman -- or one of 38 other judges.


The Sound of Christmases Past
NOW comes that time of year, so hallowed and so gracious, when "Messiahs" by the dozen bring holiday cheer to freelance musicians throughout the New York metropolitan area.
Some serious concertgoers may be inclined to duck for cover, but they should know that the holiday listings that follow include an unusual concentration of superb early-music programs.
On Sunday afternoon at Corpus Christi Church in Morningside Heights, the Sixteen, an acclaimed English choir led by Harry Christophers, will at last make its New York debut, in a typically scholarly survey of 16th-century English music: works by John Sheppard, Richard Pygott, Richard Hygons and Thomas Tallis.
Later that day, the American group Chanticleer will present an inviting swath of medieval and Renaissance music at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Review/Theater: My Fair Lady; A Darker Side To the Fable Of a Flower Girl
EVEN at this late date it would be folly to compete with the original 1956 production of "My Fair Lady," probably the perfect expression of the perfect musical.
Wisely, the people behind the latest incarnation of Lerner and Loewe's masterpiece, which stars Richard Chamberlain and a beguiling Melissa Errico, haven't tried.
One look at Professor Higgins's study will tell you that.
There, looming over the grand piano, is a gigantic phrenological head, while the good professor's recording equipment appears to have been borrowed from Dr.
Frankenstein's laboratory.
If the musical tells a Cinderella story about a Cockney flower girl who goes to the ball and is proclaimed a princess, it is also the account of a cold, calculating experiment in social engineering that threatens to run amok.
By underscoring some of the darker implications of the fable, the show that opened last night at the Virginia Theater wants to be a brave new "My Fair Lady." To a certain degree it succeeds.


Syria Is Willing To Renew Talks With the Israelis
The United States succeeded today in ending Syria's boycott of the peace talks with Israel, and also announced that President Clinton would meet with President Hafez al-Assad next month in Geneva.
After twice shuttling between Jerusalem and Damascus, Secretary of State Warren Christopher announced the resumption of talks and the Presidents' meeting at a joint news conference today with the Syrian Foreign Minister, Farouk al-Shara.


Helm Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cowboy Arrested
Dallas Cowboys offensive lineman NATE NEWTON, arrested on drunken-driving charges for the second time in 39 months, said yesterday that he was grateful that no one was seriously injured in an interstate accident late Tuesday in Carrollton, Tex.
Newton, 31, escaped injury and ANGELA PUSTEJOVSKY, 22, of Lewisville, Tex., the driver of another car, was shaken up in the accident about 11 P.M.
Tuesday in Carrollton, a northwest Dallas suburb.


Johnson Practices, but Jet Offense Is More Bruised Than Bruising
The Jets' battered offense got a big boost today when Johnny Johnson lined up in the backfield for a full-fledged practice for the first time in two weeks.
Since Johnson injured his ribs against Cincinnati on Nov. 21, he has played in one game, stood on the sidelines for another and the Jet offense has stalled, scoring just 6 points in each one.
They beat New England by 6-0 with a banged-up Johnson and lost to the Colts by 9-6 without him.


4 Are Shot, 1 Fatally, in Yonkers Grocery
In an attempted robbery that went awry in a grocery store in Yonkers last night, a man shot four people in the head, killing one and critically injuring three others, the police said.
The man and an accomplice used a semiautomatic handgun to hold up the store, Glenn's Mini Market at 270 Riverdale Avenue, but someone called 911 anonymously and informed the police of the robbery while it was in progress just after 10 P.M., said Lieut.
Lawrence McElrone, a police spokesman.


Knicks Reemploy A Big Pal: Defense
Their offense looked shaky at times, but the Knicks are returning home successfully from their three-game trip.
Relying on a suffocating defense, the Knicks wore down the Golden State Warriors, 94-81, here at the Oakland Coliseum Arena tonight.
The victory gave New York (12-4) a 2-1 record on the trip, despite failing to score 100 points in any of the three games.


National Technical Systems Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Atheism Is Said to Fade in Russia
A report on religious changes in Russia has put numbers on what was already viewed as an extraordinary revival of faith.
The report, released in Washington yesterday by the National Opinion Research Center, found that by 1991 a third of the Russians who once considered themselves atheists had become believers in God.
"These numbers," the Rev.
Andrew M. Greeley said in presenting the report, "demonstrate, after the most serious attempt to obliterate religion in history, the most dramatic religious revival."


Art in Review
Sharon Horvath
Victoria Munroe Fine Art  9 East 84th Street  Manhattan  Through tomorrow
In her small paintings and drawings, Sharon Horvath negotiates an appealing if somewhat precious alliance between art and map making.
Her task is aided by a preference for early maps, whose flat shapes already have a high quotient of abstraction; by a delicate touch, and by a notable sensitivity to materials.


Longview Fibre reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Early Unreported Illnesses Linked to Deadly Drug
Two patients became ill after taking an experimental drug for hepatitis B only days before patients began to die from taking the same drug in experiments at the National Institutes of Health.
Eli Lilly &amp; Company, the manufacturer of the drug, FIAU, knew about the illnesses but failed to report them to the Government, the Food and Drug Administration was told in a letter made public today.


Art in Review
Paul Thek  'Paintings from the 1970's and 1980's'
Brooke Alexander Gallery  59 Wooster Street, at Broome Street  SoHo  Through Dec. 30
Paul Thek, who died in 1988 at the age of 54, is appreciated primarily as precursor to the current obsession with the body.
He is best known for plastic sculptures involving meticulous re-creations of human flesh and an 1967 installation centering on a full-scale wax cast of himself, titled "Death of a Hippie."


Hot Soccer Tickets
To the Editor:
"Warming Up for the Cup" (editorial, Nov. 29) says tickets are no longer available for the World Cup soccer games to be played in this country next summer.
While some classes of tickets are no longer available, there are ticket packages for every game, including the finals.


2 SOUTH AFRICANS PEER INTO FUTURE
Sharing a podium on the eve of sharing a Nobel Peace Prize, Nelson Mandela and President F. W. de Klerk of South Africa both spoke today of the new era that will transform their country with elections in April, when white minority rule will pass into history.
But even their brief remarks were enough to suggest that they have different eras in mind.
President de Klerk seemed to be speaking for his white constituency when he stressed above all else the need for reconciliation and for "putting the past behind us."


Mandate Health Education for Grades K-12
To the Editor:
For many months now, Surgeon General Dr.
Joycelyn Elders has been making an impassioned plea for comprehensive school health education, grades K-12.
Unfortunately, her message is being grossly misinterpreted and erroneously reported as simply another disturbing scheme for sex education in the schools, thus risking the ire of opponents of sex education while missing the point.


Where Mothers Are Besieged
To the Editor:
Orlando Patterson charges that LaJoe Rivers, the subject of Alex Kotlowitz's book "There Are No Children Here," now a TV movie -- a woman Mr.
Patterson probably never met -- "recklessly insisted on having child after child" ("The Victimization Trap," Op-Ed, Nov. 30).


Smith Hopes Surgery Will End Knee Pain
Charles Smith admitted today that he has been bothered by knee pain during most of his two seasons with the Knicks.
While he refused to use that as an excuse for any subpar performances, Smith sounded optimistic that Tuesday's successful arthroscopic surgery on his left knee will allow him to return free of pain.
Smith declined to set a timetable for his return, but Dr.
Norman Scott, the Knicks' team physician, expects the forward's recovery to take about six weeks.


Suddenly Fearful, Riders Mourn Loss of a Haven
Wayne Shepard of West Orange took the regular morning rush-hour train feeling skittish.
He looked over his shoulder, watched the other passengers, noted the exits.
"I was taking notice of people getting off the train," he said, waiting for the PATH train to Manhattan after getting off an N.J.
Transit train.
"Before," he said, "I never looked around much. It was just a routine."


So, Let Your Cursor Do The Walking
An electronic yellow pages that will allow computer users to find all the shops in Brooklyn, Queens and Nassau County that repair cellular telephones, for example, or all the Mexican restaurants in the Bronx and Westchester County where dinner for two is less than $50 was announced yesterday by the Nynex Corporation and the Prodigy Services Company.
The service, expected to be available in the fourth quarter of next year, will combine in one vast listing all 300 volumes of classified ad pages from Nynex's service area of New York and New England.
It will, for instance, enable banks to change interest rates in their ads daily, and it allows for the use of headline type, color and photos in the ads.


CME KHBB Forms 2 Specialized Units
CME KHBB Advertising of Minneapolis said yesterday that it had added units to specialize in direct marketing and integrated communications.
The direct marketing group, CME Direct, will be headed by Brian Blanchard, 32, as a vice president.
He was previously manager of direct marketing services at Northlich Stolley LaWarre in Cincinnati.
The unit will work on accounts like BASF, Conagra and U S West.


George Dean Jr., 64, Lawyer for Mentally Ill
George W. Dean Jr., a civil rights lawyer who argued a case that forced Alabama to revamp its mental-health system and influenced similar changes in other states, died on Tuesday at his home in Chestertown, Md.
He was 64.
The apparent cause was a heart attack, his family said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  SYRIA TO RESUME TALKS  The United States succeeded in ending Syria's boycott of the peace talks with Israel and also announced that President Clinton would meet next month with President Assad.
A1  WORKING TO KEEP THE PEACE  In the face of discord at the negotiating table and increasing violence in the Israeli-occupied territories, the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman, Yasir Arafat, and the Israeli Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, met for over an hour to try to keep the agreement together.
A13


Healing Wounds, Mind and Body
As five Long Island families began making arrangements today to bury their dead, survivors of the carnage on the 5:33 to Hicksville struggled with another arduous task: healing from the wounds to their bodies and psyches.
For some of the injured passengers, like Kevin McCarthy, a 26-year-old man from Mineola who was shot in the head and is paralyzed on the left side of his body, the process of recovery from the physical effects of the gunfire is expected to take months.
For others less seriously injured, like Thomas F. McDermott, a 50-year-old Garden City lawyer who was released from a hospital today, the less tangible process of trying to make sense of the slaughter on the commuter train has already begun.
Spared by God
"I'm just really continually thanking God that he spared me, because there was no reason I survived and the others died," Mr.
McDermott, who was shot in the left shoulder, said a few minutes before he was released today from Mercy Medical Center in Rockville Centre.
"There seemed to be no selectivity, so there is no reason that five were killed and the rest of us were luckier."


Celex Group reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Jury Award Lowered
A Federal judge in Boston said a jury's award of $114 million to the former New England Patriots owner WILLIAM H. SULLIVAN in his suit against the National Football League was excessive and ordered it cut to $51 million.
The jury found in October that National Football League policy prohibiting public ownership of league teams prevented Sullivan from selling 49 percent of the Patriots to the public to raise money.
Sullivan said he had been forced to sell the team at an artificially low price to VICTOR KIAM in 1988.


Founders of Gitano Resign Company Posts
The Dabah family, founders of the Gitano Group, said yesterday that it would bow out altogether from the licensing and marketing company that was once the largest manufacturer in the United States of moderately priced women's jeans.
The company said Haim Dabah had resigned from his position as president and director.
His brother, Isaac, and his father, Morris, also resigned their positions as directors.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The new creative chief at Lintas New York reveals an extraordinary gift for hope.
PEOPLE who work in advertising are by nature optimistic.
Kevin O'Neill has more reason to be so than most.
A month ago, Mr.
O'Neill, an executive vice president and group creative director at Lintas New York, was promoted to chief creative officer, succeeding Tony DeGregorio, who left the agency after two and a half years.


The Spoken Word
"DUPLEX PLANET RADIO HOUR," The Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity, Clinton and Montague Streets, Brooklyn Heights.
David Greenberger reads from his magazine "The Duplex Planet," which documents the quirky insights of nursing-home residents.
Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $13 and $15.
Information: (718) 858-2424.
CORNEL WEST, 92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue.
Charlie Rose interviews Cornel West, the director of the Afro-American studies department at Princeton University.
Sunday at 8:15 P.M.
Admission: $16.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Holiday Noises, Joyful and Otherwise, on Disk
Here are reviews of 21 Christmas albums selected by New York Times pop critics.
The suggested list prices are given. (An introduction by Jon Pareles appears on page C1.)  "CHRISTMAS SONGS" (Milestone MCD-9211-2 CD $14.98; no cassette).
It's amazing how seriously these tunes are taken, by everyone from Bill Evans and Red Garland to Tom Harrell and Joe Pass.
Red Garland plays "Winter Wonderland" with Paul Chambers on bass and Art Taylor on drums, and once he's into his solo, everything starts cooking.
There's a meditative mood to many of the performances, excepting Chet Baker's version of "Winter Wonderland," which turns the melody into a mambo, a pure West Coastism.
PETER WATROUS


Jacob Brown; Educator, 43
Jacob Brown, an administrator of Columbia University's School of General Studies, died on Tuesday at the Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 43.
The cause was an AIDS-related illness, said Frank Wolf, associate dean of the School of General Studies.


National Car Rental Selects W. B. Doner
National Car Rental of Minneapolis said yesterday that it had selected W. B. Doner &amp; Company of Southfield, Mich., to handle its account, previously at Chiat/Day of New York, which was dismissed in September.
Billings were estimated at $20 million.


Review/Film; A Call for Help From the Convent
Whoopi Goldberg must have an evil twin.
The bad twin is the one who can't stay out of the tabloids, one day being happily roasted with racial jokes at the Friars Club and the next offering a cookbook recipe for "Jewish American Princess Fried Chicken." She may be tasteless but at least she's interesting.
It's the good twin who surfaces in "Sister Act 2: Back in the Habit," and she's pretty much a snooze.
Ms.
Goldberg's brash persona brought a whiff of mischief to the original "Sister Act," in which she played a mediocre lounge singer, Deloris Van Cartier, forced to masquerade as Sister Mary Clarence.
There was plenty of sentimental uplift at the end, but throughout Ms.
Goldberg made it clear that a convent was the last place Deloris's married, mobster boyfriend would find her.


Plan Aims Welfare At 2-Parent Homes
An Administration task force has proposed to make it much easier for families to collect welfare even when the father is present.


Holiday Noises, Joyful and Otherwise, on Disk
Here are reviews of 21 Christmas albums selected by New York Times pop critics.
The suggested list prices are given. (An introduction by Jon Pareles appears on page C1.) Vince Gill
"LET THERE BE PEACE ON EARTH" (MCA D-10877, cassette $10.98, CD $15.98).
Although Vince Gill is nominally a country singer and guitarist, his Christmas album aspires to the lushness of old Mel Torme recordings.
Mr.
Gill's quiveringly sincere tenor floats amid string sections and backup singers; the tempos are slow, the tone earnest.
Except for mostly instrumental versions of "Santa Claus Is Coming to Town" and "White Christmas," it's mighty syrupy.
JON PARELES


Diner's Journal; The Equitable Sweepstakes
It looks like Jerome Kretchmer is ready for midtown.
So far his Manhattan restaurants (One Fifth Avenue, Gotham Bar and Grill, Mesa Grill) have all been around lower Fifth Avenue.
Now his portfolio includes 152 West 52d Street, the space in the Equitable Center once occupied by Sam's.
In acquiring the lease to Sam's he has captured one of the city's most hotly contested restaurant locations this year.
More than a dozen restaurateurs competed for it.


Among Palestinians, Worry and Rage
Clusters of students at Bir Zeit University lingered briefly in front of yellow posters put up at lunchtime today vowing to go on with the "struggle" until Israel releases Palestinian prisoners.
The students moved on with the attitude of someone who has seen it all many times before.
But there are other times when Bir Zeit University seems more a political caldron than a university with 3,000 undergraduates.


Holiday Noises, Joyful and Otherwise, on Disk
Here are reviews of 21 Christmas albums selected by New York Times pop critics.
The suggested list prices are given. (An introduction by Jon Pareles appears on page C1.) RuPaul
"LITTLE DRUMMER BOY" (Tommy Boy single, 7593, cassette $3.49, CD $4.98).
At last, a dance-music version of "Little Drummer Boy." RuPaul, neither little nor a drummer nor a boy, gospel-moans his way through the song.
He gives "I played my drum for him" some deep passion, a real gospel fervor, as a choir backs him up.
PETER WATROUS


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY Look Homeward, Dallas  The Dallas Stars had a successful return to Minnesota last night, getting two goals apiece from Dave Gagner and Mike Modano in a 6-1 victory over the Ottawa Senators.
It was Minnesota's first National Hockey League game since Norm Green moved the North Stars to Dallas after last season.
It also was the first regular-season game ever at Minneapolis's Target Center, which is trying to lure the Oilers from Edmonton. (AP) Canucks 3, Bruins 2: Cliff Ronning's 40-foot slap shot over the left shoulder of Boston goalie Jon Casey only 37 seconds into overtime gave Vancouver the victory over the Bruins in Boston Garden.
The goal, which appeared to have been deflected off a Bruins player in front of the net, sent Boston to its third consecutive loss. (AP) Red Wings 3, Blues 2: Detroit, with Sergei Fedorov getting a goal and an assist, scored the last three goals in a comeback victory over St.
Louis at Joe Louis Arena.
It was the fifth straight road loss for the Blues (14-9-5), who were outshot by 45-19.
The Red Wings (14-12-2), who have won their last four at home, went two games over .500 for the first time all season. (AP) Capitals 4, Flyers 2: Keith Jones scored twice as visiting Washington beat Philadelphia for the first time in six tries this season.
The Capitals have three victories in their last 12 games (3-7-2) while Philadelphia has lost three of its last four and is 5-6-1 without Eric Lindros, their injured center.
Mike Ridley of Washington broke a 2-2 tie with 10:18 remaining in the third period. (AP) TENNIS Steven's Dollar Days  Brett Steven won the biggest paycheck of his career and went home.
Michael Stich took the money and the victory.
Stich, the defending champion, came from behind to beat Steven, 5-7, 6-4, 6-4, yesterday in the quarterfinals of the Grand Slam Cup in Munich, Germany.
Stefan Edberg, seeded No. 2, also reached the semifinals, beating Wayne Ferreira, 6-7 (5-7), 6-1, 6-0.
Edberg had never got past the first round in two previous appearances in the Grand Slam Cup.
Steven qualified for the 16-man event when Richard Krajicek dropped out because of an injury.
Ranked 43d in the world and a quarterfinalist at the Australian Open, Steven has never won a tournament, but the New Zealander picked up $262,500 and nearly doubled his 1993 earnings after reaching the quarterfinals. (AP) YACHT RACING A Winner in Whitbread  The European yacht Intrum Justitia entered Fremantle harbor in Australia yesterday to win the 7,558-mile second leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race.
In breaking the record time for the leg by two and a half days, Intrum Justitia, a Whitbread-60 Class yacht skippered by Lawrie Smith of England, took 25 days 14 hours 39 minutes to complete the stage, which began Nov. 13 in Punta del Este, Uruguay.
Tokio, a Japanese-New Zealand entry skippered by Chris Dickson, finished second, exactly two hours behind Intrum Justitia. (AP)


Panel Urges Expanding Aid for Two-Parent Homes
In an effort to encourage family stability, the Clinton Administration's task force on overhauling welfare has proposed to make it much easier for families to collect welfare even when the father is present.
Administration officials said the recommendation, described in a confidential draft of a report to President Clinton, is meant to correct the welfare system's much criticized tendency to divide families by cutting off benefits when the father lives in the house.


On My Mind; Surrender on Drugs?
The Surgeon General of the United States is giving the cause of narcotics legalization the biggest boost it has ever received in America.
Dr.
Joycelyn Elders thinks that legalization of narcotics would reduce crime and generally is so impressed with the idea that she wants "studies" to be made.


First Anniversary of U.S. Operation in Somalia


Playing Monopoly With the Media
One of the many scenarios in the long-running takeover battle for Paramount Communications is this one: if Viacom Inc. wins, its chairman promises, it will make sure that its weird and popular "Beavis and Butt-head" show is turned into a Paramount movie.
This is an example of synergy, the intangible that Wall Street favors highly these days as telephone companies, TV, radio and cable concerns and publishing conglomerates pursue a bewildering array of stunning and pricey deals.


Corrections
A chart in Science Times on Tuesday about genetic diseases transmitted with a recessive pattern misstated the number of people with cystic fibrosis in the United States.
It is about 25,000, not 250,000.


Casinos' Campaign for Legalization of Sports Betting Fails Again in Trenton
The state's 12 gambling casinos lost another round today in their fight to legalize sports betting when an appellate court ruled that state regulators lack the power to authorize such an extension of gambling.
The court held that voters would have to approve the new form of gambling through a constitutional amendment, but the opportunity for that was lost when bills that would have placed the question on the November ballot were blocked in the New Jersey Assembly.


Review/Art; Stalin's Painters: In Service of the Sacred
WHEN the Soviet Union fell, statues of Lenin fell, too, in celebrations symbolic of the overturning of government, celebrations that recalled the upending of the Vendome column in Paris by revolutionaries during the previous century, and the toppling of monuments of King George by American Revolutionaries the century before that.
Anyone who traveled the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe recalls the ubiquity of Lenin shrines, which is to say the extent to which the visual arts were conscripted into the service of Communist state authority.
Stalin was the one who drafted an army of Socialist Realists, as he called them.
Their assignment was to extol, in the most unambiguous visual terms, Soviet industry, the Soviet worker, the Soviet military, the Soviet Union's holy trinity of Marx, Engels and Lenin, and of course Stalin himself.


Where Mothers Are Besieged; Prime-Time Role Model
To the Editor:
Orlando Patterson, you just don't get this one ("The Victimization Trap," Op-Ed, Nov. 30).
Of course Oprah Winfrey did not portray an "accurate" sociological commentary on ghetto life in her TV movie "There Are No Children Here" -- I doubt she ever intended to.
That's your job or the job of documentaries on public broadcasting.
Don't you see that by portraying hope, by simply showing a good role model and honest behavior on prime-time television, Ms.
Winfrey has effectively done more good than a slew of depressing commentaries.
There is a heroine here and her name is Oprah Winfrey.
MARY S. LASSEN  Bronx, Nov. 30, 1993


Yankees' Newfound Thrift Costs Them Randy Johnson
If anyone ever said it would be a rare day in December when the Seattle Mariners signed a player the Yankees said they couldn't afford, today was the day.
Taking a major step toward molding a contending team, the Mariners signed Randy Johnson, their No. 1 pitcher, to a four-year, $20.25 million contract, the eighth richest pitcher's contract currently in effect based on averaged annual value.


3 Teen-Agers in Queens Accused Of Kidnapping 5-Year-Old Boy
After kidnapping a 5-year-old boy from the hands of his grandmother on a street in Queens and demanding a $500,000 ransom, three men took the boy to a prearranged meeting place last night and were arrested by detectives, the police said.
The child, who was not identified, suffered minor injuries and was hospitalized once he was safe.
The suspects were identified as Kwong Ping Yan, 19; Roberto Carlos Figueroa, 18, and Enrique Guadelupe, 16.
They face charges of kidnapping, reckless endangerment and endangering the welfare of a child.


15 Egyptian Militants Held on Plot Charges
The Egyptian authorities have arrested 15 members of a Muslim militant group that killed President Anwar al-Sadat in 1981.
The 15 are held for plotting to assassinate senior Government officials and security officers, an Interior Ministry statement said today.
The men, known as the Assassinations Group, belong to a wing of the Holy War organization, which claimed responsibility for the Nov. 25 attack on Prime Minister Atef Sedki's motorcade.
Mr.
Sedki escaped unharmed but a schoolgirl was killed and 21 others were wounded.


City Nature Lovers
To the Editor:
"A Natural Longing for Nature" (The Week in Review, Dec. 5) tells of a hypothesized genetically based emotional need to be linked with nature.
You report that some scientists fear the failure to activate this need in urban settings could lead to "indifference or outright hostility to nature at a time when conservationists are striving to save it." In my experience, many of those most concerned by the excesses of the environmental movement are active outdoors people, while most ardent environmentalists are sheltered urbanites.
Is it not possible that emotional deprivation leads to compensatory environmental activism rather than hostility toward nature?
RICHARD S. LINDZEN  Cambridge, Mass., Dec. 5, 1993


6-Round Fight Is Least of Briggs's Worries
Shannon Briggs, who wore a jacket proclaiming "Next Heavyweight Champion," learned some salient points about the fight game yesterday.
In the morning he was hit with a $25 million lawsuit at a weigh-in and in the evening his opponent, Dan Wofford, stuck his tongue out at him.
At least Briggs, 22, didn't have to worry about his six-round bout.
He easily won each round to increase his record to 15-0 as 4,023 fans came out for boxing's return at the Paramount.


In Capital, It's Boiled or Bottled Water
It was as if "Pollution," that old Tom Lehrer song of the 1960's, had come to life in the nation's capital today.
"Just two things of which you must be aware," the ditty warned.
"Don't drink the water and don't breathe the air."
Long accustomed to hot air, the city has been under orders since Wednesday to boil all its drinking water as a precaution against possible contamination by cryptosporidium, a micro-organism that causes disease in humans.


Art in Review
Mary Jones
Tom Cugliani Gallery  40 Wooster Street (near Grand Street)  SoHo  Through Dec. 18
This is the first show in New York City for Mary Jones, a painter who moved here five years ago after living and exhibiting in Los Angeles for some time.
Ms.
Jones's specialty is a kind of high-key stain painting in which washes of saturated color flood over one another, creating amorphous shapes in a drifting aqueous space.
It is a style that shares common ground with painters like Stephen Mueller and Cora Cohen without being as distinctive.


Board's Budget Requests for School Maintenance Go Unheeded
To the Editor:
Statements in recent newspaper articles attributing the deplorable physical conditions of New York City public schools to the Board of Education's inability to provide for maintenance of its facilities ignore that the board's yearly requests to the city for financing to address school maintenance needs have gone largely unheeded since the 1975 fiscal crisis.


MHI Group reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


President Asks New Yorker To Lead Health Care Drive
President Clinton has asked Harold M. Ickes, the New York lawyer, to take charge of the campaign for health care reform and is awaiting his reply, White House officials said tonight.
As the manager of the campaign, Mr.
Ickes would bring political savvy and managerial skill to an effort that has suffered in recent months as the health care plan has come under attack from powerful foes.


Art in Review
'Public Art in the Bronx'
Lehman College Art Gallery  250 Bedford Park Boulevard West  Bedford Park  The Bronx  Through Wednesday
The authors' statement that more public work is being produced in the United States today than under the Works Progress Administration in the 1930's is alone cause for real optimism.


Sports of The Times; The Day Ameche Scored
AT halftime of the Giants-Colts game on Sunday at Giants Stadium, a time capsule will open.
Stepping out of it will be Andy Robustelli, Sam Huff and Rosey Brown, along with Johnny Unitas, Gino Marchetti and Lenny Moore, opponents 35 years ago in the game that branded "NFL" on America's psyche.
The memory of that game has endured.
Not merely in New York or Baltimore but everywhere television took it.
As with Bobby Thomson's home run or the Olympic hockey team's upset of the Russians, people remember where they were when the Colts won, 23-17, on Alan Ameche's 1-yard burst in overtime.


L.I.R.R. Attack: Puzzle Unsolved
Two days after a gunman's rampage aboard a Long Island commuter train, investigators continued their search for insights into what one detective called a "planned execution." TRANQUIL YOUTH In Jamaica, former teachers and friends said nothing in Colin Ferguson's childhood foreshadowed the hatred and rage that emerged in his life in New York.
Page B1.


Halsey Drug Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giants' Defensive Foundation Is Large on Versatility but Small on Ego
Lawrence Taylor says that what makes the Giants' defense so good is that there are no big heads on it.
The egos are under control.
For whatever reason, the personalities have blended better than anyone could have expected.
As the Giants play mix-and-match with players and positions, one wonders how they've been able to remain among the best in the National Football League.
In retrospect, it's easy to see why Dan Reeves cut the ties with Pepper Johnson.
When Johnson declared that he didn't want to play outside linebacker, he just about signed his death warrant.
This defense relies on players who are flexible, players who may be asked to make difficult adjustments for the good of the team.
Any player who says "I won't" doesn't fit into the system.


Syria Is Willing To Renew Talks With the Israelis
The United States succeeded today in ending Syria's boycott of the peace talks with Israel, and also announced that President Clinton would meet with President Hafez al-Assad next month in Geneva.
After twice shuttling between Jerusalem and Damascus, Secretary of State Warren Christopher announced the resumption of talks and the Presidents' meeting at a joint news conference today with the Syrian Foreign Minister, Farouk al-Shara.


Yankees Deal Owen To Angels
The Yankees took a step toward trimming their payroll yesterday when they traded their overvalued shortstop, Spike Owen, to the California Angels for a minor league relief pitcher.
But it was only a small step in this arduous economic process because they also agreed to absorb an undisclosed amount of Owen's contract as a condition of the trade.
Conceding that they made a mammoth blunder when they signed him to a three-year, $7 million free agent contract last December, the Yankees will now pay a portion of the $4.25 million Owen will receive over the next two years to dismiss him and save some important cash.
It is doubtful the Angels would have made the deal unless the Yankees assumed at least $2 million of Owen's contract.


Cowboy Arrested
Dallas Cowboys offensive lineman NATE NEWTON, arrested on drunken-driving charges for the second time in 39 months, said yesterday that he was grateful that no one was seriously injured in an interstate accident late Tuesday in Carrollton, Tex.
Newton, 31, escaped injury and ANGELA PUSTEJOVSKY, 22, of Lewisville, Tex., the driver of another car, was shaken up in the accident about 11 P.M.
Tuesday in Carrollton, a northwest Dallas suburb.


SHUTTLE CREW SET TO FREE TELESCOPE
The high-flying mechanics and opticians of the shuttle Endeavour completed their repairs of the Hubble Space Telescope today and were ready to release it for weeks of critical testing to see if the new and improved instruments have indeed corrected the $1.6 billion telescope's blurred vision.
Endeavour has been carrying the big telescope in its cargo bay for six days while astronauts took five demanding space walks in five days to make the repairs.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  SEATTLE MARINERS -- Agreed to terms with Randy Johnson, pitcher, on a four-year agreement.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Named Billy Maxwell trainer of Billings of the Pioneer League.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Agreed to terms with Herm Winningham, outfielder, on a minor-league contract.
Hockey National Hockey League  ANAHEIM MIGHTY DUCKS -- Recalled Jarrod Skalde, center, from San Diego of the International Hockey League.
Sent Mikhail Shtalenkov, goaltender, to San Diego on a two-week conditioning assignment.
DALLAS STARS -- Recalled Troy Gamble, goaltender, from Kalamazoo of the International Hockey League.
Released Duane Joyce, defenseman.
LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Recalled Mark Hardy, defenseman, and Dan Currie, left wing, from Phoenix of the International Hockey League.
Sent Brent Thompson and Dominic Lavoie, defensemen, to Phoenix.
College  MIDWESTERN COLLEGIATE CONFERENCE -- Announced the addition of Cleveland State, Northern Illinois, Wisconsin-Green Bay, Wisconsin-Milwaukee and Wright State, effective July 1, 1994.
ALBANY STATE, N.Y. -- Named Gail Cummings-Danson assistant director of athletics, senior women's administator and women's lacrosse coach.
CLARKSON -- Named Casey Jones assistant hockey coach
HUNTER -- Named Matt Burcaw men's interim tennis coach.


The Shot Heard Round Canada
It must be a dream enjoyed by millions of would-be Babe Ruths, right as they drift off into deep sleep: They see the home run they hit sail elegantly over the outfield fence, winning the game, winning the World Series, on one swing of the bat.
For only two men was that ever a waking dream come true.
For Bill Mazeroski, the dreamlike state, if not the wonderment, surely wore off years ago.
But for Joe Carter, all the pinches in the world still can't snap the ultimate hero of the 1993 World Series to reality.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Paramount Communications was unfair to shareholders when it accepted Viacom's takeover offer instead of a higher bid from QVC, the Delaware Supreme Court said.
The ruling clears the way for a new round of bidding that could drive the price for Paramount higher.
QVC's current bid is $10.7 billion in stock and cash, compared with Viacom's offer of $9.5 billion.  [ Page A1. ]


Police Look for the Spark That Led to the Shootings
Two days after an angry gunman opened fire on a crowded railroad car, investigators are still looking into the question that continues to trouble almost everyone: why the suspect, Colin Ferguson, after years of simmering rage, apparently decided to vent his wrath on the 5:33 train to Hicksville.
"He had the gun in possession since April of this year, and we don't know what triggered this," said Mel Kenny, assistant chief of detectives of the Nassau Police.
"We would like to know why, and are trying to adequately cover what prompted this behavior -- if there were any particular or cumulative events in recent weeks that might have pushed him over the edge."


Housing Secretary Eulogizes A Woman Who Died So Near
A Cabinet secretary delivered a eulogy before 100 mourners today for a homeless woman who died alone last month -- and then became a national symbol because she froze to death at a bus stop across the street from the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
In life, the 43-year-old woman, Yetta M. Adams, was distant from her family and was ignored by her government.
In death, she became a beloved relative and a moral imperative.
The District of Columbia, which has been slow to apply for $20 million for the homeless allotted to it by the Federal Government, paid for the funeral.


Holiday Noises, Joyful and Otherwise, on Disk
Here are reviews of 21 Christmas albums selected by New York Times pop critics.
The suggested list prices are given. (An introduction by Jon Pareles appears on page C1.) Gloria Estefan
"CHRISTMAS THROUGH YOUR EYES" (Epic 57567, cassette $10.98, CD $16.98).
Although Ms.
Estefan is a competent singer who exudes a likable sincerity and can communicate a certain wistfulness, she is too bland a stylist to put an indelible personal stamp on any of the 11 songs on her Christmas album.
The record begins pretentiously with an overture followed by pleasant, straightforward readings of mostly familiar songs arranged in twinkly pop settings lightly seasoned with Latin and pop-funk rhythms.
"Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas" is sung mostly a cappella with Singers Unlimited, in a Hi-Lo's-style jazz vocal arrangement.
"I'll Be Home for Christmas" uses a boys' choir.
There is a bilingual (English and Spanish) "Silent Night" and an all-Spanish "Arbolito de Navidad." STEPHEN HOLDEN


Key Witness in Fraud 'Sting' Suing I.B.M. for $5.1 Million
For two years, I.B.M. worked closely with the Federal Bureau of Investigation to orchestrate an elaborate "sting" operation unearthing a massive computer-parts fraud that may have cost the company hundreds of millions of dollars.
But now the campaign to catch and punish the scam's participants has hit a snag: a central figure in the sting, who was expected to be a star witness for the Government, has sued the International Business Machines Corporation for $5.1 million.


Don't Forget the Turkey Tetrazzini
To the Editor:
Shakespeare committed an error in "Henry IV" by referring to a "Turkie," which he subsequently described as "gynney hen" in "Othello." Like his countrymen, he mistakenly thought the bird came from Turkey.
Its origin is Guinea in Africa.
When the Pilgrims arrived at Plymouth Rock, they saw a large, dark-feathered bird and mistook it for the familiar guinea, known to them as "turkie" bird.
That is how the main course to the Thanksgiving meal got its name.
RICHARD LA PRAIRIE  Toronto, Dec. 3, 1993


Welfare Shouldn't Be Tied to Work
To the Editor:
I am still pondering the message being sent by the proposed changes in welfare (front page, Dec.3).
Is it realy that working, at almost any paid job, is more important than the job of taking care of our children?


Blue Chips Retreat From Closing High
Blue-chip stocks failed to reach a third consecutive record yesterday in a sluggish session that battered technology issues.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 4.75 points, to 3,729.78, after a new closing high of 3,734.53 was set on Wednesday.
On the New York Stock Exchange, volume was a moderate 287.6 million shares, down from the 314.5 million shares that changed hands on Wednesday.


A Town in Terror as Children Disappear
Ten miles from the hustle and horrors of big-city life in St.
Louis, some of the streets twist and dip like a country road, and the fields and woods nearby remind everyone of what once was.
But these days there is plenty of heartbreak and fear in these suburbs to remind everyone of what now is.


N.B.A. Dislikes This Lottery
It's early in the stare-down as games of chicken go, but after a meeting in Toronto on Wednesday between Deputy Commissioner Russ Granik of the National Basketball Association and officials of the Ontario Lottery Commission, nobody has blinked.
The conditional N.B.A. franchise awarded to Toronto for the 1995-96 season remains as conditional as ever
At issue is the N.B.A.'s insistence that Ontario drop N.B.A. games from its Pro-Line smorgasbord of sports betting or forfeit the franchise.


Free Concert
The New York Youth Symphony opens its 31st season of free performances at Carnegie Hall on Sunday at 3 P.M. with a program comprising the premiere of Sean Anthony Varah's "Burning"; the American premiere of Celso Garrido-Lecca's "Danzas Populares Andinas," and Tchaikovsky's Fifth Symphony and First Piano Concerto (Misha Dichter, soloist).
Although the concert is free, tickets are required.
Information: (212) 581-5933.


Budget Director Looking For a Budget Cuts
The Clinton Administration needs to squeeze more than $30 billion from department spending requests to hold next year's Federal budget below the limits allowed by law, Budget Director Leon E. Panetta said today.
Mr.
Panetta said the Federal departments had requested $20 billion to $23 billion more than allowed by the spending ceiling established in the deficit-reduction package approved last August.


After Standing Off State, Newark's School Board Releases Its Files
State education officials and three moving men raided the offices of the besieged Newark Board of Education at 2 A.M. today to carry off a roomful of records the officials feared might otherwise disappear.
But the room was locked and no one, including the schools' superintendent, could find a key.
Thus began a 12-hour standoff between the state and the board, which have engaged in increasingly hostile clashes in the last few months as the state presses an investigation that now seems destined to support a takeover of the failing Newark system, New Jersey's largest.


Medical Marketing Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Holiday Noises, Joyful and Otherwise, on Disk
Here are reviews of 21 Christmas albums selected by New York Times pop critics.
The suggested list prices are given. (An introduction by Jon Pareles appears on page C1.) Bruce Cockburn
"CHRISTMAS" (Columbia CK 53026, cassette $9.98, CD $13.98).
The Canadian songwriter Bruce Cockburn offers meticulously homespun versions of the familiar ("God Rest Ye Merry, Gentlemen," "Joy to the World") and the obscure ("Jesus Ahatonnia," the first Canadian Christmas hymn) from the 16th century onward.
Backed by a gentle folk-rock band that can be bluesy or pristine, his singing is thoughtful and unforced, personalizing songs about spiritual revelations.
The album evokes Christmas by a cozy hearth with a musical scholar.
JON PARELES


Bank Official Gets Reduced Term Over Iraq Loans
A Federal judge gave a reduced sentence yesterday to an Atlanta bank manager who had granted more than $5 billion in secret loans that were used to arm Iraq.
Judge G. Ernest Tidwell of Federal District Court in Atlanta sentenced the banker, Christopher P. Drogoul, to 37 months in prison, saying he was giving a reduced sentence because the United States Government had encouraged economic aid to Iraq.
Mr.
Drogoul has already served nearly 20 months of that sentence and could be freed in less than a year.





HMG Digital Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 24


Jets Run Around a Distraction
A day after offensive linemen Dave Cadigan and Jeff Criswell verbally berated Rich Cimini, a Newsday reporter, over something he had written about Cadigan, Coach Bruce Coslet defended the players' right to express themselves, but disagreed with the manner in which they chose to do it.
"Individuals are free to say what they feel as long as they put the team first," said Coslet, who added that the matter was closed.
"I don't agree with the words used or the emotional state of the players, but I understand it. I've talked to Jeff and Dave about this. My chief concern is that they will be ready and focused on the Washington Redskins."


From First Daughter to Favorite Aunt


Hi, My Name Is Gary, Your Commissioner
How things have changed for the National Hockey League Board of Governors between the eras of John Ziegler and Gary Bettman.
During a recess in today's meetings, Neil Smith, president of the Rangers, stood in the lobby of this posh resort hotel alongside the blue Pacific and recalled the tone of discussion when Ziegler was president.


Greenwich Air Services Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
L.
M.
ERICSSON TELEPHONE CO., New York, said it had been awarded contracts worth $580 million to supply switching equipment and related services to Telecom Australia over the next five years.


Foster Program Fulfilling Dream for Harlem Couple
Gladys Santos and her husband Tomas always wanted a daughter.
Four times they tried, and each time were rewarded with a boy.
After the last, Mrs.
Santos was told she should not bear any more children.
Their dream of having a girl slowly faded as the couple struggled to raise a family in East Harlem.
But in 1987, when a neighbor took in a disabled foster child, the longing was triggered once again.


Survey Says Fans Want The Return of Replays
After further review, a large majority of fans have apparently decided they want the National Football League to bring back instant replay.
Instant replay was instituted by the N.F.L. in 1986, then dropped before the 1992 season in the wake of repeated complaints that it slowed the game down.
But in a nationwide telephone poll by the CBS News Election and Survey Unit, 71 percent of those questioned said they wanted to bring back the people upstairs who uphold or reverse the calls made by the people downstairs, on the field.


Review/Dance; With Motion and Song, the Ailey Marks 35 Years
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater's annual gala benefit, which opened the company's 35th-anniversary season on Wednesday night, has always had the warmth of a family gathering.
The Ailey family, in particular, is an extended one.
It takes in not only loyal audiences and past and present dancers, but also a cluster of celebrities who always lend their various talents to the task: the raising of both money and morale.


Protein Reverses H.I.V. Cell Damage
In test-tube experiments, normal immune responses have been restored in cells from people infected with the virus that causes AIDS, Federal researchers are reporting today in a scientific journal.
Restoration of the immune function was achieved by adding a recently discovered natural blood substance known as IL-12 to cells grown in a laboratory, the researchers reported in the journal Science.


Books of The Times; Families Bound by Ties That Stifle
Honey
By Elizabeth Tallent
207 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
The geometry of divorce: how relations between ex-husbands and ex-wives endure and shift over time; how their emotions ricochet off their children; how their resentments and yearnings affect the long-term configuration of their extended families.
This is the subject Elizabeth Tallent has examined again and again, in her stories and a novel.
Her latest collection, "Honey," is no exception.
Indeed, many of the tales in this volume take up where stories in her last collection ("Time With Children") left off, continuing the sagas of characters we've already met.


Health Cost Rises Are Less Steep
Reflecting rising political and economic pressures, the growth in spending for health care will slow dramatically in 1994, large employers and insurers said yesterday.
Pressure from the Clinton Administration and employers is forcing an increasing number of health maintenance organizations to hold their rate rises to 4 percent or 5 percent.
After experiencing double-digit rate gains over the last five years, some companies are even seeing rates climb below the 2.8 percent inflation rate.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.97
2.87
3.08
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.06
3.21
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.22
3.35
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.20
5.21
6.37
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.15
6.16
7.42
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.17
7.17
8.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.50
5.53
6.36
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Home Video
This week the flow of movies into video games was briefly reversed with the release on videocassette of "Super Mario Brothers," a Hollywood Pictures movie spun off the best-selling Nintendo game.
If this film (a live-action comic strip having "more to do with marketing tie-ins than with creative thinking," Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times) is any indication, movies made from video games might not have much of a future.
For games made from movies, however, the prognosis is the opposite.
Video games with themes and clips from movies, or, to take the movie connection to its conclusion, games that actually are movies, have proliferated in recent months.


Agency Rent-A-Car Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Award to Terry Bowden
Auburn Coach TERRY BOWDEN won the Bear Bryant award as college football's coach of the year last night, but he didn't get his wish.
He wanted his father, Florida State Coach BOBBY BOWDEN, to win.
Instead, Terry Bowden beat out his father and two other finalists, JOHN COOPER of Ohio State and BILL SNYDER of Kansas State.
"To be honest, I'd rather my father win," Terry Bowden said.
"I don't have to win this award at age 37."


Argentine Notes Draw Investors
Far from Mexico -- where the North American Free Trade Agreement is rousing markets -- there was business being done yesterday that signals that many investors are already betting on what might be the next Mexico in Latin America.
On Wall Street, and in Europe and Asia, portfolio managers and institutional investors yesterday snapped up $1 billion of 10-year notes issued by the Republic of Argentina.


Sega Consolidates Its Media Buying
Sega of America Inc. of Redwood City, Calif., said yesterday that it had consolidated the media planning and buying portions of its estimated $95 million account at BBDO Los Angeles.
Bozell Los Angeles had been Sega's primary media services agency.


Violent Protest At High School Injures Officers
A student protest over conditions at a Brooklyn high school became unruly yesterday, spilling into the street and resulting in injuries to three police officers and the arrest of four students, the police said.
The meeting between about 300 students and the principal of Sarah J. Hale High School, at Third Avenue and Dean Street in Cobble Hill, began at 11 A.M. in the auditorium, said Frank Sobrino, a spokesman for the Board of Education.
It became disruptive about half an hour later, said


Corrections
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index chart at the beginning of the stock tables in Business Day yesterday reflected incorrect figures for Wednesday's trading.
An updated and corrected chart appears today on page D9.


Executive Changes
CMS ENHANCEMENTS INC., Irvine, Calif., appointed Hal Clark president and chief executive and named Mike Rusert executive vice president and chief operating officer.
Steven Holmes, chief financial officer, has been appointed to executive vice president in addition to his position as chief financial officer.


Scientists at Princeton Produce World's Largest Fusion Reaction
A huge experimental reactor embodying the process of hydrogen fusion, which fuels the sun, unleashed a burst of energy tonight that broke all records and appeared to pave the way for eventual exploitation of abundant, cheap fusion energy.
The achievement crowned a day of lesser landmarks, in which the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory gradually increased the power of its Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor by mixing increasing proportions of tritium into the machine's fuel.


Reviews/Film; A Revisionist Portrait Of an Apache Warrior
"A powerful stocky warrior with a perpetual scowl on his face, Geronimo personified all that was savage and cruel in the Apache," states Robert M. Utley's introduction to a recent edition of "The Truth About Geronimo," written by Britton Davis in 1929.
"Few whites who knew him had much praise for him, and most of his own people feared and disliked him. Davis characterized him as 'a thoroughly vicious, intractable and treacherous man. His only redeeming traits were courage and determination. His word, no matter how earnestly pledged, was worthless.' History has supported this judgment."
Obviously, times have changed.
The revisionist view of Geronimo is apparent in "Geronimo: An American Legend," an earnest, leaden epic directed by Walter Hill from a reverential screenplay by John Milius and Larry Gross.
No matter that this film's narrator is actually Britton Davis, played as a bland young West Point graduate by Matt Damon and urging the story forward with colorless observations.
The real flavor of Davis's account, and of the ferocity that earned Geronimo his place in history, is nowhere evident on screen.


Novell Inc.
Novell Inc., the largest independent provider of network operating systems for computers, late Wednesday reported disappointing earnings for the quarter that ended on Oct. 31.
Novell officials told analysts yesterday that business would be flat in the next two quarters, and the stock lost more than 15 percent of its market value.


INSIDE
Rethinking the Highways
The Administration identified 159,000 miles of highways as the only routes eligible for a Federal fund.
Several are in the New York area.
Page A32.
Clinton Turns to Former Aide
President Clinton has asked Harold Ickes, a New York lawyer and former aide, to take charge of the campaign to overhaul health care.
Page A24.
Judges for Hire
The practice of judges' working as private contractors settling lawsuits is raising questions.
Law, page D20.


For Children
'Judy and the Maccabees'  Merkin Concert Hall 129 West 67th Street Manhattan (212) 362-8719 Recommended ages: 4 to 10 Sunday
The traditional story of Hanukkah leaves little room for heroines: except for Judith, who is said to have got a Syrian general drunk and beheaded him, the star of the tale is Judah, who led the Maccabees in winning religious freedom for his people.
No one's to say, however, that women weren't more involved, and the Poppy Seed Players, the resident theater troupe at the Elaine Kaufman Cultural Center, have imagined how one might have been.
She is Judy, a kind of Hebrew Joan of Arc who leaves her father's house at the age of 15 to seek out Judah and his band.


Holiday Noises, Joyful and Otherwise, on Disk
Here are reviews of 21 Christmas albums selected by New York Times pop critics.
The suggested list prices are given. (An introduction by Jon Pareles appears on page C1.) Chris Stamey and Friends
"CHRISTMAS TIME" (East Side Digital ESD 80812, CD $14.98; no cassette).
The dB's, Big Star and various associates keep power pop alive on "Christmas Time," an assortment of familiar songs and new ones.
From Phil Spector-style pop-rock (Cathy Harrington's blissful "Sha La La") to gunfighter parody ("The Only Law That Santa Claus Understood," by Ted Lyons) to tuneful power pop ("You're What I Want for Christmas," by Chris Stamey and Ms. Harrington) to punk-pop sarcasm ("I've got that holiday spirit -- gimme gimme gimme gimme gimme," the dB's sing in "Holiday Spirit"), the album is a genial grab bag, mixed but good-spirited.
JON PARELES


Borden's Board Ousts Chief to Calm Investors
Seeking to avert a showdown with several big shareholders before the company's annual meeting in April, the board of Borden Inc. dismissed its chief executive yesterday, making him the latest casualty of a revolution in corporate governance that has shaken up executive suites from Eastman Kodak to Westinghouse Electric.
Borden, the food and chemical company whose products include Cracker Jack and Elmer's glue, announced late yesterday that Ervin R. Shames, its newly hired president and chief operating officer, would immediately replace Anthony S. D'Amato as chief executive, while Frank J. Tasco, a director, would assume Mr.
D'Amato's duties as chairman.


On Stage, and Off
First Thoughts on the Tonys
Of course it's premature, with half a season to go, but hey, handicapping the Tony Awards is a year-round sport.
Besides, by now the outline of the season has begun to unblur, and this is the time of year that cagey producers of yet-to-open shows start analyzing the competition.
The first question is where the nominees for best play are going to come from.
Aside from Tony Kushner's "Perestroika" and Neil Simon's "Laughter on the 23d Floor," none of the other new plays to open this fall are likely to last even through the year's end.
"Wonderful Tennessee," the most artful of the fall's failures, closed so quickly that the producers never even got around to inviting Tony voters to see it, and according to a new rule this year, that makes the show ineligible for any awards.


San Salvador Journal; At 62, He's Political Novice (but a Polished Rebel)
In a sort of coming-out speech before a Rotary Club gathering after the conclusion of the peace accords last year, Schafik Handal, the longtime leader of the Salvadoran Communist Party, soon found himself lecturing his business audience on the long history of strife in this country.
After nearly two hours of professorial oratory, the listeners, some irritated, many bored, had to be prodded by organizers to ask a few questions before the luncheon broke up.
As he left, Mr.
Handal, at 62 the dean of El Salvador's guerrilla leaders, asked a journalist his impression of how badly things had gone.


Holiday Noises, Joyful and Otherwise, on Disk
Here are reviews of 21 Christmas albums selected by New York Times pop critics.
The suggested list prices are given. (An introduction by Jon Pareles appears on page C1.) David Foster
"THE CHRISTMAS ALBUM" (Interscope 7-92295-2, cassette $10.98, CD $16.98).
David Foster, who works with Barbra Streisand, Whitney Houston and Michael Bolton, is currently the most in-demand producer and arranger of high-toned adult pop.
His Christmas album is a grandly formal Hollywood production in which 11 pop stars sing holiday tunes and carols with lavish, gussied-up arrangements that aspire to a pop-symphonic elevation.


Tarnished in Tokyo
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa rode into office in August like a knight in shining armor, brandishing optimistic oratory as he promised to hack away at the corrupt old order and sweep out a host of burdensome regulations.
Even the financial markets, depressed for more than three years, stirred to the confident oratory of the first Prime Minister drawn from outside the Liberal Democratic Party in 38 years.
But if there has been a message in the stock market's worryingly steep decline in recent weeks, it is that oratory is no longer enough, many analysts here say.


Review/Photography; Images of Blacks When They Were Mostly Invisible
Few artists' careers follow as neat a trajectory as historians and critics might like.
The photographs of Consuelo Kanaga, now on view in a fascinating show at the Brooklyn Museum, offer vivid proof.
In the course of her long career, Kanaga, who died in 1978 at the age of 83, pursued many different directions, from newspaper photography to still lifes.
But the diversity of Kanaga's interests doesn't obscure the intertwined central themes of her work.
She was an especially graceful portraitist, and applied her abilities with considerable imagination to create insightful pictures of black people, at a time when they were relegated to the margins of American society.


A Senator Paralyzes Transit Planning
The New York State Legislature approved a five-year plan in April for $9.6 billion in mass transit projects for New York City and its suburbs.
But the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has yet to get approval to commit the funds.
The chief obstacle is Senator Norman Levy, who has held up the plan in a power play to siphon off money for Long Island.
After the plan was approved in the spring, it went to the three-member state review board that keeps an eye on the agency's long-term funding, to make sure it is well managed and properly financed.
Unanimous approval by the board is required, and was anticipated -- until Senator Levy stepped in.
A Republican, he heads the Senate Transportation Committee and is the board's Senate member.


ARAFAT AND PERES CONFER ON ACCORD
In the face of discord at the negotiating table and increasing violence in the Israeli-occupied territories, the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman, Yasir Arafat, and the Israeli Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, met for over an hour today to try to keep the agreement signed in Washington together.
Mr.
Arafat and Mr.
Peres, after 75 minutes of talks, refused to offer much insight into what they had discussed.
But Israeli officials said that the meeting had been "tense" and that the Foreign Minister wanted to confer with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin before making any comments.


U.S. Specifies Highways Eligible for Upgrading
Hoping to stop Congress from using Federal transportation money for pet projects, the Clinton Administration today identified 159,000 miles of highways as strategically important and said only those roads would qualify for more than $14 billion in improvements through 1997.
The proposed system, which requires Congressional approval, includes the 45,000-mile Interstate highway system, highways deemed necessary for defense and those that serve regional travel and provide access to airports, Amtrak stations, public transportation systems, water ports and freight terminals.


Holiday Noises, Joyful and Otherwise, on Disk
Here are reviews of 21 Christmas albums selected by New York Times pop critics.
The suggested list prices are given. (An introduction by Jon Pareles appears on page C1.) Various Artists
"A CABARET CHRISTMAS" (DRG 91415, cassette $9.98, CD $14.98).
This collection of 15 Christmas songs, performed by the cream of New York's cabaret world, is as fine an introduction as any to the city's traditional nightclub singers.
Outstanding cuts include Ann Hampton Callaway's luscious interpretation of "A Christmas Love Song," a little-known ballad by Johnny Mandel and Marilyn and Alan Bergman; Mary Cleere Haran's sultry "What Are You Doing New Year's Eve?," and Barbara Cook's "White Christmas," which includes the seldom-heard opening verse.
Karen Akers imbues David Shire and Richard Maltby Jr.'s "I Don't Remember Christmas" with just the right tone of neurotic angst.
But a harmonization of "Silent Night" by Ms.
Akers and Andrea Marcovicci grates on the ear.
Throughout, the settings for piano, bass and drums are intimate and unobtrusive.
STEPHEN HOLDEN


M.R.I. Scanner Industry Faces a Shakeout
When Alan Winakor first got into the business of owning and operating magnetic resonance imaging scanners in New York during the 1980's, the machines -- which can take sophisticated pictures of the brain and other body parts -- were a sure-fire way to make money.
Private insurers gladly paid more than $1,000 for the test, which recent studies have suggested can cost only $300 to perform.
And doctors were liberally ordering this risk-free exam to diagnose an ever-growing range of medical conditions, from brain tumors to knee cartilage tears.


A People's Charter on Human Rights
An honest stock-taking on Human Rights Day is necessarily dismaying.
Think only of Sarajevo, Port-au-Prince and Mogadishu, the most visible venues of a huge global crisis over rudimentary decencies.
But nowadays few can plead ignorance as violators squirm under the scrutiny of vociferous monitoring groups.
That wasn't the case on Dec. 10, 1948, when the United Nations adopted its Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The hopes ignited by the declaration were mocked by tyrannies and dictatorships, all asserting that their abuses were an internal affair.
With the end of the cold war and third-world bloc voting, the U.N. can no longer indulge that excuse.
On Monday, for example, a General Assembly committee censured abuses in Iran, Cuba, Iraq, the Sudan, Myanmar and the former Yugoslavia.
Each resolution could have been stronger, but that they were adopted at all marks a fundamental improvement in the world's behavior.


Reviews/Film; Doubts About a Husband Who May Be a Serial Killer
"The Hawk" is a small, efficient English thriller that plays off the question: How well do you know the people closest to you?
Helen Mirren plays a suburban housewife named Annie, who begins to suspect that her husband, Stephen, is a serial killer called the Hawk.
Stephen always happens to be traveling on business when the Hawk strikes; the murder weapon is a hammer, possibly like the one Annie can't find around the house; worst of all, the Hawk preys on women with two children, just like Annie.
Ms.
Mirren is the centerpiece of the film, in a role that might be the reverse image of her best-known part, Inspector Jane Tennison on the television series "Prime Suspect." Instead of playing a fiercely confident detective, here she is a befuddled woman trying to be strong: tortured by doubts, short on self-esteem, stuck in a bad marriage.
In one smartly detailed and affecting scene, when Annie goes out to dinner she dresses garishly wrong and is humiliated by her drunken husband.


Joyful Noises From CD Players
IN modern America, Christmas is a spiritual celebration linked to a commercial bonanza.
The holiday's ever-shifting proportions of good intentions and good business make it close kin to American popular music.
Christmas carols sung by family and friends are an occasion for communal feeling and shared homemade musicality; Christmas carols sung for CD release are, inevitably, a commodity.
Every year brings an outpouring of pop Christmas albums, each one a kind of concept album staking a different spot on the continuum between Christmas and Kitschmas.
Musicians know that a few lucky Christmas albums -- Phil Spector's "Christmas Gift for You," Willie Nelson's "Pretty Paper" -- become perennial favorites; the rest are embarrassing for only a month or two.
Some performers try personal, often melancholy reflections on the season; others lend their voices and instruments to some of the most familiar songs in American culture.


Telephone Threat After Blast Is Played at World Trade Center Bombing Trial
The speaker had an accent and he spoke with exaggerated slowness, as if trying to make sure that he would be understood despite it.
"Hi," he said, and paused.
"This is the Liberation Army." Another pause.
"We conducted the explosion at the World Trade Center. You will get our demands in the mail."


Don't Forget Saberhagen Yet
Bret Saberhagen remains a member of the Mets.
Should his status go unchanged for the next 24 hours, it is very likely that the marquee right-hander won't be headed anywhere until spring at the earliest.
The Mets, who yesterday experienced yet one more counterproductive day of negotiations with the Indians, have no other ready-to-go trade options involving the two-time Cy Young winner.


NEC TO INVEST $65 MILLION IN BULL COMPUTER CONCERN
The NEC Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to invest about $65 million more in Compagnie des Machines Bull, the ailing French computer company in which NEC has owned a small stake since 1984.
The investment is a gesture of support for the efforts by the French Government, which owns a majority stake in Bull, to inject more than $1 billion in new capital into the money-losing company.


Giuliani Urges More Support For Police as Role Is Redefined
In his first major speech since the November election, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani called on New Yorkers yesterday to give more support to the city's police officers as he moves to redefine their role and asks them to be more aggressive about crime prevention.
Mr.
Giuliani, who made crime a centerpiece of his campaign, also repeated his calls for the death penalty and for a uniform Federal gun-licensing law in the wake of the Long Island Rail Road shootings on Tuesday.
Asked by a questioner whether "in effect your proposal could lead to more New Yorkers having guns but these would be decent, well-trained New Yorkers?" he replied, "It could lead to that result, which would be a socially beneficial one."


CHRONICLE
"It's home away from Rome," ADELE CHATFIELD-TAYLOR said as she greeted about 600 guests on Wednesday at a housewarming party for the American Academy in Rome's new outpost in New York.
Ms.
Chatfield-Taylor is president of the academy, a center for the study of arts and humanities.
It awards an annual prize to 28 fellows, granting them room, board and a place to work in Rome for a year.


PENTAGON FIGHTS BUDGET OFFICIALS OVER $50 BILLION
After drafting an ambitious post-cold-war strategy, the Pentagon finds itself $50 billion short of what it needs to carry out the plan and in a skirmish with the White House budget director over the money.
The dispute has been going on behind the scenes for weeks.
But it broke into the open today, when Leon E. Panetta, the director of the Office of Management and Budget, confirmed that the Defense Department would be short $40 billion to $50 billion over the next five years.
With President Clinton trying to cut the Federal budget, Mr.
Panetta said he did not expect a change would be made in next year's Pentagon spending request.


Restaurants
In one of her best stories, America's finest food writer, M. F. K. Fisher, tells of walking into a deserted restaurant in Burgundy and fearing for her life.
As a waitress serves her an extraordinary meal, Fisher begins to realize that she is in the hands of a food-obsessed fanatic.
By the time the waitress announces that "any trout is glad, truly glad, to be prepared by Monsieur Paul," Fisher has stopped trying to refuse the next course.
Each is more delicious than the last.
"I ate it all," she writes, "knowing my luck."
Still, hours later when she leaves the restaurant, she is surprised to find herself among the living.
Americans are not comfortable in temples of food.
That is probably why so many people find Chanterelle "pretentious."


CHRONICLE
Donning a Pittsburgh Steelers cap to transform himself into an average American worker named "Bill," NORMAN LEAR searched for the meaning of life yesterday in a talk at a National Press Club luncheon in Washington.
"Let's try to imagine what's going on in the heart and the mind of the average American worker," Mr.
Lear said to 150 members of the Press Club.
Then, as "Bill," he continued:


Yeltsin Campaigns for Yeltsin And Not for Mere Politicians
One curious aspect of Russia's first full-fledged election campaign is that the country's leading political figure, President Boris N. Yeltsin, has ostentatiously stayed aloof from the race, neither forming a party nor endorsing any of the 13 blocs competing for seats in Parliament.
When Mr.
Yeltsin did finally address the electorate on television this evening, it was to issue an impassioned plea to support his draft constitution, which has come under considerable fire for giving the President too much power.
Unless the constitution is adopted, he warned, the new Parliament will collapse into new power struggles and Russia could again come to the brink of civil war.
The President seemed almost disdainful of the race for Parliament, and his only advice to voters was to support "responsible and honest" candidates and not those filled with hate.


Young to Rice: Post-Montana Perfection
Steve Young's passes sting more than Joe Montana's, but Jerry Rice has decided to catch them anyway.
Their quarterback-receiver relationship has evolved from indifference, to civility, to sharing chips and salsa, to touchdowns every other possession.
The San Francisco 49ers score points as if they're playing flag football, and this corresponds to the sudden synchronization of Young and Rice.
Montana may be in Kansas City, but Young and Rice are in the end zone.
They are playing pinball football and only concussions can stop them.


The Jordan-less Bulls Aren't Seen as Pushover
The Chicago Bulls make their first appearance in the New York area Friday night with a game against the Nets in the Meadowlands.
And although the three-time defending champions might appear in disarray without Michael Jordan -- their 8-8 record includes a loss to the last-place Philadelphia 76ers Wednesday night -- Nets Coach Chuck Daly thinks otherwise.
"That was a back-to-back, and who wins back-to-back except maybe New York and Phoenix," said Daly, referring to the fact that the Bulls played on consecutive nights, beating the L.A.
Clippers in Chicago on Tuesday night before flying into Philadelphia and getting knocked off by the struggling Sixers, the only team doing worse than New Jersey in the Atlantic Division.


Level Producer Prices Show Inflation at Bay
Despite a spirited surge in the economy, inflation remains at bay.
Prices obtained by American producers for finished goods showed no change in November, the Labor Department reported today, as increases for food and cars were about offset by declines for energy and tobacco.


The Road Ahead: A Faster Trip on the West Side


Art in Review
Francesca Woodman
Pace-MacGill Gallery  32 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Jan. 15
It's hard not to interpret Francesca Woodman's brooding photographs, an extensive selection of which is presented here, in light of her subsequent fate.
In 1981, at the age of 23 and at the beginning of a promising career, Woodman killed herself.


NO MORE OFFERS, NORTH KOREA SAYS
North Korea said today that its offer to the United States to open a limited number of sites to nuclear inspection was the "largest concession" it could make, and warned that if it was turned down the North would conclude that Washington "no longer has the intention to continue dialogue."
The statement by the North Korean Foreign Ministry seemed to heighten the standoff with the Clinton Administration.
At the same time, though, the North seemed to offer hope of some further progress, saying that once the two countries agreed on a "package solution" -- shorthand for economic aid and moves toward diplomatic recognition -- it would agree to full inspection of the sites it had declared to the International Atomic Energy Agency.


Review/Art; Korean Works Coming to Terms With the West
"Where do we come from? What are we? Where are we going?" These are the questions Paul Gauguin put into the mouths of the men and women of Tahiti in one of his most renowned paintings.
A century later, they are still being asked by non-Westerners whose lives have been changed -- as the Tahitians were -- by Western culture.
They are certainly the questions posed by the stimulating, if uneven, exhibition at the Queens Museum of Art titled "Across the Pacific: Contemporary Korean Art and Contemporary Korean-American Art." And the answers suggested are surprisingly varied, given the show's curatorial restrictions.
For "Across the Pacific" is very far from being a representative survey of new art in Korea today.
It is instead a narrowly focused exhibition stressing the same political themes of ethnic and sexual identity that have been ubiquitous among New York artists in the last few years.


Art in Review
Bill Jensen
Mary Boone Gallery  417 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Dec. 23
Bill Jensen at Mary Boone.
What's wrong with this picture?
Not as much as you might think.
Having previously shown his work at Joan Washburn's gallery, Mr.
Jensen developed, and nurtured, a reputation that would make him seem the very antithesis of an artist who should switch to the Boone gallery, which, perhaps more than any other, epitomized the spirit of the 1980's art scene.
His painstakingly slow working process, his emphasis on small works that owe a debt to the likes of Ryder, Hartley and Dove, his intimate and darkling images that demand patience and offer in return something quiet and hard-won, but never anything flashy or spectacular, defined Mr.
Jensen as the un-Schnabel.
The un-Schnabel has now gone to the gallery that launched Julian Schnabel's career.


Tree Lighting Is a First Family Affair


AIDS Drug Research
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 1 news article on the Administration's new working group on AIDS drug development strategy quotes Health and Human Services Secretary Donna E. Shalala as saying "not a single new drug application for an anti-retroviral drug" is before the Food and Drug Administration.
This could mislead readers into thinking the pharmaceutical industry is lax in its anti-AIDS research effort, and that important drug research is done not by industry but by Government.


Suspect's Quiet Roots in Jamaica Suburb
Colin Ferguson, the Brooklyn man charged with shooting 23 commuters on a Long Island Rail Road train on Tuesday, grew up in a placid, affluent suburb here and lived a comfortable life as a child, acquaintances said today.
So when they heard that he was accused of killing 5 people and wounding 18 others -- while carrying handwritten notes professing hatred for whites, Asians and "Uncle Tom" blacks -- it was difficult for them to grasp what had shaped his attitudes.


Vote in Russia Gives Women Leverage
For the early-morning crowd in the women's locker room at the Olympic Swimming Pool, conversation has switched from cold remedies and perfect grandchildren to politics and more politics.
The women, who arrive before sunrise to take advantage of the discount admission for senior citizens, treat Russia's parliamentary elections on Sunday as a personal milestone.
And as pensioners and women, they sense they are the valuable catch that many parties and independent candidates are trying to hook.


Holiday Noises, Joyful and Otherwise, on Disk
Here are reviews of 21 Christmas albums selected by New York Times pop critics.
The suggested list prices are given. (An introduction by Jon Pareles appears on page C1.) Harry Connick Jr.
"WHEN MY HEART FINDS CHRISTMAS" (Columbia 57550, cassette $10.98, CD $16.98).
In this appealing mixture of big-band swing and pop sentiment, Mr.
Connick assumes almost every musical task.
He sings, plays the piano and conducts the band in his own arrangements.
The 14 songs include four originals, each strikingly different.
"When My Heart Finds Christmas" is an all-purpose holiday ballad, and "It Must've Been Ol' Santa Claus" is an amusing novelty about a cynical grown-up who learns to believe in Santa Claus.
"The Blessed Dawn of Christmas Day" is a religious carol, and "I Pray on Christmas" a doo-wop style ballad.
High points include a punchily swinging "Sleigh Ride" and a playful "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer" in which Mr.
Connick sings call-and-response with a children's chorus.
There are also some heavy-handed moments; the most glaring is Mr.
Connick's turgid, dissonant string arrangement for "What Child Is This?" But on the whole, the album maintains a delightful balance between fun and reverence.
STEPHEN HOLDEN


Adelphi Recalls a Student Driven by Rage and Suspended for Making Threats
In the year he spent as a student at Adelphi University, Colin Ferguson appeared obsessed, tending to see racist slights in otherwise unremarkable encounters and raging against coexistence with whites, people who knew him at the university recalled today.
"Race was an obsession with him," said Hugh Wilson, director of the school's suburban studies department, who spoke a few times with Mr.
Ferguson.
"There was a sense that one had that this was someone who could snap," Dr.
Wilson added.
He said that when he heard that Mr.
Ferguson had been arrested for opening fire on the commuter train, he was "not totally surprised."


Don't Forget the Turkey Tetrazzini
To the Editor:
Your Thanksgiving Day editorial on turkeys flew like a turkey itself in maintaining that the navigators of Queen Isabella's time believed Turkey was in Africa ("Click, Click. Gobble, Gobble," Nov. 25).


He's Down in the Polls, but Perot Warns a Health Care Fight Looms
In a warning to the political world not to count him out, Ross Perot said today that he expected to keep himself as visible as ever next year and made clear that President Clinton's health care proposal might be a major target.
Even after he said he had not decided whether he would support any of the various health proposals that had been floated, Mr.
Perot immediately began criticizing the Administration's package.


Holiday Noises, Joyful and Otherwise, on Disk
Here are reviews of 21 Christmas albums selected by New York Times pop critics.
The suggested list prices are given. (An introduction by Jon Pareles appears on page C1.)  "CHRISTMAS MAGIC: INSTRUMENTAL HOLIDAY FAVORITES" (Capitol 89588, cassette $10.98, CD $15.98).
Dispense with the cult of personality that pop singers imply and go straight to the instrumental versions.
Not all of this is hopeless trash, only most of it; there's a track by Les Paul, "Santa Claus Is Comin' to Town," loaded with special effects that in no way is close to the price of admission.
But it's better than nothing.
PETER WATROUS


At the Bar; Portrait of a scrappy lawyer leaves the subject unflattered, and trying to remove some warts.
To most of the thousand-plus lawyers at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, Lincoln Caplan writes in his newly published study of New York's largest and most dazzling law firm, Messrs.
Skadden, Arps, Slate and Meagher were but syllables on the letterhead.
Joe Flom was the man who mattered.
As Mr.
Caplan recounts in "Skadden: Power, Money and the Rise of a Legal Empire" (Farrar, Straus, Giroux), Joseph Flom is the lawyer who changed Skadden, Arps from a candy store to a cash cow, built largely on the merger mania of the 1980's.
Mr.
Flom's firm was either in the thick of these takeovers or retained by potential targets so that potential predators could not hire it -- a practice known as "sterilizing Joe."


No Special Deal for Mr. Pollard
Jonathan Jay Pollard sold American intelligence secrets to Israel, motivated, he said, by concern for Israel's survival and by the attraction of almost $50,000 in cash.
Sentenced to life in prison, he has served nearly eight years.
The sentence was just and there is no reason to re-evaluate the case until he comes up for parole in late 1995.
But rather than wait, the Israeli Government and a number of Americans, both Jewish and non-Jewish, want President Clinton to grant early clemency to Mr.
Pollard.
The White House is expected to announce its decision shortly, after studying a Justice Department review.


Corrections
An obituary on Nov. 29 about Bernard V. Bothmer, a department chairman at the Brooklyn Museum, misstated the period he was in charge of ancient Middle Eastern art.
It was mid-1979 to 1982.


Havel Calls The Gypsies 'Litmus Test'
To President Vaclav Havel, the hardships faced by Eastern Europe's Gypsy populations, like violence against foreigners, are rooted in the lack of preparation by people to assume the responsibilities of freedom after living under repressive governments for so long.
"I have often compared the condition of our society, of all societies that have rid themselves of Communism, to the post-penitentiary condition of someone released from prison," Mr.
Havel said recently in an interview in Prague Castle, the presidential office.
"Something I have experienced a number of times myself."


British and Irish Prime Ministers To Confer Again on Ulster Today
Hoping to nudge peace efforts in Northern Ireland forward, Prime Ministers John Major of Britain and Albert Reynolds of Ireland are to meet for the second time in a week on Friday, searching for a formula that could pave the way for talks including the Irish Republican Army.
But after several days of closed-door discussions and telephone negotiations between Dublin and London, diplomats and Government officials say they do not expect a breakthrough when the leaders meet in Brussels, on the sidelines of a European summit meeting.


Holiday Noises, Joyful and Otherwise, on Disk
Here are reviews of 21 Christmas albums selected by New York Times pop critics.
The suggested list prices are given. (An introduction by Jon Pareles appears on page C1.) John Fahey
"THE NEW POSSIBILITY" (Rhino R2-71437, cassette $10.98, CD $15.98).
The reissue of an old favorite, John Fahey's solo guitar versions of the familiar carols, has been augmented by the addition of most of "Christmas With John Fahey (Vol. II)," which includes guitar solos and duets.
Mr.
Fahey's leisurely finger-picking (emulated by Bruce Cockburn in "Christmas") honors the old melodies by making them seem like everyday natural sights, just beyond the front porch.
JON PARELES


Mediators Cancel Meeting of Bosnian Foes After Government Balks
The international mediators trying to end the conflict in Bosnia today abruptly canceled a meeting between the warring parties that they had planned on Sunday in Greece after the Bosnian Government said it would not attend.
But diplomats reported that Lord Owen, the European Community's mediator, and Thorvald Stoltenberg, who represents the United Nations, hope they can bring Serbian, Croatian and Muslim leaders together for another meeting about Dec. 20 that could produce a peace settlement.


Inside Art
Art and Libel
What began as an international art scandal has landed in State Supreme Court in Manhattan as a libel case.
The uproar centers around a Dec. 24, 1991, article in The Wall Street Journal with the headline "For That Price, Why Not Have the Whole Museum Repainted?" and a Dec. 30, 1991, article in the international edition of Time magazine titled "Was a Masterpiece Murdered?"
The masterpiece in question is "Who's Afraid of Red, Yellow and Blue III," an 8-by-18-foot painting from 1967 by the American artist Barnett Newman, consisting of a large field of red flanked by strips of blue and yellow.
The painting, which belongs to the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam and has been valued at $3.1 million, was slashed eight times horizontally and vertically by a vandal in 1986.
At the time, some Dutch art experts thought it had been damaged beyond repair.


Holiday Noises, Joyful and Otherwise, on Disk
Here are reviews of 21 Christmas albums selected by New York Times pop critics.
The suggested list prices are given. (An introduction by Jon Pareles appears on page C1.) Carnie and Wendy Wilson
"HEY SANTA!" (SBK K2-27113, cassette $10.98, CD $16.98).
Brian Wilson's daughters -- Wilson Phillips without Chynna Phillips -- hurtle back toward creamy, hermetic Christmas pop from the 1950's and 60's.
The Wilsons' versions of songs like "Silver Bells" and "Jingle Bell Rock" aim somewhere between Phil Spector's Christmas album and the collected works of Doris Day.
But while the singing is less robotic than it is on Wilson Phillips' albums, the creepy complacency of the music can't help reminding listeners that when the Wilson sisters sing "Let It Snow, Let It Snow, Let It Snow," they're in Los Angeles.
JON PARELES


Murder Trial in Canada Stirs Press Freedom Fight
An Ontario judge's order banning news reports about a trial concerning a particularly grisly murder has stirred a debate here about press freedom and set the stage for a constitutional challenge that might reduce the power of judges to issue similar gag orders.
The issue is one faced often in the United States: the balancing of a free press with a defendant's right to a fair trial.
Because of different history and traditions, trial judges in Canada have come down harder against press freedom than their counterparts across the border.


Art in Review
Robert Adams  'Los Angeles Spring'
Lowinsky Gallery  578 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Jan. 29
For the first show in its new space, this gallery is offering a selection of Robert Adams's melancholy landscapes of the Los Angeles area, most of which date from the late 1970's and early 80's.
Accompanying these are recent seascapes taken at the mouth of the Columbia River in Oregon.


Market Place; How to play the new chip, PowerPC? Apple gets a vote.
THE new chip jointly developed by I.B.M., Motorola and Apple, the PowerPC, is a tantalizing product for investors.
It is being billed as "twice the performance of Pentium, for half the price," a market challenge to Intel's newest microprocessor for desktop computers.
The slogan contains a measure of hyperbole, but computer and chip analysts agree that the new chip poses the first serious challenge to Intel's position as the industry standard.


Holiday Noises, Joyful and Otherwise, on Disk
Here are reviews of 21 Christmas albums selected by New York Times pop critics.
The suggested list prices are given. (An introduction by Jon Pareles appears on page C1.)  "AN UPTOWN CHRISTMAS" (Uptown 2733, CD $14.98).
Uptown, a small jazz label, seems to have recorded a Christmas song at every session it has done, which means that this album features Charlie Rouse playing "We Three Kings," Carl Fontana and Al Cohn on "Winter Wonderland," Johnny Coles and Frank Wess on "I'll Be Home for Christmas" and Sahib Shihab on "Silent Night." The rhythm sections usually include some of jazz's finest pianists, with Barry Harris, Kenny Barron, Walter Davis Jr. and Tommy Flanagan all showing up.
It's swinging music that moves right along after the melodies have been dispensed with.
And some of the melodies, like Rouse's version of "We Three Kings," come off as abstract and modern.
PETER WATROUS


Critic's Choice/Pop; Mending an Aching Heart
"Anodyne," the title of Uncle Tupelo's new album, is defined by the American Heritage Dictionary as a soothing or pain-relieving agent.
For Uncle Tupelo, a trio from Belleville, Ill., who will perform this weekend in Hoboken, N.J., it's a code word for the kind of music that makes you feel better.
The band's two lead singers and songwriters, Jay Farrar and Jeff Tweedy, have an obvious affinity for some of the most soul-stirring moments in country and rock history: "Anodyne" (Sire/ Reprise) has the rustic lilt of an old Hank Williams tune, the harmonic grace of the Flying Burrito Brothers, the loose rumble of the Rolling Stones' "Exile on Main Street."
From the pointedly unpolished production, crackling with fiddle, mandolin and pedal steel guitar, to songs like "Chickamauga" (named after the Civil War battle site), "Anodyne" is intentionally retro, an homage to mythically purer times.
Mr.
Farrar and Mr.
Tweedy's allegiance to their roots borders on fetishism: they have even written an ode to Acuff-Rose, the company that published Hank Williams's material.
"Name me a song that everybody knows, and I'll bet you it belongs to Acuff-Rose," Mr.
Tweedy sings in his self-effacing twang.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the main front-page article on Saturday, about the Government's employment report for November, misidentified the Labor Department survey that showed a gain of 208,000 payroll jobs in the month.
It was the survey of employers, not households; the separate household survey determines the unemployment rate.


Genesee Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Delaware Court Ruling Aids QVC In Struggle to Acquire Paramount
In a sweeping victory for QVC Network Inc., the Delaware Supreme Court said today that Paramount Communications had not been fair to its shareholders when it accepted a takeover offer from Viacom Inc. while blocking a higher bid from QVC.
Clearing the way for a new round of bidding, the state's highest court upheld a lower court's decision that struck down defensive tactics by Paramount that made it prohibitively expensive for a rival bidder like QVC to acquire the giant media company, which owns a leading Hollywood studio, a publishing arm, the New York Knicks basketball team and the New York Rangers hockey team.
The three-justice panel, which issued its 11-page order only hours after hearing the case, also chastised Paramount's board for not giving the QVC offer proper consideration. 'Stinging Rebuke'
"This is a stinging rebuke to the Paramount management and board for not taking shareholder rights seriously," said Larry Cunningham, professor of law at the Benjamin N. Cardoza School of Law at Yeshiva University in New York.
"In recent years, Delaware courts have wavered between protecting management and supporting shareholders. This decision is clearly intended to support shareholder rights."


Charter Power Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Robert B. Mitchell, 87, City Planning Scholar
Robert Buchanan Mitchell, emeritus Professor of City and Regional Planning at the University of Pennsylvania, died on Nov. 29 in Philadelphia, where he lived.
He was 87.
The cause was thought to have been a massive heart attack, the university said.


Anthony Travia Sr., 82, Is Dead; Was Assembly Speaker in Albany
Anthony J. Travia Sr., who served as Speaker of the New York State Assembly from 1965 to 1968, died on Tuesday at Vassar Brothers Hospital in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
He was 82.
Mr.
Travia was a Democrat from the East New York section of Brooklyn.
He was first elected to the Assembly in 1943 and served as minority leader from 1959 to 1965, when he was elected Speaker.


Aerosonic Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about the fatal shootings aboard a Long Island Rail Road train referred incorrectly in some copies to the academic record of the suspect, Colin Ferguson.
He made the dean's list at Nassau Community College, not Adelphi University, which he also attended.


Stephenson Sues Heat Over 1990 Mugging
The pro golfer JAN STEPHENSON is suing the Miami Heat over a career-threatening injury suffered in a mugging outside the team's arena in 1990.
The team was "careless and negligent" for failing to provide adequate security and proper lighting in nearby parking lots known as "a haven for dangerous and disreputable persons," the suit charged.
Stephenson's ring finger was broken when a robber stole her ring and a purse containing $1,200 in a parking lot after she left a Phoenix-Miami game Jan. 23, 1990.


A Downside of Mail-Order Mania
A bright red stamp in the middle of the cover of the latest J. Peterman catalogue entices last-minute shoppers with a promise that orders placed by noon on Dec. 23 will arrive in time for Christmas.
Wolferman's, a mail-order company that sells baked goods, has mailed a postcard guaranteeing customers delivery in time for Christmas.


Review/Film; A Piece of the Action Or a Piece of His Hide
The title character of Nick Mead's terminally whimsical satire, "Bank Robber," is a handsome thief named Billy (Patrick Dempsey), who, whenever he needs money, simply dresses up in a fancy business suit and holds up a bank.
As the movie begins, Billy has decided that it's time to retire.
All he needs is enough money to buy the sloop of his dreams and sail off into a tropical sunset with his girlfriend, Selina (Olivia D'Abo).
Billy pulls off his final heist but makes one fatal mistake.
He fails to destroy a surveillance camera.
No sooner has he hid out in the Heartbreak Hotel than he finds his own image flashed on the television news.


TV Weekend; Midler Takes Her Turn In Mama Rose's Spot
Everything's coming up roses?
As far as Bette Midler is concerned, absolutely.
An extensive concert tour, "Experience the Divine," has reaped rave reviews and lively ticket sales.
She won an Emmy Award for singing to Johnny Carson on his next-to-last "Tonight Show" appearance.
And now she looks like a shoo-in for another Emmy for her powerhouse, all-systems-are-go performance as Mama Rose in CBS's splendid re-creation of the 1959 Broadway musical "Gypsy." The special three-hour broadcast, Sunday at 8 P.M., perfectly defines the concept of event television.
The first Mama Rose was Ethel Merman, using her last appearance in a Broadway show to crown a legendary career with her most memorable performance.
In the process, she bequeathed a fearsome hurdle to all subsequent productions.
A movie version of "Gypsy," starring Rosalind Russell, never stood a chance.
Some stage productions, most notably those starring Angela Lansbury and Tyne Daly, held their own admirably.
But the special Merman imprint lingered as a kind of theatrical Everest that would never be scaled in quite the same way again.
Until now.


A Meeting With Cuomo Brings Out the Critics
For years Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has waxed poetic about the importance of participatory democracy.
But today he got a tart taste of what can happen when there is a New England-style town hall meeting at the Capitol.
Mr.
Cuomo had been asked to address a conference organized by Terry Anderson, the former hostage, and his group, the Alliance for a New York Renaissance.
In the room were two dozen advocates for a wide range of government reforms, including term limits, stronger ethics codes and campaign finance restrictions.


Shoplifting an Accident, Capriati Says of Charge
Jennifer Capriati, who decided late this summer to take a temporary break from her tennis career and its attendant celebrity, found herself unhappily back in the headlines yesterday after being issued a citation on a charge of shoplifting jewelry at a suburban Tampa, Fla., shopping mall.
According to Capriati's father, Stefano; her agent, Barbara Perry, and a vendor interviewed on television, the incident occurred when Capriati and a friend tried on several inexpensive rings at a jeweler's kiosk at the Tampa Bay Mall Thursday evening.
Capriati, who was already wearing several rings of her own, left the kiosk without returning at least one of the rings she had been sampling.


Jewel Thieves Scout Victims While Dining
Two well-dressed men have been using some of the nicest restaurants on the Upper East Side of Manhattan as their private hunting ground, dining and drinking while scouting for victims, and then following women with expensive jewelry and robbing them at gunpoint, the police said yesterday.
Investigators said they were looking for two men who they believe have made off with more than $500,000 worth of jewelry from four robberies.
In an additional robbery attempt, a man was shot trying to prevent the theft of his wife's diamond ring, the police said.
In all but the first case, the police believe the victims, ranging in age from 42 to 67, were chosen as they sat in restaurants.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL No. 16 Illinois Wins  Deon Thomas scored 26 points and moved into second place on the school's career scoring list as 16th-ranked Illinois beat Morehead State, 110-75, in the opening game of the Illini Classic last night in Champaign, Ill.
Thomas, a senior center, moved past Mark Smith on Illinois' scoring list with 1,670 points, only 21 behind Eddie Johnson.
Thomas could take over the top spot during today's championship game.
Illinois (3-1) will play American University, which defeated Tennessee-Martin, 99-81. (AP) Rutgers Faces Cincinnati: Charles Jones scored 19 points to lead Rutgers (3-2) past Boise State, 71-50, in the first round of the Bearcat Classic in Cincinnati.
The Scarlet Knights will play in the championship game today against No. 20 Cincinnati, which defeated Cleveland State, 92-70.
For the Bearcats, the freshmen Dontonio Wingfield and Damon Flint keyed a pair of six-minute bursts as Cincinnati (5-1) wore down Cleveland State. (AP) Tulane Turns Back Princeton: Carlin Hartman scored 20 points and Tulane adjusted to a slowed-down tempo to beat Princeton, 56-51, in the first round of the Otis Spunkmeyer Classic at Oakland, Calif.
Princeton (3-3) dictated the tempo, but the Green Wave adjusted after halftime and shot 67 percent in the second half. (AP) N.H.L.
Sabres Punish Flames  In Buffalo last night, Alexander Mogilny had three assists, and Dominik Hasek made 25 saves as the Sabres' power play cooled off Calgary, 6-2.
The victory was the third in a row for the Sabres, who moved above .500 for the first time since they won on opening night.
Calgary came in with a four-game unbeaten streak. (AP) Panthers 5, Jets 2: John Vanbiesbrouck made 37 saves in helping expansion Florida defeat Winnipeg for its third straight victory.
Goals by Gord Murphy, Jody Hull and Andrei Lomakin gave Florida a 3-0 lead before Winnipeg was able to get the puck by Vanbiesbrouck. (AP) TENNIS Sampras Defeats Chang  Pete Sampras, who usually has trouble beating Michael Chang, mastered his American rival's newly found power game and won, 7-6 (9-7), 6-3, yesterday to reach the semifinals of the $6 million Grand Slam Cup in Munich, Germany.
The victory was worth $431,250 for Sampras.
The Grand Slam Cup invites players with the best records in the four Grand Slam tournaments -- the Australian, French and United States Opens and Wimbledon. (AP) GOLF Hobday Leads Seniors  Simon Hobday of South Africa shot a bogey-free eight-under-par 64 and took a two-shot lead yesterday in the first round of the season-ending Senior Tour championship in Dorado Beach, P.R. (AP)


Kelly Has Surgery
Outfielder BOBBY KELLY should be fully recovered by the start of the 1994 season, the Cincinnati Reds said yesterday, after arthroscopic surgery for a shoulder injury.
Kelly, 29, separated his left shoulder trying to make a diving catch July 2 against Pittsburgh.
At the time, he was leading the National League in hits with 102.
He played in only one game after the injury. (AP)


Italy's Communists Come In From the Cold
Their name has changed, their ideology has died and no one is talking class struggle anymore.
But after decades of waiting for power, Italy's onetime Communists seem finally to reckon their moment has come -- too late to storm the barricades but, maybe, just in time to benefit from a different revolution.
Through the years of the cold war, Italy's Communist Party -- the largest in Western Europe -- was kept out of national office by an alliance of centrist parties who helped themselves to vast and illicit patronage from the state coffers.


Mets Acquire Seminara From San Diego
The Mets failed to make a dramatic trade yesterday, but they did make a useful one.
In the Shea Stadium universe, it amounted to not a bad day at the office.
The Mets acquired right-handed pitcher Frank Seminara and two prospects from the Padres for outfielder Randy Curtis, a prospect who was named the most valuable player of the Florida State League in 1993, and a player to be named later.


New Coach for Becker
BORIS BECKER, hoping to break out of a slump, has a new coach.
NICK BOLLETTIERI, the former coach of ANDRE AGASSI, among others, was hired yesterday as Becker's seventh coach.


Rushdie Book Insults Majority of Muslims
To the Editor:
I think your editorial "Hold the Waffles, Please" (Dec. 2) missed the point.
It is clear that you have never read "The Satanic Verses," in which Salman Rushdie clearly portrays the Prophet Mohammed's wives as prostitutes.
Every Muslim who has read the book finds it insulting.


A Commitment to Safer Schools
New York City's Schools Chancellor, Ramon Cortines, has asked Frank Mickens, a popular Brooklyn high school principal, to be his chief assistant for school security.
Mr.
Mickens is a reasonable choice for the job, since he had some responsibility for security under former Chancellor Joseph Fernandez.
One snag is that Mr.
Mickens has asked for a loftier title.
If he and Mr.
Cortines cannot agree on the matter, the Chancellor plans to look quickly for another candidate.
As well he should.
Violence is rising in the city's junior high schools.
Many high schools are having problems with a new system of automatically locking doors and computerized alarms.
The $38 million system, which is being installed in 42 high schools, is too complex for some school officials to operate and has failed some preliminary tests.


Depositors Favor Green Point Shift
At an overflowing and raucous meeting, the depositors of the Green Point Savings Bank voted yesterday to convert their mutual savings bank in Flushing, Queens, to public ownership through a $700 million stock offering.
Green Point, which escaped an unsolicited, hostile bid by the Republic New York Corporation, received more than the required 75 percent of the votes cast.
The votes were allocated by the amount each customer had on deposit.


A 2d Chance Seen Likely On Lost Aid
New York City officials passed up a chance this year to apply for millions of dollars in Federal money to rehabilitate public housing, but the Clinton Administration now says it may give the city another chance.
New York was left with only $500,000 in Federal funds from a $1 billion program to improve the nation's worst public housing projects after housing officials decided to simply ask for a limited amount of money to put together a larger rehabilitation plan.
Meanwhile, 30 other cities received major grants, totaling as much as $50 million per locality, to renovate public housing projects that are considered "severely distressed."


Man's Job Is Gone, Not Self-Respect
Felix B. first started working at the age of 9, delivering prescriptions after school for a corner druggist in Brooklyn Heights to help support his sister and his mother.
In fact, for most of his life, there was hardly ever a time when he was not holding either a part-time or full-time job.
He put himself through two years of business courses at the Fashion Institute of Technology by working as an office assistant.


Review/Music; A Singer Makes Songwriters Sound Like Neighbors
When Emmylou Harris sings, the country is a place of speed-fingered string bands, serene Nature and unspoken longings, a place where understatement can resonate.
A quiver of vibrato can express painful vulnerability; a two-note slide or a touch of graininess conveys profound desire.
Since the early 1970's, Ms.
Harris has traced her own path through country, folk, pop and rock music.
At the Beacon Theater on Thursday night, she made Chuck Berry, Jesse Winchester, Bill Monroe, Rodney Crowell, A. P. Carter and Doc Pomus and Mort Shuman sound like kindred spirits, neighbors in down-home America.
Long before Nashville discovered "new traditionalism," Ms.
Harris was simultaneously crossing genre lines and bringing her songs a pristine, idealized rural sensibility.
She chooses (and occasionally writes) songs to suit her contained, reedy mezzo-soprano, and performs them with bands that are steeped in country and mountain music.


Gathering To Mourn Lives Lost On Train
Families and friends today mourned their losses at wakes and funeral services for three of the five passengers slain by an angry stranger on the Long Island Rail Road Tuesday evening.
"She worked so hard and had so little," Kun Kim, a family friend, said of Mi Kyung Kim, the 27-year-old Korean immigrant who worked as an assistant in the mathematics library at Columbia University.
"She did not deserve such a horrible death.


Ashrawi Quits Her P.L.O. Post
Hanan Ashrawi, who gained worldwide fame as the voice of mainstream Palestinian views for the last few years, said today that she had resigned as spokeswoman for the Palestine Liberation Organization and would not accept any official position under the Palestinian self-rule that is supposed to begin in stages on Monday.
Mrs.
Ashrawi, a professor of medieval and comparative literature at Bir Zeit University in the West Bank, said she would concentrate on forming a commission to monitor and protect human rights in the Israeli-occupied territories once the P.L.O. takes charge.
She had been expected to become the organization's representative in Washington.


Letdowns Need Not Stay a Tradition
Charlie Ward is about to change forever.
The change is not coming from within.
Ward's poise, his values, his strong religious faith and his dry sense of humor should always remain intact.
But even though he may not know it, something beyond his control will happen this afternoon when he reaches the southern tip of Manhattan, arrives at the old building at 19 West Street, rides to the floor marked "H" in the elevator, enters the Heisman Room with all its rich portraits, sits in the television lights and waits to hear his name.


Canada's Health Care System Merits Copying
To the Editor:
Your informative supplement on "The Health Debate" (Nov. 14) has generated considerable comment.
The article on the Canadian system contained a number of misleading statements.
To begin with, it is not the case that health care spending in recent years is growing nearly as fast in Canada as in the United States, an assertion published elsewhere without documentation by an anti-single-payer think tank.


As Russian Voting Nears, Pessimism Seems to Rise
The campaign to choose a new parliament and a new constitution for Russia is drawing to a close on a far more somber note than many pro-reform politicians had predicted.
Two months ago, as the last of the old People's Deputies was being marched out of the smoldering White House, many euphoric "democrats" expected that Russia would finally acquire a legislature and charter dedicated to the transformation of the nation.


Robinson Dealt for Newman
Minutes before their game against the Chicago Bulls tonight, the Nets completed a deal to send guard Rumeal Robinson to the Charlotte Hornets for forward Johnny Newman, a former Knick.
Newman, who was making $1.45 million a year compared to Robinson's $1.225, had to agree to take a $9,000 pro-rated cut in salary so the Nets could stay within the bounds of the salary cap.
He will become an unrestricted free agent at the end of this season, Nets General Manager Willis Reed said.


How Much Canadian Bankers Earn
Canadians are finally learning how much senior executives are being paid, thanks to new disclosure regulations.
Banks are the first to submit to the new rules -- similar to those in the United States -- because their fiscal year ended Oct. 31, shortly after the rules took effect.
Most other companies close their year on Dec. 31.


PRESIDENT CONFERS WITH LABOR LEADER FOR FENCE MENDING
President Clinton met with the labor leader Lane Kirkland at the White House today in an effort to repair a relationship frayed by the North American Free Trade Agreement and to enlist his support for the Administration's health care plan.
In the end, the President seemed to have been only partly successful.


At Peace Prize Ceremony, a Note of Unity


Carlotta Monti, Actress, 86
Carlotta Monti, an actress who wrote the 1971 book "W. C. Fields and Me," an account of her role as companion to the comedian for the last 14 years of his life, died on Wednesday at the Motion Picture and Television Fund Hospital in Woodland, Calif., after a long illness.
She was 86.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, said Al Newman, a spokesman for the hospital.


U.S. Backs Ending Fiber Optic Export Ban
The Department of Commerce recommended today that the American Telephone and Telegraph Company and other United States companies be allowed to export advanced fiber optic communications equipment to the former Soviet Union and to China.
The recommendation means that the cold war prohibition could end as early as next month, deciding one part of a five-year debate in the Government.


When the Bill of Rights Joined the Constitution
To the Editor:
William Safire's column entitled "Golosuite!" (Dec. 2) errs on a major matter of history.
Mr.
Safire writes that "ratification  [ of the Constitution ]  was withheld until a Bill of Rights was added."


Nanny Admits Causing Death Of Westchester Baby in Her Care
A Westchester nanny admitted in court today that she had fatally injured the 10-month-old boy in her care by hurling him violently to his bedroom floor after he tugged at her hair.
After insisting for months that she had played no role in Kieran Dunne's death on March 3, Ann Franklin told a starkly different story this morning about how the baby had fractured his skull a week earlier.


Q &amp; A
Selling Against the Box
With a short sale against the box, in which the short sale is covered by the purchase of an equivalent number of shares, what is the cost basis in determining profit or loss?
MARION J. CADLEY, Garden City, L.I.
In a short sale against the box, shares are sold in the same quantity as shares already owned.
This technique is often used to lock in a paper profit and postpone a taxable gain.
At some later date, you will close out the short position by buying the equivalent number of shares.
Your gain or loss will be measured by the difference between the price of the stock sold short and the cost basis of the stock used to close the short sale.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 3 about disposal of spent fuel from civilian nuclear reactors misstated the amount paid by the utilities to the Federal Government for that purpose.
It is about $600 million a year.


Corrections
A brief music review on Tuesday about a performance of Leonard Bernstein's "Chichester Psalms" at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in Manhattan on Dec. 1 misidentified the countertenor soloist.
He was Johnson Flucker; the tenor soloist was Neil Farrell.


Farewell, Low-Calorie Diet: Giulianis Seeking New Chef
It wasn't the skinless chicken breasts or the salmon salad, two of Mayor David N. Dinkins' favorites -- Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani never put knife and fork to either one.
But yesterday Mr.
Giuliani's transition team told the chef at Gracie Mansion and the executive administrator, who oversees the menus, that they were being let go.
"It's nothing personal," said Mr.
Giuliani's spokeswoman, Cristyne Lategano.
She said that the changes reflected Mr.
Giuliani's desire for a "fresh start" and that the decision to dismiss the $49,393-a-year chef, Christopher N. Nicolelis, was "no reflection on his culinary talents."


Migration of the 'Plain People' Revitalizes Farming
While farmland lies fallow in much of rural New York, an influx of Mennonite families is making agriculture a viable way of life once more in the central part of the state.
"Yates and Seneca Counties are the only two counties in the state to show an increase in the number of farms," said Charlie Elrod, a dairy specialist with Cornell Cooperative Extension.
"That's entirely due to the Mennonites."


Weakened by Fast, Doctor Appears in Court
Frail, haggard and unshaven, Dr.
Jack Kevorkian was brought by wheelchair into a courtroom here today, 10 days after beginning a hunger strike in jail, for a hearing on a charge of assisting in a suicide.
Dr.
Kevorkian, who is fasting to protest what he calls Michigan's immoral law against suicides assisted by doctors, has been held in the Oakland County Jail, 20 miles away in Pontiac, Mich.
The hearing was called to determine whether he must stand trial in the suicide of Merian R. Frederick, a 72-year-old woman who suffered from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
It is scheduled to continue on Monday.


A Word of Caution for Growth Investors
Among funds that invest in small companies, most of the best performers over the last three years have had a growth orientation.
These funds, which emphasize long-term growth, had an enormous run-up in 1991 and have done pretty well since then.
The few value funds in the top group made most of their money by loading up on cyclical stocks.
The managers of these funds buy stocks they believe are undervalued by the market,
Growth funds are the place to be when the market is strong, as it has been in recent years, because their volatility is all for the good.


METRO DIGEST
NANNY ADMITS GUILT IN BABY'S DEATH
In a plea bargain to avoid a murder conviction, a Westchester nanny admitted in court that she fatally injured the 10-month-old infant in her care by hurling him to his bedroom floor after he tugged at her hair.
Page 1.
L.I.R.R. INSANITY DEFENSE HINTED
The lawyer for Colin Ferguson, the man accused of killing five people aboard a Long Island Rail Road train on Tuesday evening, called for an assessment of his client's sanity, but legal and psychiatric experts said an insanity defense in the crime, which the police say was carefully planned, would be difficult.
Page 1.
Before a defendant can invoke an insanity defense, he may have to undergo fitness hearings to determine whether he is even fit to stand trial to present such a defense.
Page 28.
Families and friends mourned their losses at wakes and funeral services for three of the five slain passengers.
Page 28.
The notion of the suburbs as calm oases, segregated from the comparative chaos of the cities, is becoming quaint for some people.
Page 28.
NEW YORK CITY GIULIANI SELECTS A TOP OFFICIAL
Mayor-elect Giuliani has selected Peter J. Powers, a lifelong friend and close adviser, to be the No. 2 at City Hall, advisers to Mr.
Giuliani said.
But the appointment has been held up by a conundrum over what exactly to call Mr.
Powers.
To be Mr.
Giuliani's stand-in, he must be called deputy mayor.
But Mr.
Giuliani promised to cut the number of deputy mayors.
Page 1.
Mr.
Giuliani's transition team told the chef at Gracie Mansion and the official who oversees the menus that they were being let go.
Page 27.
2D CHANCE POSSIBLE  FOR U.S. AID
New York City officials passed up a chance this year to apply for millions of dollars in Federal money to rehabilitate public housing, but the Clinton Administration now says it may give the city another chance.
Page 27.
REGION CUOMO GETS AN EARFUL
Governor Cuomo got a taste of participatory democracy at a conference organized by Terry Anderson, the former hostage.
The group engaged in a bruising assault on Mr.
Cuomo's record, mixing harangues with civics lectures and displaying a disdain for incumbents in general and Mr.
Cuomo in particular.
Page 29.
BY MORE LENGTHS THAN SECRETARIAT
As towel-waving workers at the Belmont Park training track followed helplessly on foot, a 2-year-old race horse with a keen sense of direction left his exercise rider in the dust and took a two-mile rush-hour tour.
"Other horses have made it to Hempstead Turnpike," his trainer said, "but never to the Cross Island." Page 29.
NEWARK SCHOOL FILES STAY PUT
A day-old agreement between New Jersey and the Newark Board of Education on a plan for removing 20 years' worth of files from board offices collapsed, intensifying a bitter battle for control of the city's school system.
Page 29.
Chronicle 24
About New York by David Gonzalez 27
Neediest Cases 29


Beliefs
It is high time to rescue the angels, even if the task requires a grinch.
Angels, in case you haven't noticed, are big business.
There are mail-order houses specializing in angel pictures, angel statuettes and all manner of angel collectibles.
There are national newsletters reporting angel sightings.
There are workshops in, yes, angelology, and the leading angelologists have spread their wings on Oprah, Geraldo and assorted other talk shows.


NORTH KOREA GETS A NEW U.S. OFFER
Clinton Administration officials met with North Korean diplomats today and presented a slightly more flexible proposal for breaking the deadlock over Pyongyang's nuclear program, American officials said today.
One Administration official said the latest American proposal contained a number of new "nuances."


Critic's Notebook; Out of the Shadow of George Szell: A Slow Movement
Christoph von Dohnanyi, the music director of the Cleveland Orchestra, said earlier this week that he would welcome a competition of orchestras like those among keyboard players in Bach's day.
Until such a contest is arranged, any national or international "championship" will remain as mythical as that in college football, though by any conceivable standard the Cleveland would have to receive serious consideration.
Yet the Cleveland Orchestra, which turns 75 today, is still a tyke compared with some prominent American orchestras.
The New York Philharmonic is 151 years old, the Chicago Symphony 102; even the neighboring Cincinnati Symphony is 99.


Hanukkah Celebrates Religious Freedom
To the Editor:
"Victory Won in 'Judas Maccabaeus' " (review, Nov. 29) has fallen into the Hanukkah trap, saying that Handel's "Judas Maccabaeus" "does not touch upon the miracle that Hanukkah commemorates, the burning of . . . oil for eight days. Still, Hanukkah secondarily celebrates the victory of the Israelites, led by Judah Maccabee, over the Seleucid Greeks."


Lying Down, Governor Stands Tall


British and Irish Premiers Hold Talks on Ulster Future
British and Irish leaders today discussed the text of a proposed joint statement to encourage peace in Northern Ireland but said they needed to meet again before Christmas to try to finish it.


Review/Music; A Chorus Out on Its Own
When the New York Philharmonic and the Philadelphia Orchestra perform choral works, they generally call on the services of the Westminster Choir.
But although the performances have given the choir considerable visibility, its director, Joseph Flummerfelt, is usually left sitting on the sidelines, having trained his singers in the works at hand and then passed them over to the orchestra's conductor for the performance.
Mr.
Flummerfelt was on the podium at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday evening to conduct his remarkably well-polished chorus in a Christmas concert.
Yet he did not keep the spotlight to himself.
Among his soloists was Jennifer Larmore, a mezzo-soprano who was once a member of the choir and who has lately become a hot property in the worlds of opera and recital.
Inevitably, attention was focused on her, and Mr.
Flummerfelt gave her ample opportunity to shine in arias from Bach's "Christmas Oratorio," Handel's "Messiah," the Brahms Alto Rhapsody and Adolphe Adam's "O Holy Night."


Cleaning Up Violence on Radio
Hard-core rap music is wildly popular and often reaches number one on the charts.
It is also the music where women are called "bitches" and "whores," and men murder each other for sport.
But now hard-core rap and other murderous, misogynous music will have one less radio outlet in New York City.
Inner City Broadcasting, which owns several radio stations around the country, including WBLS-FM, the fourth-most-popular station in New York, has adopted a policy for keeping violence and profanity off its airwaves.
It is a responsible measure that other stations ought to emulate.


Key Document in the Waldheim Investigation
To the Editor:
In "Wiesenthal Defends His Role in Waldheim Affair" (news article, Dec. 1), Simon Wiesenthal seeks to refute a key charge made in "Betrayal," the book that William Hoffer and I have written on the Kurt Waldheim investigation and cover-up.


Jets Know the Score Without Looking Up
In the heat of a playoff race, there will be no scoreboard watching by the Jets today when they face the Redskins in Washington.
The reason is simple: There are no out-of-town scores to worry about.
The Jets and Redskins will be the only teams playing when the National Football League's first Saturday game of the season gets under way at 12:30 P.M., part of a doubleheader that will include the San Francisco 49ers against the Falcons in a 4 P.M. game in Atlanta.


Rich Deal for Aikman Is Expected Soon
TROY AIKMAN was expected to sign a six-year contract within days that would make him the highest-paid player in the National Football League, The Fort Worth Star-Telegram reported yesterday.
Although the Dallas Cowboys would not confirm the report, they did say that they hoped that a contract would be signed soon.
According to the report, JERRY JONES, the Cowboys' owner, said, "We've made enough progress that we may not even need more face-to-face meetings."


No Koch in '95 Cup
BILL KOCH , who financed America  's successful defense of the America's Cup in 1992, has decided not to participate in the 1995 race series, said RICK WRIGHTSON , Koch's yacht racing associate.
"For right now, unless he changes his mind again, he's pulling away," said Wrightson from San Diego.


3 ARABS ARE SLAIN AS KILLINGS PERSIST ON THE WEST BANK
Eye-for-an-eye killing continued unabated in the Israeli-occupied territories today as three Arab laborers were shot to death on a West Bank road in what seemed to be a revenge attack by Jewish settlers.
According to Israel Television, the militantly anti-Arab Kach movement, founded by Rabbi Meir Kahane, took responsibility.
A caller to Israel Radio said settlers had carried out the attack to avenge the killing of a settler and his son by Palestinian gunmen earlier in the week.


Security Is Easy to Breach At Airports, Inquiry Finds
Federal investigators have found that although airports have made progress in screening airline passengers, they have failed to keep unauthorized people out of restricted areas, including tarmacs where unoccupied planes could be targets of terrorists.
In spot checks at four of the nation's largest airports, the Transportation Department reported on Thursday, Federal investigators walked unchallenged past security guards and passed through emergency doors, setting off alarms that elicited no response.
In one case, an investigator even carried a deactivated hand grenade through a metal detector.


Starting a Special Fund For a Disabled Child
WHEN Karen Greenberg and Jeffrey Rubin of Baldwin, L.I., learned their son was autistic, financial planning took on a new meaning.
Ricky, who is 6 and will always need help with personal and household chores, is "likely to live long after us," Ms.
Greenberg said.
Parents of children with mental and physical disabilities must grapple with a host of concerns about their children's well-being.
An important one is financial security, particularly as medical advances lead to longer life spans.


Consumer Prices Up Modestly
Restrained by declines in the cost of energy, consumer prices rose a modest two-tenths of a percent in November, matching the average for the two preceding months, the Labor Department reported today.
Analysts regarded the data, which were about as expected, as further evidence that inflation remains in check, though not nonexistent, even as the economy picks up speed.


Like Father, Like Son: Two Knights Are Punished for Outbursts
Bob Knight, the Indiana University basketball coach who has made it known he prefers the more mature "Bob" to the juvenile "Bobby" that more aptly describes his personality, had another Bobby pinned on him yesterday.
He was suspended from last night's home game against Tennessee Tech because of his Bobbyish behavior during a game against Notre Dame on Tuesday.
As a result, Knight was not on hand when his son, Patrick, a reserve for Indiana, was ejected for fighting during the Hoosiers' 117-73 romp over Tennessee Tech.


New Limits on Insurance for Retirement Accounts in Banks
Keeping several retirement accounts at one bank is not the safest move.
As of Dec. 19, Federal deposit insurance for most retirement accounts will be limited to $100,000 a person.
A person can now have that amount covered at a bank in each of four types of retirement accounts: individual retirement accounts, Keogh plans for self-employed workers, 401(k) plans sponsored by corporations and so-called 457 plans set up by state and local governments or nonprofit organizations.


Note of Unity Pervades Peace Prize Ceremony
The two were opponents and collaborators: one the freedom fighter who suffered nearly three decades in prison, the other the enforcer of the white power structure who finally bowed to the imperative for change.
Today they accepted the Nobel Peace Prize for their great enterprise of bringing peace and nonracial democracy within reach of South Africa.
In speeches that merged and diverged like tributaries of the Limpopo River, Nelson Mandela and President F. W. de Klerk looked to a future of rejoicing and prosperity for their country, shed of the fears and injustices of apartheid.


The Science of Selling Gets Little Attention
FEW words of investment wisdom get more respect than "buy and hold." But what the advice omits may be as revealing as what it includes.
Buy and hold . . . and what?
Sell, of course, at least eventually.
But, for reasons ranging from the self-interest of investment professionals to media boredom, selling seldom gets the attention that buying does.
It's often seen not as the endgame, just as the end of the game.


Fed Criticizes Plan on Bias in Bank Loans
Members of the Federal Reserve Board today sharply criticized the Clinton Administration's new plan for insuring that banks open branches and make loans in poor and minority neighborhoods.
The board voted to put the proposed rules forward for public comment, as all four Federal banking regulatory agencies are doing.
But most of its members expressed reservations about the plan as drafted.


Corrections
An article in Your Money on Dec. 4, about taxes on capital gains from investments, misspelled the surname of the president of Novos Planning Associates.
She is Madeline I. Noveck.


Into a New Frontier After Fusion Success
Buoyed by the success of a high-power fusion test on Thursday night, scientists at the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory plunged across a new physics frontier yesterday with a series of experiments that may eventually lead to an inexhaustible source of energy.
The tests yesterday were even more successful than the first one on Thursday night.
In the five tests the laboratory conducted yesterday, its reactor achieved a peak power of 5.3 million watts -- vastly more energy than any other fusion reactor had ever produced.


S. Fraser Sammis, Cargo Executive, 65
S.
Fraser Sammis, who retired in June as the president of the National Cargo Bureau in Manhattan, died on Wednesday at Huntington Hospital in Huntington, L.I.
He was 65.
The cause was cancer, said his companion, Barbara Fritz.


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about Leon M. Block, the retired president of Dunhill Tailors, omitted a survivor.
He is Mr.
Block's brother, Norman, of Manhattan.


Giuliani Selects Campaign Chief As Top Deputy
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani has selected Peter J. Powers, a lifelong friend and close adviser, to be his No. 2 at City Hall, the person who would speak in the Mayor's name and even take the helm temporarily when he is away, advisers to Mr.
Giuliani said yesterday.
But the appointment has been held up by a conundrum over what exactly to call Mr.
Powers, a tax lawyer and political neophyte who managed Mr.
Giuliani's campaign and is now running his transition team.


New York, the City With a Heart of Gold
To the Editor:
On a recent Monday, I fell while crossing Broadway at 23d Street.
Before my head hit the pavement, six persons were at my side.
I heard someone say "Call 911" and a voice replied "I did, using my cellular telephone." I was bleeding profusely and spat blood over two men who were trying to make me more comfortable.
I apologized, but one of the men said, "Forget us; just stay still."


Lawyer Seeks Sanity Inquiry In L.I. Killings
The lawyer for the man accused of killing five people aboard a Long Island Rail Road train called today for an assessment of his client's sanity.
But legal and psychiatric experts said an insanity defense in the crime, which the police say was carefully planned, would be difficult.
This morning, the defendant, Colin Ferguson, wearing a bulletproof vest and protected by 20 guards, appeared emotionless and silent in Nassau County District Court, where Anthony J. Falanga was appointed his lawyer.
While Mr.
Falanga declined to discuss his plans for a defense, he called for his client to "be examined psychiatrically" and added, "I think it's obvious an evaluation is in order."


Players And Teams Stalled On Format
Considering that some clubs have been making player moves with the proposed divisional alignment in mind, their general managers will most likely be shocked if their basic assumption turns out to be wrong.
Yet the chances of the realignment becoming reality for the 1994 season appeared shaky today.
"The players are not prepared to agree, based on what has happened so far," Donald Fehr, executive director of the Players Association, said at the conclusion of the executive board's four-day meeting.
"I'm under instructions to get back to the clubs next week with some ideas. I'm hesitant to describe them as different, but there will be differences."


Walking the Dog Turns Into a Scene From 'Jurassic Park'


No Headline
Five years ago people would have seriously questioned the sanity of anyone who would have predicted that Mr.
Mandela and I would be joint recipients of the 1993 Nobel Peace Prize. -- F. W. DE KLERK, President of South Africa.  [ 7:1. ]  -- Let a new age be born!
NELSON MANDELA.  [ 7:1. ]


Alice Tully Is Dead at 91; Lifelong Patron of the Arts
Alice Tully, a philanthropist who was an important figure in New York City's musical life for almost half a century, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 91.
Her lawyer, James McGarry, said the cause was the flu.
She had not been seen in public since suffering a stroke in 1991.


A Rampage Shatters Semblance of Safety
Sharon Sprintz refuses to be shocked.
It is just not possible anymore, she says, to be surprised or scandalized by the random brutality of the times.
"You just can't worry about these things," Ms.
Sprintz, an X-ray technician from East Meadow, said.
"It has to be accepted as a fact of life anywhere, unfortunately. I felt very sorry for the families. That's terribly upsetting. This stuff happens, even in East Meadow. There's just no control."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7 ARAB WORKERS ARE LATEST VICTIMS
As Palestinian self-rule draws nearer, three Arab workers lost their lives in an apparent act of revenge by Jewish settlers, the latest in a series of killings in the Israeli-occupied territories.  1


SIERRA ON-LINE EXPACTS TO SPIN OFF UNIT
The chairman and chief executive of Sierra On-Line Inc., Ken Williams, said this week that he expects the company's interactive computer game unit, the Imagination Network, to go public as a separate company in 1994.
Currently, 30,000 subscribers pay a monthly fee to play games against each other or chat electronically in real time on the network.
Mr.
Williams said a newly chosen chief executive, whom he declined to identify, will take the Imagination Network in mid-January and probably lead a public offering of 15 to 20 percent of the unit.
In Nasdaq trading yesterday, Sierra On-Line, which has been as low as $9.50 this year, was off 50 cents at $21.875.


Giving From the Heart, Using the Mind
Letters from charities requesting money are as common in mailboxes these days as holiday greeting cards.
Hoping to take advantage of the giving spirit of the season and reminding taxpayers that Dec. 31 is the deadline for gifts deductible against this year's income, charitable organizations from the well known to the obscure pull out all the stops.
Many groups find a receptive audience, for charitable impulses run deep through the American culture.
Donations totaled more than $124 billion in 1992, with the vast majority of them from individuals, according to the American Association of Fund-Raising Counsel Inc.


Zagreb Journal; Feminist Gadfly Unappreciated in Her Own Land
The ornate turn-of-the-century Gradska Kavana on the central square here is one of those cafes that define the style of Central Europe.
The lives of nations, and sometimes their fates, are played out at such places, and the relationships between regular patrons are dense and multi-layered.
Like many Croatian intellectuals, Slavenka Drakulic considers the Gradska Kavana a second home, and on a recent morning she made her way to an outdoor table with the confidence of a regular patron.
She noticed an old acquaintance, a man she has known since she was a teen-ager, and acknowledged him with a smile and a wave.


Bridge
Study the North-South hands in the diagram and consider whether a slam should be bid.
If your answer is affirmative, you may have been peeking in the East-West hands.
It is true that six hearts can be made by playing for West to have the spade king and taking a diamond finesse, but it is not a good contract, since it needs some luck in two suits.
Six hearts had mixed results when the deal was played Wednesday in the weekly Imp game at Honors Club, 42 East 74th Street.
One pair, however, reached six no-trump as shown.
This is slightly inferior to six hearts, and appears doomed on the lie of the cards.


Chief of House Panel Ends Inquiry on Arkansas S.&amp; L.
The chairman of the House Banking Committee decided today to end his investigation into the collapse of an Arkansas savings and loan association without seeking access to government records about the institution, which was owned by a friend and business partner of President Clinton.
The chairman, Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, Democrat of Texas, agreed last month to a Republican request for a bipartisan examination of the failure of the savings and loan, Madison Guaranty.


Gallego Cautions Against Another Trade
One will probably be the starting shortstop for the Yankees next season and the other will probably be traded.
Both have been utility players for most of their careers, but a starting job is staring at one of them.
They are Mike Gallego and Randy Velarde.
Although General Manager Gene Michael completed a daunting task by trading shortstop Spike Owen and at least $2 million to the California Angels for minor league pitcher Jose Musset on Thursday, he has conceded that the Yankees still need to dispose of other contracts before they can pursue an outfielder and a starting pitcher.
That is why it is easy to surmise that Velarde or Gallego, who have value and sizable salaries, could soon depart and further slice the payroll.


MARION MERRELL LIFTS STAKE IN KODAMA HOLDINGS
Marion Merrell Dow Inc. raised its stake in the Japanese drug company Kodama Ltd. to about 38 percent from 20 percent in a bid to penetrate the Japanese market further.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
In June, Marion's Japanese subsidiary, Marion Merrell Dow K.K., bought 20 percent of Tokyo-based Kodama's shares, forming an alliance to market drugs and develop new products.
Marion plans to raise its stake to more than 50 percent in early 1994.
Marion, with more than 900 employees in Tokyo, Osaka and Hirakata, had $216 million in sales in 1992.
Kodama has more than 580 employees.


Hanukkah Celebrates Religious Freedom; Why Kids Expect Coins
To the Editor:
Contrary to the assertion in Food Notes (Living section, Dec. 1), the observance of the eight-day Hanukkah festival does not call for gift-giving every day.
At most, it calls for the giving of some money to young children on the first night of the festival only.


For Lapps, A Hesitant Cultural Flowering
These days, the midnight sun is at the other end of the world.
On and above the Arctic Circle, at the northern end of Europe, a pale sky lightens the low hills and glacial lakes of Lapland for just a few hours a day.
The only living things visible for miles are white grouse and wandering herds of reindeer, pawing the snow for food.
But there are people here, too: the Samis, as the Lapps call themselves, who once herded reindeer and who are now adjusting, sometimes awkwardly, to modern life.
This is the United Nations' International Year of Indigenous People, and Norway, Finland, Sweden and Russia have been full of events celebrating Sami cultural achievement.
These celebrations are turned as much inward, toward Sami self-awareness and cultural redefinition, as outward, which would lure even more of the tourists about whom the Samis are profoundly ambivalent.


Horse Sets Belmont Record (on Highway)
A 2-year-old race horse with a mind of its own, a keen sense of direction and a desire to run with the motorized horsepower set, left his exercise rider in the dust on the Belmont Park training track yesterday morning and took off on a rush-hour tour of two of New York's busiest roadways.


European Community Backs Plan To Create Jobs by Reducing Costs
Facing an unemployment crisis that is the main concern of their electorates, European Community leaders gave broad backing today to a plan to create jobs by cutting labor costs.
But Britain and Germany balked at proposals that the community borrow billions of dollars to start major public works projects.
While the 12 leaders debated formulas to create $15 million in new jobs by the year 2000, negotiators in Geneva struggled to put the final touches to what many officials regard as the best long-term solution to the disappearance of European jobs -- a world trade agreement that is expected to stimulate business worldwide.


CHRONICLE
In another nugget of marital news, Princess YASMIN AGA KHAN and her husband, CHRISTOPHER JEFFRIES, were divorced this week.
Justice David B. Saxe of New York State Supreme Court granted the divorce on Thursday to Mr.
Jeffries, a 42-year-old lawyer and real-estate executive, the Associated Press reported yesterday.
He accused his wife of abandoning him.


To Knicks, 12-4 Feels A Little Like 8-8
The Knicks' recent victories have not included any masterpieces, but winning has made that easier to accept.
New York (12-4) returned home yesterday after a 2-1 road trip, capped by Thursday night's 94-81 victory over the Golden State Warriors.
While the Knicks are obviously not playing their best basketball, they have still found ways to win.
As usual, they have won primarily with defense, holding their last two opponents to an average of 79.5 points.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Consumer prices rose a modest two-tenths of a percent in November, restrained by declines in the cost of energy.
The small November rise matched the average for the two preceding months and was seen as further evidence that inflation remains in check while the economy picks up momentum.  [ Page 39. ]
President Clinton and the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s president, Lane Kirkland, agreed to end their bitter public debate over Nafta and will work together on health care changes.
But the union said state and local chapters could still decide to punish supporters of the trade pact in the 1994 elections.  [ 1. ]
The Fed assailed the Treasury's proposed overhaul of the Community Reinvestment Act, saying it could lead to Government influence over loans and unsound lending practices.  [ 39. ] Companies
Green Point Savings depositors voted to convert the mutual savings bank to public ownership through a $700 million stock offering.
But state regulators must rule on the change and will hold hearings to determine if regulations were followed.  [ 39. ]
Nynex plans to reduce expenses sharply in its core local telephone business.
But the Baby Bell refused to confirm reports that it planned to cut about 22,000 jobs over three years.  [ 39. ]
Paramount's board will meet Monday to plan an auction for the company after the Delaware Supreme Court ruled that it must consider acquisition bids other than Viacom's.  [ 41. ]
American companies should be allowed to export advanced fiber optic communications equipment to the former Soviet Union and to China, the Commerce Department recommended.  [ 41. ]
Canadian bank executives are paid far less than their U.S. counterparts, data released under new disclosure rules show.  [ 41. ]
Prudential Insurance's financial strength rating could be lowered because of the scandal in its securities unit.  [ 50. ] International
American lawmakers, executives and lobbyists are pouring into Geneva hoping to influence the world trade talks.
Their fervor may be a signal that any GATT agreement will face the same intensity of feeling in Congress that greeted Nafta.  [ 39. ]
European Community leaders backed a plan to create jobs by cutting labor costs and employer contributions to welfare programs.
More than 5 million European jobs have been lost since 1990 and the unemployment rate is 11.3 percent.  [ 5. ]
The Japanese economy is still deteriorating and may not recover for a year or more from its two-year-old recession, a survey of the country's business executives showed.
The executives indicated they planned to cut staff and spending.  [ 40. ] Markets
Blue-chip stocks rose to new records while broader averages continued to slide.
The Dow industrials rose 10.89, to 3,740.67.  [ 40. ]
Interest rates rose despite a Government report that consumer inflation remained subdued last month.  [ 48. ]
Oil prices rebounded on technical factors, weather-related supply problems and producers' optimism on prices.  [ 49. ]
The dollar weakened against the German mark but gained against the Japanese yen.
Gold prices rose.  [ 49. ] Your Money
The urge to donate to charities rises during the holidays, but donors should scrutinize how groups parcel out their money.  [ 36. ]
Following a selling strategy can help investors maximize their returns when they want to liquidate stock holdings.  [ 36. ]
Keeping several retirement accounts at one bank is not wise because of new limits in Federal deposit insurance.  [ 36. ]
A special kind of trust for children with mental and physical disabilities can protect their inheritance and benefits.  [ 37. ]


Blue-Chip Issues Gain As Other Averages Fall
The stock market turned in another good news, bad news performance yesterday, as blue-chip issues rose to new records, while broader averages continued to slide.
An unexpected jump in the University of Michigan's survey of consumer sentiment about the economy in early December, to its highest level since January, was noted by analysts and traders as the most important event of the session.


Isles Call Up A Goaltender
The Islanders yesterday called up goaltender Jamie McLellan from their Salt Lake City minor league affiliate on an emergency basis because of a back injury suffered by Tom Draper during his off-ice conditioning session on Wednesday.
McLellan, who had a 5-8 record in 17 games and had become the No. 1 goalie in the club's farm system, will presumably take Draper's place as Ron Hextall's backup, at least for tonight's game against the Philadelphia Flyers.


Alice Tully Dies


Family Support: The Lifeline for a New Business
Yearning to start his own business, Esmeraldo Esposo, 29, this year opened the Emerald Cafe in Westwood Village, home to the University of California at Los Angeles, his alma mater.
For the many people who fantasize about running a restaurant, Mr.
Esposo can attest to the oft-repeated warnings about unexpected expenses.
Like many entrepreneurs, he got capital from his family.
He is now working several jobs to pay back some of that money.
Here's how he got started.


With Song and Poetry, a Farewell to a Kidnapped Girl Named Polly
More than 1,500 mourners said farewell to Polly Klaas on Thursday night, part in tribute to her brief life and part in pledge that her death would not be wasted.
"Tonight, we continue to remember Polly, whose life and death have brought our entire community to an all-new height of caring and love for one another, a very mighty legacy for a 12-year-old girl to have given us," said the Rev.
George Risden, pastor of St.
Vincent de Paul Church.


Flaw Is Found in Math Proof, But Repairs Are Under Way
The widely heralded proof of Fermat's last theorem, one of the most enduring and difficult problems in mathematics, has hit a snag in the review process before publication, the proof's discoverer said this week.
But he said he did not believe it was a fatal flaw.
Others said such problems were to be expected when a long and extremely complex proof undergoes rigorous scrutiny before publication.
They said it would be premature to conclude that the proof is in trouble.


Classical Music in Review
La Boheme  Metropolitan Opera


U.S. Politicians Turn Into Lobbyists Over GATT
Congressional leaders, executives, lobbyists and environmentalists who fought for or against the North American Free Trade Agreement have been streaming here to fight shoulder to shoulder against proposed provisions of a new global trade agreement.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who wants to retain American limits on low-cost imports, and Senator John D. Rockefeller 4th, the West Virginia Democrat concerned about limits on medical research subsidies, came last week.


Pleading the Insanity Defense Presents a Real Maze of Possibilities
Before a defendant can invoke the insanity defense, as Colin Ferguson may attempt in the Long Island Rail Road shootings, hearings are often held to determine whether he is even sufficiently stable to stand trial to present such a defense.
And so a defendant may have to undergo fitness hearings.
To be fit to stand trial, according to New York State law, a defendant must meet two tests.
Does he understand the nature of the proceedings -- the indictment, the roles of the judge, his lawyer, the prosecutor and the jury?
And can he then assist in his own defense?
A defendant may, for example, have a rudimentary understanding of what is going on in court, but may also be occasionally delusional or suffer hallucinations, and so may not be able to have lucid conversations with his lawyer.


'Any Given Day' Closing
"Any Given Day," a drama by Frank D. Gilroy, is to close after the matinee tomorrow at the Longacre Theater, 220 West 48th Street, Manhattan.
The matinee of the play, directed by Paul Benedict and co-starring Sada Thompson and Andrea Marcovicci, will be its 32d regular performance; it had 16 previews.


Paramount Is Preparing For Auction
Paramount Communications Inc., mindful of a tough Delaware Supreme Court ruling that requires the company to consider all acquisition bids, has scheduled a board meeting Monday afternoon to begin setting up procedures for an auction.
Paramount representatives have sent notice of the meeting to lawyers for QVC Network Inc., the home shopping company that is seeking to acquire Paramount in a hostile bid.
The Delaware Supreme Court said Thursday that Paramount's board could not favor a lower bid from its handpicked partner, Viacom Inc., over a higher offer from QVC.
A Possible Action
Although there were reports that the independent members of Paramount's board would form their own committee to review bids, giving the appearance that they were not under the thumb of Paramount's management, an executive close to Paramount's board said he was not certain the independent directors had decided to do that.
He added that the Delaware court had not specifically addressed that question.


Second Wave of AIDS Feared By Officials in San Francisco
Here in the gay capital of America, where the decadelong AIDS epidemic has spread not just death but also despair, public health officials say there are ominous signs of a second wave of AIDS infection.
Many gay men here, saying they are numb with loss, fatalistic about their own survival, unwilling to face a measure of sexual deprivation and eager for the attention showered on the sick and the dying, are again practicing unprotected anal intercourse.
Experts say this behavior is increasing the infection rates.


Where Did the Optimism Go?
The depression in Western societies has become much more than economic.
There is a Spenglerian sense of cultural decline, of a loss of capacity to keep countries going in the way we expect of them.
Only a few years after the collapse of Communism brought such a feeling of historic vindication, both optimism and self-confidence have melted away.
The West, like the East, is now facing the colossal bill left by the cold war, which includes moral and psychological questions about the assumptions on which free societies are based.


Observer; So He Minded His Step
Once, having an afternoon to kill in Beverly Hills, and lacking a car, I went for a walk, though I had been cautioned against it with the explanation that the police regarded walking as powerful evidence of criminal intent.
It was lonely.
Though the sun was friendly the streets felt ominous.
It was that feeling the movies strive to convey when the hero finds himself utterly alone at high noon in what should be an extremely busy location:


James M. Franey, Movie Executive, 92
James M. Franey, a former movie executive in Manhattan, died on Monday at St.
Joseph Villa, a retirement home in Flourtown, Pa.
He was 92.
From 1946 to 1971, Mr.
Franey served first as the head of United World Films, a subsidiary of Universal Pictures, and later as the head of Universal Education &amp; Visual Arts, a division of M.C.A.
Inc.


Review/Television; No Longer Dad's Little Girl
In "Attack of the 50-Foot Woman,", a new version of a cheap 1958 sci-fi flick whose special effects are still treasured as being among the most atrocious of all time, the heroine has been changed from witchlike to liberated gorgeous.
Nancy Archer, who has an encounter with aliens that sets her off on a gargantuan-growth binge, is here played by Daryl Hannah.
Her story is told in flashback as a bus-tour presentation about the "life of one special American woman."
Making Nancy's life miserable, chipping away at her self-esteem and leaving her smaller and smaller are her philandering husband, Harry, played by a surprisingly pudgy Daniel Baldwin, and her father, the greedy businessman Hamilton Cobb, harrumphed to a slimy fare-thee-well by William Windom of "Murder, She Wrote."


Shuffle at Channel 2
ROCK ROTE will be replaced next month as WCBS-TV/Channel 2's weekend sportscaster by TOM VARRATO, the station said yesterday.
Since WARNER WOLF's departure last year, Rote has filled in as the weeknight sportscaster, but that role will be assumed full time by BERNIE SMILOVITZ, who is being imported from WDIV-TV in Detroit.


GENERAL MILLS WILL CUT PRICES ON SOME CEREALS
General Mills Inc. said yesterday that it would cut prices on large size boxes of its Trix, Total and Apple Cinnamon Cheerios breakfast cereals by 11 to 16 percent.
The cuts will affect just 6 percent of the food maker's cereal volume, said Austin Sullivan, a General Mills spokesman.
A Lehman Brothers analyst, Caroline Levy, said the price cut was a one-time adjustment to stimulate sales of the larger cereal boxes.
She said the smaller sizes offered better value per ounce to consumers under the previous pricing system.


U.S. to Intervene in Landing Fees
Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena told airport officials and airline executives today that he would intervene in disputes concerning airport landing fees.
He said he might even withhold grants to airports that did not present evidence to justify their charges.
Last week the Transportation Department intervened when a dispute over landing fees threatened to close Los Angeles International Airport.
Mr.
Pena said today that in the future he would mediate in such disputes and, if an impasse developed, "the department will not hesitate to use its existing broad legal authority to review the legality of proposed airport rates and to take all necessary investigatory and enforcement actions."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Promoted Chuck LaMar, director of scouting and player development, to assistant general manager for player personnel; Donnie Mitchell, scout, to assistant scouting director; and Scott Proefrock, assistant director of scouting, to assistant director of scouting and player development.
CHICAGO CUBS -- Traded Chuck McElroy, pitcher, to the Cincinnati Reds for Larry Luebbers and Mike Anderson, pitchers, and Darron Cox, catcher.
Released Bill Brennan, pitcher.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Traded Eric Anthony, outfielder, to the Seattle Mariners for Mike Felder, outfielder, and Mike Hampton, pitcher.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Signed Dave Clark, outfielder, to a one-year contract.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Traded Frank Seminara, pitcher, Tracy Sanders, outfielder, and a player to be named later to the New York Mets for Randy Curtis, outfielder, and a player to be named later.
Southern League  BOARDS OF DIRECTORS -- Named Arnold Fielkow president, effective at the end of the 1994 season, and announced the league offices will be moved to Atlanta.
Basketball National Basketball Association  NBA -- Promoted John Rose, vice president and general counsel of NBA Properties, Inc., to senior vice president of player relations and administration, and William Koenig, assistant general counsel, to general counsel of NBA Properties.
Named William Nix vice president of business affairs for NBA Properties and Richard Buchanan assistant general counsel.
CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Traded Johnny Newman, forward, to the New Jersey Nets for Rumeal Robinson, guard.
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Placed Doug West, guard, on the injured list.
Activated Marlon Maxie, forward, from the injured list.
Football National Football League  DETROIT LIONS -- Activated Mack Travis, defensive lineman, from the practice squad.
Waived Darryl Ford, linebacker.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Placed Will Wolford, offensive tackle, on injured reserve.
Activated John Ray, offensive lineman, from the practice squad.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Bruce Pickens, cornerback, to a two-year contract and Fred Montgomery, wide receiver, to the practice squad.
Hockey National Hockey League  BOSTON BRUINS -- Assigned Dmitri Kvartalnov, left wing, to Providence of the American Hockey League.
MONTREAL CANADIENS -- Recalled Donald Brashear, left wing, from Fredericton of the American Hockey League.
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Recalled Jamie McLennan, goaltender, from Salt Lake City of the International Hockey League.
Assigned Milan Hnilicka, goaltender, from Richmond of the East Coast Hockey League to Salt Lake City.
VANCOUVER CANUCKS -- Sent Neil Eisenhut, center, to Hamilton of the American Hockey League and Mike Peca, right wing, to the Ottawa of the Ontario Hockey League.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Returned Jeff Nelson, center, to Portland of the American Hockey League.
Colonial Hockey League  UTICA BULLDOGS -- Placed Craig deBlois, forward, on the injured list retroactive to Dec. 9.
Activated Mike Jorgensen, forward, from the injured list.
East Coast Hockey League  HUNTSVILLE BLAST -- Released Guy Prince, left wing.
Activated Joe Dragon, defenseman, from the 14-day disabled list.


The Mayor-elect Builds Bridges
New York City's Mayor-elect, Rudolph Giuliani, started work on two essential bridges this week -- to Washington and Albany.
Those two capitals supply one-third of the city's revenue as well as reams of legislation that regulates the city's welfare.
Good relations make good sense.
Mr.
Giuliani's meeting with President Clinton in the Oval Office was a smart move for both.
New York's Mayor and America's President need each other, as do the city and the nation.


Britain Defies China on Hong Kong
For 14 months, Britain and China have talked, cursed and cajoled over how much democracy the residents of this British colony ought to be granted as they prepare for the return to Chinese rule on July 1, 1997.
The talking may almost be over.


De La Hoya Puts Managers On the Unemployment Line
Oscar De La Hoya has a new manager: himself.
The former Olympic boxing champion, whose professional career is suddenly in knots, surfaced today with a cast on his left wrist and a game plan he utilized in the amateur ranks.
It is called "All in the Family."
Charging that his former managers -- the New Yorkers Robert Mittleman and Steve Nelson -- were tardy with bonus payments and had practically moved into his house, De La Hoya officially fired them, in public, this morning.


Can the New N.H.L. Let Bylaws Be Bylaws?
Like students sent home early for a holiday vacation, the owners and executives of the National Hockey League streamed out of their conference room today, ending the board of governors meeting one day ahead of schedule.
Bill Wirtz, the president of the Chicago Blackhawks and former chairman of the board, told reporters that a committee had been formed to investigate Peter Pocklington's plan to move his Edmonton Oilers to Minnesota.


INSIDE
Airport Security Is Still Lax, Federal Investigators Find
Federal investigators said airports have failed to keep unauthorized people out of restricted areas, including tarmacs where unoccupied planes could be targets of terrorists.
Page 8.
U.S.
Assails Mississippi Jails
Citing maggot-infested cells and segregated drunk tanks, the Justice Department has called for the closing of four jails in Mississippi.
Page 8.
A Step to the Right
The abyss between democracy in concept and in action is becoming more apparent as Russia's parliamentary elections approach.
Page 5.
Big Shift for Savings Bank
Green Point Savings depositors voted to convert the mutual savings bank to public ownership through a $700 million stock offering.
Page 39.
Restaurant Stalking Grounds
Two well-dressed men have been following women out of Upper East Side restaurants and robbing them of jewelry, the police say.
Page 25.
Telescope Back in Orbit
After getting new sets of corrective lenses, the Hubble Space Telescope was sent back into orbit.
Page 9.


Japanese Business Outlook Is Worsening, Survey Finds
An important Government survey released today showed that the Japanese economy, struggling to emerge from a bruising two-year-old recession, is still deteriorating and may not recover for a year or more.
The quarterly survey of thousands of companies by the Bank of Japan, known as the tankan, showed a steep decline in business executives' expectations for the future and indicated that they were planning to cut staff and reduce spending.


C. W. Holman, 86; Pioneered Transplant Of Heart and Lungs
Dr.
Cranston W. Holman, a retired thoracic surgeon who was one of the nation's leading tennis players in the 1920's, died yesterday at New York Hospital, where he helped perform one of the first heart-lung transplants in 1969.
He was 86.
His daughter, Martha Paul, said he died of injuries caused by a fall at his home in Manhattan on Thursday.


Hijack Attempt Foiled in France


Russian Artifacts Being Offered at Auction


Christopher Sees Arafat At P.L.O. Headquarters
The Secretary of State came calling on Yasir Arafat today, and the symbolism of Warren Christopher's arrival at the headquarters of an organization the United States once labeled terrorist was not lost on either man.
"It's wonderful to see you at your headquarters in Tunis," Mr.
Christopher told the Palestinian leader before entering the crumbling villa that the Palestine Liberation Organization calls the seat of its government.


CHRONICLE
An on-again, off-again couple say they are definitely on again.
DONALD J. TRUMP and MARLA MAPLES announced yesterday that they would marry on the evening of Dec. 20.
The statement came through a spokeswoman, CHEN SAM , who knows a thing or two about weddings -- she also represents Elizabeth Taylor -- and who said that the decision was made on Thursday night.
The couple's daughter, Tiffany, was born on Oct. 13.
The wedding is to be held -- where else? -- at the Plaza, which Mr.
Trump owns.
The guest list numbers 2,000.


Wharton Set Concept For Foreign Aid Study
To the Editor:
Your editorial of Nov. 28 on foreign aid restructuring was right on the mark.
The realignment and revival you refer to could, indeed, lead to well-designed investments in future peace and prosperity.
The 1961 Foreign Assistance Act is long overdue for serious change; the leadership of the administrator, Brian Atwood, toward a new program focused on sustainable development, family planning, expanded democracy and humanitarian relief well deserves widespread support.


Sports of The Times; Athletes At Risk Too Often
ONCE you get beyond the tragedy of Joseph Marable's death, you can begin to comprehend the potential peril to a portion of the five million athletes who compete each year in interscholastic sports.
It's frightening to think that many of them may have no business engaging in rigorous competition, but don't know it.
Marable collapsed and died last Tuesday during basketball tryouts for William Penn High in Philadelphia.
Had he not been the first cousin of Hank Gathers, the Loyola Marymount star, Marable's death may have gone unnoticed outside his circle of family and friends.
But because of his relationship to Gathers, who collapsed and died during a conference tournament game in 1990, Marable's death received national attention.


Guide to the Grandeur: Touring Heaven's House
A FEW days ago Howard Quirk embarked on a journey through cold and darkness, slowly climbing heavenward until he emerged into the light and stared St.
Peter in the eye.
In time he also encountered St.
Thomas Aquinas, Moses and even Hippocrates.
An hour later, slightly winded but not worn, he was back walking among the rest of us mortals.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LOCKHEED CORP., Calabasas, Calif., a military and space systems concern, said the Air Force's fleet of Lockheed C-141B Starlifters, which has been operating with restrictions because of cracks discovered in the transports' wings, will be 100 percent operational by the end of 1994.
BROWNING-FERRIS CORP., Houston, a waste management concern, plans to increase its capital spending by 27 percent in 1994 to $962 million and is looking for acquisitions.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the end of Syria's boycott of peace talks with Israel misstated the duration of the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories.
Thursday, when Syria banned a demonstration by Palestinians in Damascus, was the sixth anniversary of the start of the uprising, not the fifth.


Dr. John H. Menkart, Corporate Executive, 71
Dr.
John H. Menkart, a retired senior vice president of Clairol Inc., died on Thursday at his home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 71.
The cause was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease, said his wife, Edith Menkart.


Six Killed as Military Tanker Explodes in Milwaukee


FMC PUTS ITS JOB CUT TOTAL AT ABOUT 2,500
The FMC Corporation said yesterday that its job cuts would total 2,500 this year, or about 12 percent of its total work force.
FMC, based in Chicago, also said it would take a $125 million after-tax charge in the fourth quarter for the restructuring of its machinery, equipment and industrial chemicals units and the write-down of assets in its precious metals segment.
About half the job cuts had previously been announced.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
2.94
2.76
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.05
3.23
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.23
3.39
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.29
5.20
6.44
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.20
6.15
7.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.24
7.17
8.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.50
5.50
6.36
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Yonkers Neighborhood Reels After Shootings
Gunfire and violent death have come often to the tiny piece of Riverdale Avenue between Pier and Ludlow Streets, but never more viciously than Thursday night.
This time, gunmen killed Antonio Jose Urena in his little neighborhood market and shot and critically wounded one of his helpers and two customers.


Virtuosos in Space
It has been a near-flawless performance by the Endeavour astronauts in the most complex repair job yet attempted in orbit.
Late at night, while most of us were sleeping, they installed new gyroscopes on the ailing Hubble Space Telescope, replaced wobbly solar panels, inserted a new camera and installed an array of lenses to correct blurry images -- all without a major problem.
The few glitches that did arise, such as latching a balky door and removing a bent solar panel that refused to roll up properly, were readily resolved.


U.S. Condemns Conditions in 18 Jails in Mississippi
Citing conditions ranging from maggot-infested cells to racially segregated drunk tanks and serious fire hazards, the Justice Department has called for the closing of four county jails in Mississippi and has cited all 18 it investigated this year as having substandard conditions that violate the Constitution.
The investigation was made after reports of an unusually high number of suicides in Mississippi jails since 1987.
The department is still investigating some of those incidents amid accusations that some prisoners who were said to have committed suicide might have been murdered.


Anderson Difference Not Enough For Nets
Kenny Anderson turned in game highs of 31 points and 11 assists and scored 14 straight New Jersey points during a five-minute stretch in the third quarter tonight.
But his teammates didn't provide enough firepower and the Nets ran out of steam against the Air-less Chicago Bulls, dropping a 109-105 decision before a sellout crowd of 20,049 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The crowd was suffering from mixed emotions in watching a Bulls team minus the retired Michael Jordan put five players in double figures led by Scottie Pippen's 28.
B.
J.
Armstrong added 20 points, Horace Grant had 18 points and 16 rebounds, and Pete Myers scored 14 points.


Austrian Police Arrest 2 Suspects In Letter-Bombings That Hurt 4
The Austrian police questioned two suspects today in connection with a wave of letter bombings this month that wounded four people, including Mayor Helmut Zilk of Vienna.
"Two Austrian citizens, active in the far-right scene, were arrested after tips on Thursday," the Austrian Interior Minister, Franz Loschnak, said.
"After a house search, materials and implements which could be used to make letter bombs were found."


Time Waits for No Offense, Not Even Reeves's
Last year two of the coaches who were against changing the play clock from 45 seconds to 40 were Joe Gibbs and Dan Reeves.
Gibbs left the Washington Redskins for the auto racing circuit and may soon be in a Carolina Panthers uniform.
Reeves, of course, is working magic in New York.
Reeves didn't like the change to 40 seconds and still doesn't.
So he must have been pleasantly surprised when George Young, the Giants' general manager, was named co-chairman of the competition committee on Thursday.
Does Young expect Reeves to knock on his door anytime soon?


PEARSON OF BRITAIN SELLS ITS CONTROL OF CAMCO
Pearson P.L.C. of Britain said yesterday that it had sold a controlling stake in its United States oil services company Camco International Inc. by selling shares to the public for $15 each, or a total of $194 million.
The price was lower than Pearson's own forecast of $17 to $19 a share, reflecting a sharp drop in oil prices since the sale was first announced in November.
Pearson said it expected to report a nonoperating loss on the Camco sale in its 1993 results after writing back good will.
The company has also sold its fine china business, Royal Doulton P.L.C.
It wants to expand its media interests, which include the newspaper Financial Times, a half share in the magazine The Economist and the British regional newspaper company Westminster Press, into a bigger share of the television market.


Johnson Suit Dismissed
A United States District Court judge in Kalamazoo, Mich., has dismissed a $2 million lawsuit filed by a woman who said that the former National Basketball Association star MAGIC JOHNSON gave her the virus that causes AIDS.


The Next-to-Last Word on Political Correctness
On the PBS program "Firing Line" on Monday night, eight panelists will debate the proposition "Resolved: Political correctness is a menace and a bore." Here are excerpts from the two-hour debate, taped at the University of Pennsylvania on Dec. 3.
The debaters quoted are Robert H. Bork, the former Federal judge (for the resolution), and Prof.
Linda S. Greene of the University of Wisconsin Law School (against).
BORK -- Political correctness, I think, is something that is widespread in this society, and it's part of a mood of radical egalitarianism which has taken hold.
Of course, equality does not occur for all people without coercion.
And I'm afraid that's what we're seeing.
We're seeing it in affirmative action and quotas in the universities.
And we're seeing it in the speech codes, which are judging speech not by what it objectively means, but by how somebody perceives it, over which the speaker has no control.
And I think this kind of leveling in speech and of rejection of the achievement principle for quotas isn't going to work.
This kind of thing, I think, leads to hostility, a loss of civility and a rejection of the achievement principle upon which this society is really based.
GREENE -- P.C. is a menace, but perhaps for different reasons than the other side would say.
It's a menace because it obscures the real problems and issues that we face as a society.
It's a clever rhetorical phrase which turns a debate about racism and sexism into a debate about censorship.
If you can force us to discuss censorship instead of discussing racial epithets, censorship instead of discussing sexual harassment, censorship instead of discussing the question how we are going to transform our institutions into more diverse places, then you have set the terms of the debate and prevented a discussion of the real issues.
And it seems to be a great cause of glee on the right, among conservatives, that they have been able to change this debate.
Let's stop attacking young people who come to college, whose parents send them to college with a reasonable expectation that they won't be the victims of racist, derogatory speech.
Let's stop attacking the victims and start attacking the problem of racism.
P.C. labels prevent that.
The P.C. charge prevents that, and that's why P.C. is a menace.
Let's eliminate the phrase and get on with the unfinished business of transforming our society and transforming our educational institutions.
BORK -- Professor Greene, do you think there is more racism in this society today than there was 30 or 40 years ago?
GREENE -- I think that racism has changed its character.
I think that racism still exists but its character is different.
I think we have two types of racism going on, or at least two.
In one type we see the explicit racist remark or the explicit racial decision, sometimes because of an inadvertent slip.
Other times we have a veiled racism, not necessarily the product of a person's specific intent, but an unconscious comfort which we have with the status quo.
What we need to do is not to focus on calling each other racist or sexist, but instead to try to understand how historical racism has affected our lives and consciousness and not make charges but try to understand how we all -- white, black, men and women -- have been affected by our past.
BORK -- Professor Greene, I think none of us on this side of the table disagrees that people could be punished for making open racial or ethnic insults in a university.
That is not the question in which this arises.
This arises when students steal a student newspaper because they regard it as racist, although it's just conservative, or when a professor is put through sensitivity training for a remark that was not really offensive in the classroom, that's political correctness, and that's what we object to and it's happening.
It's not just a question of forbidding talk about racism.
GREENE -- Well, is it political correctness because the university expresses a concern?
It seems to me that if we eliminate the label of political correctness from our debate, we can talk more explicitly about what speech we want to empower people to engage in.
Let's stop talking about political correctness and instead talk frankly about what we want people to be able to say at the university.
Are we saying that we want students to be able to say anything they wish to another person?
Are we saying that we want faculty to be free to make remarks, however offensive or threatening to their students?
Are we saying that we want professors to be able to make sexual remarks to their students?
All I am saying is that the P.C. charge prevents us from discussing the rules of decorum in the university.
I think that when you mention acts like the stealing of newspapers  [ at Penn ]  or other acts of this nature, we all understand that these acts occur in a context.
I don't think we want to continue to focus on these specific incidents.
I think what we need to talk about is the way that the characterization of this debate prevents us from really discussing how much freedom a professor should -- we've both been professors.
I'm a professor now.
You've been a professor.
You know how important it is to be free to speak and to not be misunderstood.
BORK -- Nobody on this side of the table is saying we should not discuss racism or sexism and how to deal with it.
GREENE -- Judge Bork, don't you think that there is a great deal of hypocrisy in the free speech debate?
We don't have an outcry over the regulation of speech in the context of stock offerings; we don't worry about regulating speech in the area of copyright, plagiarism.
Some of the conservatives are perfectly happy to suppress pornography and obscenity or other types of advertising.
So how would you make the distinction between that speech which ought to be permitted and that speech which we ought to suppress?
BORK -- At the core of the First Amendment -- which I take it is the emblem of free speech in our society -- there is concern for political speech, concern for speech about ideas, about social matters, and so forth.
There is no concern about speech -- at least there wasn't originally concern about speech which expresses no idea, but merely expresses hatred or obscenity or something of that sort.
If somebody says, for example, that Asian-American students turn out to be better at mathematics and physics than others, I take it a speech code might land them on that person.
That's political correctness, and that's wrong.
We've got to be free to discuss differences, abilities, and so forth.
But when you get to a code about a stock offering, you're merely saying don't sell somebody a product that you have lied about.
GREENE -- It seems that you're supporting the idea that we can regulate some hate speech ----
BORK -- In a university. In a university.
GREENE -- In the university.
And hate speech which might be one person making a personally directed racial epithet at another person.
Wouldn't you agree that that ought to be, if not punishable, certainly subject to some type of university discipline and correction?
BORK -- There certainly ought to be.
I remember there was an episode at Brown University not long ago in which a drunken student went out in the quadrangle and shrieked anti-Semitic remarks, and the dean had him in and I think he was suspended.
I don't have much trouble with that.
GREENE -- How do you explain that there is so much intellectual and political firepower marshaled in favor of people who want to yell epithets and derogatory, hurtful language?
How do we explain this marshaling of energy and intellect in support of people who want to act this way towards others?
BORK -- I think nobody does.
GREENE -- Well, then, would you agree with me that what we need to do is talk about the real issues and stop hurling our charges at each other?
BORK -- Oh, the charges are much more fun.


CHRONICLE
PEG BREEN, director of communications for the New York City Council, has been chosen as the next president of the New York Landmarks Conservancy.
She is to take over the private, nonprofit preservation organization on Jan. 17, 1994.
Ms.
Breen, who has also been the liaison for cultural affairs for the Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, will succeed SUSAN HENSHAW JONES.
Ms.
Jones has been named president and director of the National Building Museum in Washington.


Critic's Notebook; Talk on Single Mothers Acquires a Tougher Tone
Goodbye, Murphy. Hello, Murray.
Even people who shun sitcoms must remember the to-do last year over Murphy Brown's decision to become a mother -- on television, but out of wedlock -- and being criticized for it by Vice President Dan Quayle, on television and still in office.
Those who watch mainly hit shows may not have encountered Charles A. Murray, the conservative social scientist whose call for cutting off payments to single mothers more prone to have children than jobs has lately become a starting point for television reports and discussions of the welfare system.


SHUTTLE RELEASES HUBBLE TELESCOPE
Released from the cargo bay of the space shuttle Endeavour like a ship leaving dry dock, the Hubble Space Telescope floated away early today in a slightly higher orbit with new sets of corrective optics, rejuvenated power and electronic systems, and the fervent wishes of astronomers that its troubled years are over.
The 12 1/2-ton telescope, 43 feet long and 14 feet wide, with the golden veneer of its two new solar-power panels gleaming in sunlight, was deployed at 5:27 A.M., Eastern standard time, more than three hours later than scheduled.
Problems with erratic data transmissions from one telescope component caused the delay.
These did not involve any of the repaired parts and were not expected to interfere with future operations.


Classical Music in Review
Minoru Nojima Pianist The Frick Collection


Woman, 80, Is Slain in Her Queens Home
An 80-year-old woman was stabbed two times in the back of the head and died yesterday in her home in Jamaica, Queens, the police said.
There was no indication of robbery or forced entry.
The body of Agnes Stephens was discovered at 2 P.M. by her 58-year-old son, who lived with her in a single-family home at 146-02 115th Avenue.
He had left home about two hours earlier and returned to find his mother lying face-down, fully clothed, between the kitchen and the living room.


Peter Alan Gloo, Pianist and Singer, 37
Peter Alan Gloo, a pianist and singer of popular music at Manhattan nightclubs for a decade, died on Dec. 3 at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center of New York.
He was 37.
The cause was AIDS, said his mother, Joan Gloo, of Mohawk, N.Y.


School Files From Newark Are Delayed
A day-old agreement between the state and the Newark Board of Education on a plan for removing 20 years worth of files from board offices collapsed today, intensifying an already bitter battle for control of the city's school system.
For several hours this afternoon and this evening, it was unclear if the state would immediately seize files that on Thursday it agreed to allow to be copied first.
The files were mostly minutes and agendas of board meetings for the last three years -- records that the board says it cannot operate without.
But shortly before 8 P.M., the state agreed to put off any action until Monday.


2 of 3 Young Black Men in Denver Listed by Police as Suspected Gangsters
Using a variety of criteria, from a youth's choice of clothing to tips from informants, the Denver police have compiled a roster of suspected gang members so vast that it could include two of every three young black men in the city.
Police officials say that only a small percentage of the 6,500 names on the list could be considered "hard core" gang members and that many of these young men, in fact, have never been arrested.


Philip G. Steiner, 92; Made Innovative Toys
Philip G. Steiner, an entrepreneur who helped develop and market innovative toys, died on Nov. 24 at his home in Hyde Park, Ohio.
He was 92.
Mr.
Steiner, with his brothers, Joseph and Albert, founded Kenner Products in Cincinnati in 1946.
Originally a soap and flavoring concern, the brothers branched out in the 1950's.


Review/Theater; Two Women Find an Odd Bridge Across the Abortion-Debate Divide
The prospect of Americans reaching a happy consensus on abortion is, of course, about as likely as unconditional harmony in the Middle East.
And in her starkly delineated drama "Keely and Du," at the Hartford Stage Company, the pseudonymous playwright Jane Martin dramatizes the debate in a way that fixes her characters irretrievably on opposite sides of an ideological chasm.
Accordingly, the play, which has garnered considerable attention since its premiere at the Actors Theater of Louisville, Ky., in March, unfolds as a point-counterpoint presentation of irreconcilable points of view.
There are lightning flashes of eloquence but, in spite of a truly shocking denouement, surprisingly few moments of dramatic urgency in this story of a young pregnant woman who is kidnapped from a clinic by members of a militant anti-abortion organization.
Unlike David Mamet's similarly structured and comparably politically weighted "Oleanna," which deals with sexual harassment, "Keely and Du" never finds a fierce, propulsive dynamic in its dialogue.


Gunman Kills 2 and Hurts 2 In Yonkers Housing Elevator
Two young men were shot and killed and two others were wounded by a lone gunman who sprayed them with gunfire from a semiautomatic weapon tonight as they got into an elevator in a sprawling housing complex in the southwestern corner of Yonkers, the police said.
The shooting occurred about 5 P.M., some 19 hours after a grocery store owner was slain and two customers and a store clerk wounded in an apparent robbery about a half-mile down Riverdale Avenue from the complex of six towers.


Underground Testing
Last week, a New Yorker who had never won a door prize, a raffle or a bingo game, let alone the lottery, finally got a prize.
She became the first person on her block to ride in one of the Bombardier Corporation subway cars that, along with some made by Kawasaki of Japan, the city is testing for possible purchase.
And all she did was take the A train.
The interior is white and green, which is to say easy on the eyes and nerves.
The voice (taped) that announces the stations and transfer points is as serene as a flight attendant's; and the transverse digital signboard that conveys the same information is discreetly elegant.
Together, they create the illusion that one is traveling from Paris to Ankara rather than, say, from West Fourth Street to Columbus Circle.


Showy Plants That Have Staying Power
THIS may seem like an odd time of year to be praising a particular deciduous plant.
Shade trees are leafless, the lawn has been raked for the last time.
The hand tools are tucked away on racks and hooks in the tool shed.
Yet one deciduous plant persists in showing off and it deserves a plug.
It is the oakleaf hydrangea (Hydrangea quercifolia), which remains spectacular to see quite late in the year.
The leaves are large and resemble those of an oak tree except that they are larger, perhaps seven inches long.
In late fall they have a purple-bronze hue, an unusual coloration that is spectacular and can be seen for quite some distance.


Francis A. Gagliardi, Psychiatrist, 78
Dr.
Francis A. Gagliardi of Jamaica, Queens, the former director of psychiatry at Baptist Medical Center in Brooklyn, died Tuesday at Mary Immaculate Hospital in Jamaica.
He was 78.
The cause was a heart attack, said Alessandra Gagliardi, a daughter.


Tourists' Safety On the Agenda
THE effort to insure tourists' safety creates a dilemma for a city.
Visitors need candid, authoritative advice, but if that advice sounds too urgent, they may decide they are unsafe in any case and take their trips elsewhere.
Putting it another way, seeing a police officer is reassuring, but the sight of soldiers with machine guns had the opposite effect when I saw them in the late 1970's guarding the portals of the convent atop the hill called La Popa outside Cartagena, Colombia.
In the light of the acute anxiety generated by crimes against tourists in Florida, a number of experts were interviewed about effective techniques to safeguard tourists.
Most of them took note of this dilemma -- seeking to make tourists street-wise without unduly frightening them.
Everyone had some answers, particularly telling tourists to stay away from areas that make them uneasy, but no one had a sweeping plan.


Georgia Defends Coach
The University of Georgia says its new defensive coordinator, MARION CAMPBELL, did not break any rules by attending team practices during the season.
"In my inquiry into the allegations I'm convinced he was not coaching, he merely provided advice," Georgia's assistant athletic director, HOKE WILDER, said Friday.
"Coach Campbell in no way violated the rules."
National Collegiate Athletic Association rules limit the number of coaches who may work with a college team.
The Southeastern Conference ordered Georgia to see whether Campbell's presence at practices before the Florida and Auburn games violated the rules.


Hillary Rodham Clinton Strikes a New Pose And Multiplies Her Images
IT was a running joke among reporters during the 1992 Democratic convention in New York: If you really want to get your head bitten off, go ask Susan Thomases, Hillary Clinton's friend and adviser, what fashion statement Mrs.
Clinton wanted to make.
"Clothes," Ms.
Thomases told one reporter, with a contemptuous laugh, "are not something I think about."


Beyond the Usual Lawyer-Bashing
To the Editor:
Having read Jill Gerston's article "This Season They've Rebuilt 'Picket Fences' "  [ Nov. 21 ]  I wanted to note that some Jewish viewers find the depiction of the unremittingly evil Jewish lawyer in the CBS series to be so repugnant as to be anti-Semitic (no, not just the usual lawyer-bashing).


Transplant Tissues to Be Checked for AIDS Virus
The Food and Drug Administration announced on Friday that beginning next week it would regulate the sale of bone, skin and other tissues used for transplants to help protect recipients from infection with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Two years ago, officials found that a Virginia donor who died in a 1985 shooting had been infected with H.I.V., even though two tests on his blood before the removal of his organs and tissues did not detect the virus.
Three people who had received transplants from the donor later died of AIDS.


Waterfront Vision
To the Editor:
We write in response to Herbert Muschamp's essay "Fear, Hope and the Changing of the Guard"  [ Nov. 14 ] .
While we share his hope that architecture and design will "play a more substantial role" in urban affairs, we believe his criticism of the city's new waterfront zoning is not well informed.


More Guards Walking Beats
Frank de Falco and his neighbors on West 94th Street were tired of picking up crack vials from the sidewalks.
They worried constantly that someone would break into their cars at night.
When they looked out of their windows, they often saw people urinating in the street.
"We weren't dealing with hardened criminals, but these people were making our lives miserable," said Mr. de Falco, a member of the Neighborhood in the 90's Block Association.
"We had to do something."


Ballot May Deny What Yeltsin Seeks
Elections are said to be the best school for democracy.
But if Russia eventually graduates as a full-fledged democracy, few people will look back at this first multiparty campaign, which ends with voting on Sunday, with much pride or nostalgia.
Daubed in the blood of October's violent confrontation between President Boris N. Yeltsin and the holdover Parliament, these elections have been tossed together so quickly, with so much improvisation about the rules and so little knowledge about the candidates, that they are unlikely to provide the legitimacy for a new political system that Mr.
Yeltsin, and the West, would like.


Conversations: John P. Morris; A Disillusioned Teamster Boss Doubts Even He Can Save Labor
JOHN P. MORRIS is a union boss who thinks the American labor movement is just about dead.
"The last chapter will be written in the next five years," he says.
He is Pennsylvania's and much of the mid-Atlantic's top Teamster, representing 140,000 members, and in some ways he fits the stereotype of his profession.
Sixty-seven years old, the hot-tempered scion of Irish anthracite miners, he is quick with the four-letter slur and his one good fist.
He has a stump for a right hand, a twice-broken nose, four-times-broken collar bones and the scars of clubbings, stabbings and surgery on his chin, chest, back and across a kneecap.


Optimism Buoys GATT Talks Despite a Rift Over U.S. Trade Laws
Trade talks among 116 countries have become increasingly mired in a dispute that pits the United States against most of the rest of the world over whether American trade laws should remain intact.
Despite the slow progress, however, the mood here remains one of near-certainty that some sort of global trade agreement will be concluded in the next several days.
Most issues have been resolved, including the most contentious fights over farm subsidies, European computer tariffs and American apparel tariffs.


Knicks Continue To Baffle The Pacers
Reggie Miller is tired of trying to figure out the Knicks.
He doesn't know why they always seem to get the big defensive play when it's necessary.
He doesn't know why his Pacers never seem able to take full advantage of New York's mistakes.
What he does know, though, is that the Knicks always seem to get the victory.
Miller got another lesson in this particular brand of frustration when he and the Pacers visited Madison Square Garden last night.
In a game that was often ugly on both sides, the Knicks managed to turn a great game by Patrick Ewing into just about all they needed for a 98-91 victory.


One Cop, Eight Square Blocks
It will always come down to this -- one mutt, one cop, eye to eye, struggling for control of the street.
The cop is Kevin Jett, Badge No. 19980, Beat 12, Sector George, the 52d Precinct in the northwest Bronx.
The mutt is Killer, a Jamaican drug dealer with arctic eyes and a taste for letting blood.
The cop patrols on foot from East 194th Street to East 198th Street, from Decatur Avenue to Valentine Avenue -- one man, eight square blocks, perhaps 12,000 people.
Most of these, in the officer's words, are "upstanding citizens." They work hard, worry about their children, struggle to survive.
Among them, however, boldly encamped on corners or lying in alleyways, is a species of citizen that Kevin Jett has come to despise: the urban predator -- Cuco and Sweet Pea, Gravy and Chisel Head, Scarface and Killer.


Religion Case May Broaden Disabilities Law
To the Editor:
Your report that the Supreme Court has accepted a freedom of religion case involving the establishment of a separate school district to serve the children of an upstate New York Hasidic community misses the central point (front page, Nov. 30).


Seton Hall Survives Departure by Hurley
After losing Terry Dehere, Jerry Walker and Luther Wright to the pro ranks, Seton Hall was expected to have more than its usual share of problems this season.
But not too many people thought things would be this bad for the defending Big East champions, and yesterday they got even worse.


Mickey Kantor
There are several things about Mickey Kantor that his friends have learned to accept.
His competitiveness.
"If I took Mickey fishing with me," says Bob Doochin, a close childhood friend, "he made everything into a damn contest. If I didn't stop him, before you knew it he'd be counting the size of the fish, the number of the fish."


Today, Astronauts Don't Expect Ticker-Tape Parades
JOHN GLENN'S role as an astronaut of the 1960's could have been played by a chimpanzee with much the same results.
But the strong, handsome test pilot soared one place no chimp will every go: into the pantheon of American heros.
Ticker tape rained down.
The door to the Senate creaked open.
Tom Wolfe determined that he possessed "The Right Stuff."
Wendy Lawrence, daughter of a test pilot who trained with the first astronauts, was 2 years old in 1962 when Mr.
Glenn first orbited the earth.
After the Naval Academy, helicopter flight training, and a master's in oceanography from M.I.T., Lieut.
Commdr.
Lawrence joined the astronaut corps a year ago.


TODAY IN THE CITY
VIOLENCE AND THE SCHOOLS Amid rising alarm, New Yorkers are searching for ways to keep the children safe.
With a school-by-school breakdown of violent incidents.
Page 1.
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT A new life for a Bowery flophouse; the illicit medicine peddlers of Brighton Beach.
Pages 6 and 10.
SOAPBOX Looking for work and finding grace at a Harlem soup kitchen.
Page 25.
The City, section 13 (distributed in most of New York City).


Who Cares About Religion? Nobody Lives It Anymore
To the Editor:
The tone of Robert Lipsyte's column is insulting, and the choice of words demonstrates intolerance.


Israelis and Palestinians Face Pivotal Parley Today
With a key deadline two days away and anxieties running high on both sides, Israeli and Palestinian leaders readied themselves today for a pivotal meeting on Sunday that will decide if they can smoothly enter the next phase of their agreement to introduce Palestinian self-rule to the occupied territories.
Negotiators are stuck, as they have been for weeks, over arrangements for security once Israel starts withdrawing its forces and transferring authority to the Palestinians.
The shift is scheduled to begin on Monday in the troubled Gaza Strip and in this balmy oasis near the Jordan River.


Fordham's Balancing Act Proves to Be a Winning One
Fordham 74, Iona 55
Fordham, getting double figures from five players, led all the way and defeated Iona, 74-55, yesterday in New Rochelle, N.Y.


SUNDAY, December 12, 1993; If You Have to Ask ...
It's brain-boggler time.
There you are watching the World Series, or a tennis match, or the Super Bowl.
During the commercial breaks, advertisers pitch beer, trucks and televisions to you.
Then a 30-second spot for Nasdaq comes on, a high-tech jumble of infrared images of a jogger, the globe in an eyedropper, erythrocytes pumping through the bloodstream -- and the tag, "the stock market for the next hundred years."'
Yes, well, what exactly is being advertised here?
Can you buy a Nasdaq?
Does it have a warranty?
What kind of reception does it get?
The answer to all these questions is the same as the famous one to the question about how much a yacht costs.
If you have to ask, you can't afford it.
If you have to ask what a Nasdaq is, the ad isn't talking to you.


Is a Diplomacy of Dollars Really Enough?
SHORTLY after the Clinton Administration took office, Secretary of State Warren Christopher told a gathering of American, Japanese and European businessmen that he saw himself as the America Desk officer at the State Department and that his top priority was "American jobs."
At a recent White House briefing, Secretary of Commerce Ron Brown introduced Mr.
Christopher by commenting that the country "finally has a Secretary of State" who believes one of his prime tasks is "to promote American business abroad."


Giuliani Quietly Meets on Gay Concerns
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani will not take over City Hall for another three weeks, but he has already adopted a familiar tactic from his predecessors' playbooks.
He keeps a public schedule, the details of which are passed out to news organizations each day, and a private schedule, whose details are closely guarded.
Last week, for example, Mr.
Giuliani quietly sought to reach out to homosexuals, who are widely perceived to have backed Mayor David N. Dinkins in the mayoral race.
Mr.
Giuliani met on Monday evening with 50 gay men and lesbians in a private home in Manhattan to talk about issues important to them.
The meeting was not listed on his public schedule.


Mutual Funds; Grasping the Slippery Idea of Risk
WITH the bull markets in stocks and bonds starting to age, attention is turning to a basic but critical concept: risk.
Legislative and regulatory watchdogs are speaking with the mutual fund research company Morningstar Inc. about developing a universal risk-rating system for funds.
In mid-November, a notice from the National Association of Securities Dealers reminded its fund-group members to disclose the risks of fund investing.
And the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation will introduce new bond fund risk ratings in January.


CHINESE DISSIDENT WARNED BY BEIJING
In China's first attempt to silence the country's most famous dissident since he was released last fall from a long prison term, Wei Jingsheng said the Public Security Bureau has told him that he cannot write articles for publication at home or abroad.
The warning was reportedly given to the 43-year-old Mr.
Wei last week and was related to a piece Mr.
Wei wrote for the Op-Ed page of The New York Times, which was highly critical of China's attitude toward democracy and human rights.
The essay, which appeared on Nov. 18, was the first article Mr.
Wei has written for any publication since he was released last September from 14 1/2 years in prison.


School Integration: Summing Up the Case; For the State: Legislature Has Met Constitutional Test
ON Thursday in Rockville Superior Court, Judge Harry Hammer will hear the final summations in the lawsuit known as Sheff v.
O'Neill, which is seeking to overcome the segregation of poor Hispanic and black children in Hartford's schools by linking the schools with those in 21 surrounding towns.
The suit seeks to improve the education of Hartford children by breaking up the concentration of minority students in the city's schools, where the enrollment is more than 93 percent Hispanic and black, and by obtaining more state aid to overcome the educational obstacles posed by poverty.
Judge Hammer, who heard opening arguments in the case on Dec. 16, 1992, is expected to issue his decision in the spring.
After nearly three months of testimony earlier this year, each side has summarized their arguments in briefs submitted to Judge Hammer.


THE PHONY ISLAMIC THREAT
Edward Said argues justly that the culture and congeries of loyalties represented by the term "Islam" should be understood as they are experienced by Islam's adherents, rather than through Western caricature or demonization.
This is an exhortation to fairness and informed sensitiveness that Professor Said would do well to take to heart.
His bundling together "foreign occupation, imperialism or Zionism" as a list of interchangeable, self-evident evils is an especially odious instance of the kind of culture slander he purports to deplore.
Zionism, too, merits understanding through the lives and consolations of its adherents -- as a cherishing of an ancient intellectual, ethical and linguistic heritage; as a restoration, after long and bitter exile, to homeland.


Fred Marcus Robin Harrison, Jeffrey Kaplan
Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert W. Harrison of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Robin Gail Harrison to Jeffrey Michael Kaplan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen H. Kaplan of Woodmere, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Harrison, 24, is a first-year law student at Yeshiva University.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the founder and chairman of Financo Inc., an investment banking company in New York.


Data Bank/December 12, 1993
Data Bank/December 12, 1993
Consumer Credit
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
Annual percent change
12.7
9.6
8.0
Producer Prices
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Monthly percent change
0.0
-0.2
0.2
Consumer Prices
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.4
0.0
U.S. Productivity
III Q'93
II Q'93
I Q'93
In percent
4.3
-0.4
-1.6
3-Month Treasury Bills
Dec. 10
Dec. 3
Nov. 26
Rate in percent
3.04
3.10
3.09
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
3.23
3.26
3.23
Weekly Jobless Claims
Dec. 3
Nov. 26
Nov. 19
In thousands
335
322
339
Electric Power Production
Millions of gigawatt hours
57,218
55,093
55,290


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
CROWN HEIGHTS A Holiday Sing-Along At the Botanic Garden
The Brooklyn Botanic Garden is celebrating the season today with "Winter Greens," a special tour and a concert.
The hourlong tour, beginning at 1 P.M., will explore the garden's one-acre collection of conifers and holly.
A concert by Dulcie Barlow, harpist; Clare Hoffman, flutist, and Peter Emery (left), tenor, will follow in the Steinhardt Conservatory, concluding with a carol sing-along.
The conservatory is decorated with wreaths, birch and ficus trees and hundreds of white lights, and through Jan. 2 it is also the site of a quilt show.
Twelve of the 13 quilts shown were created by Brooklyn artists.
The 13th, consisting of 144 patches with winter and holiday scenes, was made by more than 100 children from public and private schools in Brooklyn.
Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue; "Winter Greens," today, 1 to 4 P.M.; quilt show, Tuesday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; free; (718) 941-4044.
FLUSHING  Korean-American Writers Describe Their Isolation
Four Korean-American writers will read from their works today as part of the Queens Museum of Art's show "Across the Pacific: Contemporary Korean-American Art."
Marie G. Lee, a children's book author; Walter Lew, a poet and film maker; Sung J. Reno, a poet and playwright, and Diana Son, a playwright, will address issues like immigration, racism and isolation.
The show, which continues to Jan. 9, includes paintings, sculpture, film, video and symposiums with artists from South Korea, the United States and Canada. (Below, a detail from "Satisfaction" by Y. David Chung.)
"Because there are few Korean voices in the mainstream media, Koreans have had little opportunity to speak for themselves," said Jane Farver, the director of exhibitions.
The show, she said, lets artists "make visible" the effects of American life on the Korean identity."
The Queens Museum of Art, New York City Building, Flushing Meadows, Corona Park; today, 2 P.M.; free with museum admission, which is $3 or, for children and elders, $1.50; (718) 592-9700.
CHELSEA  How the Hula Came to Be, Plus an Anklet Dance
A history of the Hawaiian hula will be among the offerings today at a dance program at the Lotus Fine Arts Center.
Filipino and Burmese dances will also be presented.
Potri Ranka Manis (below), a princess of the Maranao tribe of the southern Philippines, will perform a dance centered on the singkil, an anklet with bells that was worn by young women of the tribe and was intended to keep them from eloping.
A Burmese Kablayut dance and a piece combining song, dance and acting will be presented by U Win Maung, a son of the renowned Burmese dancer Shwe Man Tin Maung.
And Makalina, the director of Hawaiian Express, a Polynesian group, will dance the hula.
The Lotus Fine Arts Center, 109 West 27th Street; today, 5 P.M.; $10, or $5 for children; (212) 627-1076.
KEW GARDENS  Christmas-Tree Lighting: Children to Set the Pace
Queens residents have been invited to carol and dance around the nine-foot-tall spruce in front of Borough Hall as it stars in its third lighting ceremony on Thursday.
Claire Shulman, the Borough President, and Oliver B. Spellman, the Borough Parks Commissioner, will jointly throw the switch that illuminates the tree.
The tree, first lit in 1991, will be decorated this year with ornaments made by preschoolers in a program of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
Youth groups sponsored by the department will get the singing and dancing going; the Salvation Army will provide refreshments.
Queens Borough Hall, 120-55 Queens Boulevard; Thursday, 4 P.M.; free; (718) 520-5948.
ERIN ST. JOHN KELLY


SUNDAY, December 12, 1993; Too Old to Smoke
Smokers' rights, long considered about as compelling as mineral rights, have suffered another blow.
But this time the argument on behalf of smokers was a good one.
And it was made not by a friend of tobacco, but by the New York State Department of Health.
The scene of the conflict was the Maplewood Nursing Home in Webster, a suburb of Rochester.
The home has been smoke-free since 1947, and currently denies 72 residents (at last count) the right to poison themselves with tar and nicotine.
Recently the state insisted the home provide an opportunity for the residents to smoke, and Maplewood went to court.


New York Hotels
To the Editor: I read with interest Terry Trucco's article "Checking Out New York Hotels" (Sept. 19).
In it, she gave what seemed like a mediocre review to the St.
Moritz Hotel on Central Park South, and made it sound kind of cute that there were mint-green curtains and crumbs on the park-view window sill ("The previous occupants had apparently enjoyed the view, too.")
I had a much less cute experience at the St.
Moritz Hotel last winter.
When I arrived, the lobby was jammed.
I waited half an hour before I was checked in.
A porter showed me to a room that astonished me: The bed was softer and droopier than I've seen in a life of traveling ( including third-class accommodations in Thailand and North Vietnam).
There were holes in the wall near the floor; you could fit a baseball through them.
I trudged back down to the jammed lobby and I waited in line again.
I told the clerk it was one of the most depressing rooms I'd ever seen.
He explained that this was one of the "unrefurbished" rooms and gave me a key to a second room.


At 33, He Is the New John Elway
John Elway in pinstripes. Imagine the possibilities.
He could very easily be completing his 11th season with the Yankees instead of the Denver Broncos.
Right field would have been his home, Yankee Stadium his neighborhood.


Sarah Wilson and Andrew W. Mercer
Sarah Jean Wilson, a daughter of Constance S. Wilson of Fair Haven, N.J., and the late Douglas B. Wilson, was married yesterday to Andrew William Mercer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry D. Mercer Jr. of Rumson, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Kenneth O. Jones performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Mercer, 28, is an assistant to the international project finance advisory group at the Union Bank of Switzerland in New York.
She graduated from the College of William and Mary.
Her father was a vice president for commercial lending at Bankers Trust Company in New York.
Her mother teaches mathematics at the Beers Street School in Hazlet, N.J.


Proved Beyond a Doubt: Trials Are Not Predictable
One thing that can be said with certainty about the World Trade Center trial, which finished its 10th week of testimony last week, is that the lawyers have been working hard, either preparing some 150 witnesses for examination or getting ready to cross-examine them.
And yet, events last week, perhaps the most important and dramatic of the trial so far, illustrate a truism:
No matter how hard trial lawyers work, no matter how they strive to anticipate every eventuality, once they have a witness on the stand, they can never be sure what is going to happen.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
GENIUS: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman By James Gleick.
Vintage, $14.
The physicist Richard Feynman was brilliant enough to share a Nobel Prize for research conducted when he was only in his 20's, and romantic enough to marry the woman he loved even when he knew she was terminally ill.
Last year our reviewer, Walter Moore, said that "Genius" "provides a good introduction for those who were not privileged to know him personally."  THE COLLECTED STORIES By William Trevor.
Penguin, $16.
The author writes most often of his native Ireland and the humble, unadorned lives of those who inhabit its small towns and countryside.
But this collection of 85 stories, which represent more than 30 years of work, is never limited in emotional depth or vividness of detail.
Mr.
Trevor "proceeds to uncover new layers of yearning and pain, new angles of vision and credible thought -- layers that most readers would never have guessed in men, women and lone unassisted children whose home and history would seem to have left them as mute as Galway ponies in the rain," Reynolds Price said here earlier this year.


Whitney Riggs, M. S. O'Connor
Whitney West Riggs, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrason Riggs Jr. of Nantucket, Mass., was married there yesterday to M. Stephen O'Connor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin J. O'Connor of Mequon, Wis.
The Rev.
Andrew Foster officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.


Ward Wins Heisman By About 100 Yards
"I'm not an individual type of guy," Charlie Ward said yesterday, the day that belonged to him.
It could serve as the epitaph of his college career, if the Heisman Trophy had any room for one.
But Ward will have to accept his Heisman the way it is, as an overwhelming choice for the outstanding college football player in the nation.
He rose above the crowd, the balloting and the regional politics that can overwhelm the months of discussion that precede the presentation of the award.
Ward, the Florida State quarterback, became the 59th winner by a margin that was among the largest in history, receiving 91 percent of the first-place votes, 6 percentage points higher than Michigan's Desmond Howard, who had set the record in 1991.


Year After Devastating Storm, Nature Offers Not-So-Gentle Reminder
Everyone who lives near the ocean learns the signals of a big storm moving on the coast.
Low-flying clouds fuse into a dark blanket to blot out the morning sun; rainbursts slash against the windows; crashing waves claw high on the sandy face of broad beaches.


NASA Success in Hubble Mission Gives Space Station Plan a Boost
The successful repair of the Hubble Space Telescope, the first big confidence-building accomplishment in years for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, may have infused new life into the agency's next major project, the $40 billion space station.
In a telephone call to congratulate the astronauts of the shuttle Endeavour on Friday, President Clinton said that the current mission was "an immense boost to the space program in general," and in general language he gave the space station project his most forceful endorsement yet.
Public support for the station has been waning, and only by the barest margin did the proposal survive a tough Congressional budget fight last month, leaving its future very much in doubt.


The Two Sides to Every Sin
Kurt Weill, long known to Americans principally as the man who wrote "Mack the Knife" and a string of Broadway shows with left-leaning political messages, has now assumed his place as one of the most thoughtful and original composers of this century.
The reassessment began in the 1970's with successful productions of Weill's opera "The Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny" in San Francisco and at the Metropolitan Opera and was further fueled by popular recordings of his songs by Teresa Stratas.
As proof of Weill's acceptance as a serious composer of the first rank, the New York Philharmonic is devoting a week to his music and that of his contemporaries.
In subscription concerts beginning on Wednesday at Avery Fisher Hall, the orchestra will perform "The Seven Deadly Sins," a mordant series of absurdist tableaux, with the soprano Angelina Reaux.
In a nod to the work's theatrical origin, the Philharmonic has commissioned the artist Oscar Hammerstein III to produce copies of the original stage designs by Caspar Neher.
Seven banners depicting the deadly sins will be hung in the promenade.


In a Novelist's Eye, Children Meet Art
"ALL my art has been an attempt to recapture one image, that of a topaz bird I saw for one hour outside my house as a child," writes a great-great-grandmother we will never meet, in the early pages of Carole Maso's young first novel "Ghost Dance."
"So generation after generation of Hausers began to look into the air.  People mistook them for snobs because their heads were always raised, but what they were looking for of course was that elusive bird."


Monet's Pond and Henry Moore's Moor
ARTISTS' GARDENS From Claude Monet to Jennifer Bartlett.
By Madison Cox.
Photographs by Erica Lennard. 208 pp.
New York: Harry N. Abrams. $49.50.


ECONOMIC PULSE: The Great Plains; Plains, While Still Bleak, Offer a Chance to the Few
Survival has always demanded ingenuity in the Great Plains, where 19th-century settlers, making do without timber and nails, used mud and grass to build their homes.
Today vast stretches of this region are about as lonesome as they were a century ago.
But some small economic miracles, born of creative ideas and the willingness to take a chance, are thriving in the scrub and dust of America's least populated quarter.


Drugs, Performance and Tests
To the Editor:
In "Finding a Better Way to Test for Drugs" (Viewpoints, Nov. 28), William L. Holstein favors impairment testing over the more common practice of specifically testing for drugs as less intrusive on employees' privacy and dignity.


London's 'Other' Royalty, With Raiment to Match
WITH a little bit of luck and a lot of new costumes, yet another revival of "My Fair Lady" has opened on Broadway.
Purists may complain about some of the details, but at least one of the show's costume traditions endures.
In "Get Me to the Church on Time," two dancers wear suits that are lavishly trimmed with buttons -- the uniform of London's working-class "royalty," the Pearlies.


Niekro, Throwing a Curve, to Manage Women's Team
At this time last year, Phil Niekro, baseball's top-winning knuckleball pitcher, was excited about his chances for the Hall of Fame after becoming eligible for the first time.
He missed out on the required number of votes, but with the announcement of the Cooperstown Class of '94 only a month away, wouldn't you think Niekro would be just as eager to find out his status this year?


Insulting Message
To the Sports Editor:
I am sick and tired of the Dennis Byrd story.
What has Dennis Byrd accomplished that merits an autobiography and a movie?
He was a football player whose career was ended by an injury, and who now has become a television analyst.
If the injury had been almost any other, the whole thing would have gone relatively unnoticed.
I am sick and tired of the Dennis Byrd story because it perpetuates the myth that one must walk again in order for the story to have a happy ending.


A Simple Way to Protect Tapes
To the Editor:
In "Memories Linger but the Tapes Fade" (Technology, Nov. 28), Lawrence M. Fisher left out an important -- and simple -- point.
Consumers should punch out the safety tab found on the edge of video cassettes to prevent accidental recording over existing material.
BRIAN HOLTZ  Middleton, Wis., Dec. 1  The writer is a consultant with Network Technologies and Applications Inc. in Middleton, Wis.


Jessica Ballantyne, William Gerber
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward L. Ballantyne of Suffern, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jessica Marie Ballantyne to William Alan Gerber, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis Gerber of Wyncote, Pa.
A December 1994 wedding is planned.
Miss Ballantyne, 25, is a publicity associate at Simon &amp; Schuster in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Wesleyan University.
Her father is the head of the financial copy desk of The New York Times.


Ireland's President Acts on the Divorce Issue
In a rare exercise of power, President Mary Robinson has used her office in a way that could advance the cause of those who want to make divorce legal in this predominantly Roman Catholic land.
Mrs.
Robinson surprised the country last week by announcing that she would send the Matrimonial Home Bill, which was approved by Parliament, to the Supreme Court for review.
Submitting legislation to the court is one of the few powers given to the President, who is still referred to as "him" in the Constitution.
Mrs.
Robinson has not referred any other bills to the court.
Her referral was done with the approval of the Council of State, a body of ranking government and judicial officials and former prime ministers.


The Biographer and The Murderer
Biography is getting bad press these days.
A "lowly trade," Martin Amis pronounced it, reviewing Andrew Motion's biography of Philip Larkin.
"Something horrid has recently befallen the craft of biography," lamented Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. in The New Republic, deploring the glut of gossipy new lives on the market.
Joyce Carol Oates even coined a word to describe the genre: pathography -- biographies that revel in "dysfunction and disaster, illnesses and pratfalls, failed marriages and failed careers, alcoholism and breakdowns and outrageous conduct."
Now biographers themselves have joined the chorus.
"Biography as a form has become the revenge of little people on big people," noted Edmund White, the biographer of Jean Genet, in The New York Times Book Review a few weeks ago.


Euro Disney Trying To Warm Up Winter
AFTER displaying a distinct corporate cockiness when opening its resort near the French capital a year and a half ago, Euro Disney is now backpedaling furiously, slashing prices at its hotels and restaurants, serving once-banned alcohol at the theme park and promoting cheaper entry tickets.
As winter descends on Marne-la-Vallee, 20 miles from Paris, adult entry fees to the theme park have been lowered to 175 francs ($29.60) in the low season, which includes January, from 250 francs ($42.40) in the high season, which includes the week following Christmas.
In addition, a 1,040-franc package for a family of four (children must be 11 or younger) includes two days entry, a night in ahotel and breakfast.
Restaurants are offering complete meals for about 40 francs ($6.80), just a little more than they were previously charging for a sandwich.


Frank Gehry Lifts Creativity Out of the Box
The New Frederick R. Weisman Museum of Art, designed by Frank Gehry for the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis, may remind you of the first time you saw mercury.
You were a child, learning to differentiate between one thing and another, and along came this stuff that threw the whole idea of differentiation into doubt.
Is it metal?
Water?
Magic?
An adult version of Silly Putty?
How come it neither hardens nor flows?
Do you call it a piece or a puddle?
Call it a lesson: the mind must make room for a world where things will not always fall neatly into place.
The mercurial quality of the Weisman Museum, which opened three weeks ago, isn't solely due to the quicksilver reflections of light that constantly play over its gleaming stainless steel facade.
Nor is it just a matter of the mutable images -- a fish, an ice palace, Rapunzel's tower -- fleetingly evoked by the facade's flaring, curving facets.
It arises, rather, from an idea about art and its place in the contemporary scheme of things.
This is Frank Gehry's first art museum.
He has designed some brilliant museum installations over the years, and his Temporary Contemporary, a converted industrial shed, remains one of downtown Los Angeles's enduring joys.
But the Weisman is the first art museum Gehry has designed from the ground up, and it invites a closer view of the kinship between art and architecture.


A Teddy Bear for Every Occasion
A benefit and auction for Housing Works, at Industria Superstudio, Dec. 8.


SURFACING
MOVIES  It's a depressing life: Hollywood is spreading very little cheer this Christmas, releasing films on such dire subjects as AIDS ("Philadelphia"), the Holocaust ("Schindler's List," above) and the Vietnam war ("Heaven and Earth").
PRETENSION  Ritzy Ritz crackers: These gourmet-style chocolate-dipped wafers are available as a "limited edition" through the holidays, according to Nabisco. (Suggested retail price for box of 15: $2.69.)


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a sentence in a review on Nov. 28 about "Transforming a Rape Culture," a book of essays, misstated the positions of two essayists.
They do not disagree about anti-pornography legislation; both support it.
The sentence should have read: "Honorable women and men can respectfully disagree with Nina Silver, a Reichian therapist and writer, and Steven Hill, the editor of The Activist Men's Journal, about the merits of supporting anti-pornography legislation."


Teaneck's Efforts at Healing Racial Strife Are Paying Off
WHEN a white police officer shot and killed a black teen-ager here in April 1990, a town's image of itself also died.
Suddenly, the leafy suburban community that had chased away blockbusters and eventually became one of the first predominantly white towns in the nation to integrate their schools voluntarily, in 1964, found itself riven by racial strife.


Finding Beauty in Babyless Strollers
Sometimes urban refuse speaks of great melancholy, and so it is with the empty baby strollers that occasionally appear, seemingly out of nowhere, on the city's sidewalks.
Nari Ward, 30, a multimedia artist, encountered his first abandoned stroller on 125th Street in the morning rush last summer.
It had pink and white horizontal stripes and pink wheels that worked perfectly.
"It bothered me that no one else saw this sadness in the thing," Mr.
Ward said.
"I wanted to somehow make that sadness apparent, so I decided to collect more of them."


Smaller Architects Find Their Niche
NEIL MURPHY is not the first architect who has been asked to do something extra to please a client.
But he is probably one of few who has ever been asked to scratch a client's tongue.
The client in question was a young beluga whale at the Aquarium for Wildlife Conservation in Coney Island, where Mr.
Murphy is working on a permanent tent-like structure to cover the 180,000-gallon oceanic tank.
Greeting the architect, the whale opened its mouth wide.


Lost and Found
To the Editor: I want to thank Lesley Hazelton for her eloquent observations in "In the Traveler's Lost and Found" (Oct. 31).
Ms.
Hazelton has opened my eyes and helped me accept one such loss.
After living in Japan for two years, I decided it was time to return.
However, it would not be a quick 10-hour flight home, rather a six-month sojourn through lands unknown to me.


Another View On Bias Attacks
After reading "Skinheads a Growing Cause for Concern" (Oct. 31), I realized that if, like Paul Goldenberg (head of the state's Office of Bias Crime and Community Relations) and the Anti-Defamation League, you make a living fighting bias, you have to create a bogyman to justify your salary and the measures you use to stomp out the threat you have created.
Hence the damage posed by 400 skinheads, naturally all white, out of eight million people.


NATO COMMITMENT SOUGHT BY POLAND
Fearing that Russia is reassuming its historical role as an imperial power, Poland's Foreign Minister says the countries of Eastern Europe want a concrete commitment from Washington and Western Europe on membership in NATO.
So far, Foreign Minister Andrzej Olechowski said in an interview on Friday, the West has failed to understand that a post-cold-war security vacuum in Eastern Europe could be filled by a resurgent Russia.


U.N. Tours, Suspended For 2 Months, Resume
Tours of the United Nations, suspended for two months because of anxiety about possible terrorist attacks, have resumed and will be offered five days a week through December.
In January and February, they will stop for the regular seasonal closing, starting again in March.
Because of the security issue, while the tours will still enter the vast General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council chamber, they will no longer visit two companion halls, for the Trusteeship and Security Councils.
This will take about five minutes off the tours, which normally run 45 minutes.
Security for the Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali of Egypt, has also been strengthened since the Federal trial opened for suspects in the bombing in February of the World Trade Center; the charges say that the United Nations enclave on the East River was among the other potential targets.


A Hypnotist Taps The Mind's Power In North Haven
ROBERT McGRATH stared into his visitor's eyes as she settled into a large, acoustically designed chair called an alpha chamber.
He flicked on the stereo releasing a flow of baroque music into the chamber and asked her to close her eyes.
"First of all, I would like you to concentrate on your breathing," he said, in a calm, mellifluous voice.
"Feel the rhythm of it, the slow, steady rising and falling of your diaphragm."


Noble Pursuits
Celebrating the education of children, the moves of dancers and the inspiration of artists.


Lay Off Cotton Mather
To the Editor:
Richard Lingeman perpetuates a demonstrably false caricature, in his review of Theodore Dreiser's "Jennie Gerhardt" (Nov. 7), when he praises Jennie as "so sympathetic . . . that only a Cotton Mather would have judged her an un redeemable sinner."


Celia Kaner And Ron Offir
Celia Kaner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Israel Kaner of Monsey, N.Y., was married last evening to Ron Shraga Offir, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Offir of Atlantic Beach, L.I., Rabbi Basil Herring officiated at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs.
Offir, 24, graduated from the State University at Albany.
She is a training coordinator in the executive office of KPMG Peat Marwick, the accounting firm, in Montvale, N.J.
The bride's father is the president of Air-Conditioning and Appliance Center, a repair business in Old Greenwich, Conn.
Her mother, Lea Kaner, owns and operates Lea Skin Care in Monsey.


Crime
Jane Langton.
Irene Allen.
Kate Charles.
Bless them for elevating our spirits during this holy season with their unorthodox works.
Ministers are murdered, organists are kidnapped and churches are vandalized in this lively bunch of ecclesiastical mysteries.
Homicidal passions even shatter the serenity of the peaceable Quakers.
Who says that a life of piety has to be dull?
An arrogant evangelical minister is bashed to death right in church, in Kate Charles's cunningly plotted whodunit THE SNARES OF DEATH (Mysterious Press/Warner, $18.95), after he callously strips a little village church of its Anglo-Catholic paintings, statuary, candles, incense and other "offensively popish" devotional trappings.
Although everyone in the Norfolk parish of St.
Mary the Virgin had cause to loathe this zealot, the bloody evidence points to a young clergyman in love with the new pastor's daughter.


Gardener's Recess
A belated welcome to the Sunday Metro section, gardeners.
It's an honor to be next to the obituaries, the stars and the weather -- an eloquent reminder that for all our great thoughts, our gardens will be around long after we are compost.
Your gardens should be put to bed by now.
If you didn't wrap your fig, so be it. (Oh, go ahead; run out there with the tar paper. Maybe it survived the deep freeze this weekend. )


A Small Victory For Fusion Power
THE dream of hydrogen fusion as a source of cheap and abundant energy came a little closer to realization last week when physicists at Princeton University loaded a reactor with high-strength fuel and fired bursts releasing up to 5.3 million watts of power -- a landmark in fusion research.
Physicists who had worked on Princeton's Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor since its construction began in 1976 -- and had lived through difficult budget constraints and technical problems -- were exultant.
On Thursday, as midnight approached, the big, doughnut-shaped machine (called tokamak after a Russian acronym for "torroidal, magnetic chamber") moaned as powerful beam injectors slammed deuterium and tritium atoms into the machine's interior, heating its fuel to a temperature many times that of the sun.
Friday's shots produced even more power.


Julia Roberts, After the Layoff and With Lyle
Between wildfires, earthquakes, race riots and a debilitating recession, the city of illusion has been looking a little sad of late.
So there is a palpable cheer around Hollywood now that the highest paid actress in the world -- for the moment -- is back in town, generating all kinds of economic activity, grist for the professional gossips and old-fashioned movie star incandescence.
Two years after she made her last film and fell into a tabloid twilight zone over her personal life, Julia Roberts is starring in three new productions, the first of which is Alan J. Pakula's adaptation of John Grisham's legal thriller "The Pelican Brief," opening on Friday.


In a First Novel, an Author Wallows in the Banality of Evil
IT'S a setup.
An author creates a borderline psychopath and imbues him with endearing, positively humanistic characteristics.
It's Stephen King's dictum: "I try to create sympathy for my characters, then turn the monsters loose."
But how many young authors can aggrandize this deceptively smiple trick all the way to domestic and international publishing and film rights riches the first time out?
The rights riches the first time out?
The odds of being charred by a flash of lightning are about as good.


Wall Street; Advice Alone Can't Cure Borden
BACK in September, when Anthony S. D'Amato was still chairman and chief executive of Borden Inc., an important shareholder came calling to discuss the company's problems and prospects.
The shareholder wanted to know whether Mr.
D'Amato would be hiring an executive recruiter to help find talented directors for two new slots being added to the board.
The question drew a pained look from Mr.
D'Amato.
"I've had more consultants in here, I can't face another one. We've had McKinsey. We've had everybody," the shareholder, Nell Minow, a principal of Lens Inc., recalled Mr.
D'Amato as saying.


Heather Murray, William White 3d
Heather Winton Murray, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomson C. Murray of Mill Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to William Turner White 3d, the son of Mrs.
William T. White Jr. of North Muskegon, Mich., and the late Mr.
White.
The Rev.
Charles Newberry performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's of Lattington (L.I.).
Mrs.
White was until recently a personnel manager at Conde Nast Publications in New York.
She graduated from Fisher Junior College.
Her mother, Roberta P. Murray, is the Mayor of Mill Neck.
The bride's father is president of the Interstate Directory Publishing Company in Jericho, L.I.


How to Play Chopin? Cortot Had Answers
The American music critic James Gibbons Huneker, who studied piano with one of Chopin's most important pupils, attacked two national styles of Chopin performance in 1900: "If the Germans treat him in a dull, clumsy and bruted manner, the Frenchman irritates you by his flippancy, his nimble, colorless fingers and the utter absence of poetic divination." Huneker didn't know how good he had it.
Today there are many players of unusual abilities playing Chopin -- players who seem at home in his melancholically lyrical style, who can apply rubato to a melody without breaking the pulse and attend to the music's inner voices -- but there are no Chopinists.
There are no pianists whose reputations are primarily based on Chopin performance or whose playing of Chopin is consistently compelling.


Amy J. Povich, David B. Agus
Mrs.
Philip Baskin of Pittsburgh and Maury Povich of New York, the talk-show host, have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy Joyce Povich to Dr.
David Bernard Agus, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Zalman Agus of Cherry Hill, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Povich is an actress in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Connecticut College and received a master's degree in acting from Yale University.


Creative Answers to the Question of Gifts
CRAFT galleries and museum shops across the state are filled with creative answers to the question of what to give people who have "everything." The items offered include traditional and innovative jewelry, glassware, carved wood, ceramics, fashion accessories and holiday ornaments.
Prices start at $10 for some Christmas tree decorations and run into hundreds of dollars for one-of-a-kind jewelry with semiprecious stones, sculptural ceramics and wall hangings.
While the objects may be elegant, lighthearted or strictly practical, good craftsmanship gives them an added value that cannot be measured by price tags.


Ex-House Member Aided F.B.I. Inquiry
The Justice Department said today that a former member of the House of Representatives, Carroll Hubbard Jr., served as an informer for the Federal Bureau of Investigation for about six months this year while trying to avoid prosecution on charges related to his use of campaign contributions.
Carl Stern, a department spokesman, said that the investigation of Mr.
Hubbard was continuing but that the former Congressman was no longer working for the bureau.


Profile: Albert E. Sindlinger; Kill-Joy at the Recovery Ball
TIRED of all the happy talk lately about how business has begun to perk up -- but not for you?
Looking for a fellow skeptic about the nation's economic course?
Albert E. Sindlinger may be your man.
The 86-year-old pollster, who was born during the financial panic of 1907 and came of age during the Depression, finds little to cheer these days.
It's not that he's a natural sourpuss -- in fact, critics over his long career have as often complained of over-optimism, notably after the '87 crash -- it's that he says things have fundamentally, perhaps permanently, changed for the worse.


Arty Fare
AMSTERDAM'S GRAND * (212) 925-6166; 454 Broadway, near Grand; $$; all major credit cards
This long, two-tier restaurant has a bar along one side and an open rotisserie grill on the other, and it doubles as an art gallery.
The restaurant changes its exhibitions every month, and has become a popular spot for reliably pleasing fare at moderate prices.
Dishes to look for are little pizzas, called pizzettes, topped with zucchini, prosciutto, red pepper and mozzarella; grilled pork loin sandwich; a tasty, crunchy vegetable sandwich on country bread with herb dressing, and roasted salmon salad with zucchini, tomato and a basil-avocado mayonnaise. (Review: 11/1/85; article: 12/18/92)


3-D Technology Enters Operating Room
THEIR eyes wrapped by dark glasses, a group of people watched a television monitor in a dimly lighted room here, absorbed in a three-dimensional picture show.
A few were observers glimpsing the future; the others were members of a surgical team removing a patient's gall bladder.
The scene was an operating room at St.
Agnes Hospital, where surgeons from the hospital's Institute for Minimally Invasive Surgery were using a new laparoscopy system developed in Germany by Carl Zeiss, an optical-instruments company with United States headquarters in Thornwood.
During laparoscopies, doctors may make several half-inch incisions in a patient and operate through these openings using miniaturized instruments.
They also insert a small television camera and lights and watch what they are doing on a monitor.


Howard R. Suslak, Investment Banker, 73
Howard R. Suslak, a Manhattan investment banker who was the president of MacDonald &amp; Company, one of the country's oldest corporate merger specialists, died on Friday at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital.
He was 73.
The cause was colon cancer, said his wife, Lillian.


Not-Yet-Ready-to-Wear
During Anna Sui's spring '94 show, a middle-aged woman "just here for fun with my friend who's a buyer" grew increasingly bad-tempered at the escalating parade of things very short and/or bare.
She kept turning around, searching for comrades-in-consternation.
Finally at the sight of a Peruvian-inspired hot pants ensemble (just the thing should Macchu Picchu ever have a singles week), the woman blurted out, "And where am I supposed to wear that?" Her friend feigned deafness.
But a prominent fashion writer felt she deserved an answer.
"The thing to remember," he told her, in a deadpan worthy of Steven Wright, is that "fashion is not about you." Not yet, anyway.
What comes down a catwalk has never been about real life.
That's not the way fashion works.
The runway displays ideas, concepts, a wardrobe wish list for the best of all possible worlds.
Fashion shows are not much different from those cars of the future that used to enliven auto shows.
Not meant for production, they were nonetheless dazzling and defensible because the technology used to make them could be applied to cars in the current assembly line.


MAIL-ORDER AMERICA
I've written and edited hundreds of mail-order catalogues.
But I've never seen a copywriter's words placed under the kind of scrutiny that Holly Brubach employs in her article.


Heidi R. Steinberg, James E. Solomon
Heidi Rose Steinberg, a first vice president in equity research at Lehman Brothers in New York, and James Edward Solomon, the president and chief operating officer of Dansk International Designs, the tableware company in Mount Kisco, N.Y., are planning a January wedding.
Ms.
Steinberg graduated from Barnard College.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Jerome Breslin of Jacksonville, Fla., and the late Albert Steinberg, a former general contractor in Cleveland.
The future bride's stepfather, Mr.
Breslin, is a systems analyst with Computer Power Inc., a computer software company in Jacksonville.


MAIL-ORDER AMERICA
Brubach's vision seems especially narrow when she writes about the marketing intentions of Victoria's Secret as aiming at "the women who would wear the clothes or . . .  the men who would like the women in their lives to wear the clothes." Why not for the women who would like the women in their lives to wear them?
I'm not surprised that she feels "excluded" by the homoerotic overtones in International Male.
It seems only fitting.
LENORE LIPSTEIN New York, N.Y.


Just Another Innocent Abroad?
To the Editor:
Having worked and resided in Southeast Asia off and on the last 25 years, I'm still amazed when I read articles like Scott McNealy's "To Asia With Hope: Opportunity Lures a U.S. Executive" (Nov. 28).
It's not so much the lack of knowledge of Eastern culture and customs among our American business executives, but the boorishness and lack of interest to learn them.


Russia Envoy To U.S. Joins Yeltsin's Foes
Officially, the Russian Ambassador to the United States is on vacation.
But it is hardly a secret that the Ambassador, Vladimir P. Lukin, is really on the hustings back in Moscow, campaigning for a seat in Parliament as part of a bloc that poses a challenge to President Boris N. Yeltsin.
At the ornate Russian Embassy, which was the setting for so much cold war skulduggery and scheming, his rebellious campaign has set a new standard in intrigue.


When a Hotel Stops Looking Like the Palace
For years the Palace Hotel reigned as the Bowery's biggest flophouse.
Nearly 600 impoverished men crammed into rows of dormitory beds and tiny windowless cubicles at nightly rates of $4.50 to $6.
By the end of the 1980's, it was overrun by drug dealers and users.
Today the Palace sign has been torn down and the hotel stands virtually deserted, with only 65 tenants rambling about its dingy interior.
But a nonprofit organization, the Bowery Residents Committee Human Services Corporation, took over the operation three months ago and is providing counseling, security and other services.
Crews are fixing the roof, boilers, windows, bathrooms and alarms and have demolished most of the four-foot-by-six-foot cubicles.


A Different Way To View Assessments
Mr.
Beebe is apparently saying it is unfair that houses with the same sales price are paying different property taxes and that the state board will remove the unfairness by forcing communities to reassess.


The Exclusionary Boy Scouts
The Boy Scouts of America has retained the legal right to exclude any youngster who cannot conscientiously swear to love God or "do my duty to God." Last Monday, the Supreme Court declined to review a case in which an agnostic father and son contested exclusion from a Cub Scout pack in Illinois.
That left standing a lower-court victory for the Boy Scouts.
Whatever the legal merits of this case, the Boy Scout policy is needlessly and harmfully exclusionary in a society with a wide range of moral and ethical beliefs, not all of which are founded on God.


Mexico Raises Minimum Wages as Pledged
Fulfilling a pledge made during the fierce debate over the North American Free Trade Agreement, the Mexican Government is raising minimum wages by 7 percent, taking into account for the first time worker productivity and the rate of inflation.
The increase is the smallest rise in nominal terms since 1989.
But government officials say that because the rate of inflation for 1994 is expected to be 5 percent or less, purchasing power for workers at the bottom of Mexico's wage scale will increase for the first time in years.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Brighton Beach; From Russia to Little Odessa: Illegal Medicine Trade Thrives
As on most major New York streets, scores of peddlers gather along bustling Brighton Beach Avenue to hawk their wares, including colorful scarves, books and jewelry.
But the peddlers there are offering passers-by something different and potentially dangerous -- illegal medicines.
The medicine peddlers are immigrants from the former Soviet Union; so are their customers in this part of Brooklyn known as Little Odessa because of its large Russian emigre population.
And the medicine also started out in Russia, brought in by friends or family members.
Physicians warn that the medicines lack expiration dates and their effects are often not understood by either the seller or buyer.


THE PRICE OF THE 10-PAGE PAPER: $355
The assignment: a 10-page paper furnishing a critical analysis of the works of the television producer Steven Bochco.
This topic was assigned by Prof.
Robert Thompson, an associate professor of television at the S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University.
The source: the Academic Research Group Inc. in Rutherford, N.J., which tells clients that its reports are not to be submitted as original work.


Holiday Biscotti for Dipping or Munching
THE tradition of Christmas cookies depends heavily on German recipes, an inventory that includes pfeffernusse, springerle, lebkuchen, zimtsterne and spekulatius.
English ginger cookies and Austrian vanilla crescents are some others that are popular.
These cookies all keep well, making it possible to bake them weeks in advance of serving or giving as gifts.
And now it is time to add Italian biscotti to the list.


Extra Place: Losing All Traces of a Street That Is Barely There
Extra Place is a flyspeck on the official map of New York City.
Indeed, it helps to have a magnifying glass to detect the tiny inlet, on the north side of First Street between the Bowery and Second Avenue.
Extra Place is hard to find on foot, too: no signs identify it, nestled behind a row of buildings and looking very much like a driveway.
One legend has it that Extra Place is a leftover sliver of the 110-acre farm of Philip Minthorne, which was divided among his sons after he died in 1802.


Season's Sounds: Handel to Handbells
The magical, merry music of Christmas will be heard in profusion in the county's concert halls and churches during the festive two-week period ahead, but celebrants will be hard put to choose among three stellar programs all scheduled for Saturday at 8 P.M.
On the traditional side is a performance of Bach's "Christmas Oratorio," to be presented in its entirety by the Taghkanic Chorale and Amor Artis Orchestra playing period instruments under the direction of Johannes Somary.
The concert will be held at the Paramount Center for the Arts, at 1008 Brown Street in Peekskill.
The first cantata of the three-hour Baroque masterpiece was first performed with Bach himself conducting on Christmas Day, 1734, in Leipzig's St.
Thomas Church.
The other cantatas were heard on the second and third days after Christmas, New Year's Day and the Feast of Epiphany.
Composed as a collection of six cantatas, rather than following a single biblical text as most oratorios do, the work is woven together by recitations.
Soloists in Saturday's performance are Susanne Peck, soprano; Ray Pellerin, countertenor; Patrick Romano and Thom Baker, tenors, and John Eppler, bass.
"Hallelujah Holidays," a family Christmas-Hanukkah-Kwanzaa spectacular by the New Orchestra of Westchester will be performed in the Performing Arts Center Concert Hall at the State University of New York at Purchase.
It begins with excerpts from "The Nutcracker Suite" by Tchaikovsky, Bach's "Brandenburg" Concerto No. 2, with Paul Dunkel, the orchestra's director, doubling as flute soloist, and Robert Fertitta manning the Flentrop organ.
Next on the bill is a mini-version of Dickens's "Christmas Carol," presented by the Phoenix Theater.
Miller Lide will serve as narrator; Vernon Morris will portray Scrooge, and Bram Lewis, the theater's artistic director, will be Bob Cratchit.
Projections of George Cruikshank's original drawings for the novel will provide backdrops for the costumed actors.
Robert Sherman of WQXR will then narrate "G.A.G.E. -- The Story of Silent Night," accompanied by the orchestra.
The letters are the first four notes of the beloved carol.
In addition, a rousing chorus of more than 200 voices from the Westchester Choral Society, the Master Singers of Westchester and the Dobbs Ferry Harmonaires Children's Chorus, with Diana Solomon-Glover, soprano, and Andre Solomon-Glover, baritone, will join in songs from the Caribbean, familiar carols and excerpts from Handel's "Judas Maccabaeus" and "Messiah."
The third concert is Westchester Community College's "Too Hot to Handel," a version of the composer's "Messiah" featuring rock, rhythm and blues, jazz, gospel and pop.
It will have its premiere in Lincoln Center on Thursday and will be performed at the County Center in White Plains on Saturday by the college's Concordia Orchestra, the Morgan State University Choir from Baltimore and Lillias White, soprano; Vivian Cherry, mezzo-soprano, and Thomas Young, tenor.
The conductor will be Marin Alsop, the first woman to win the Koussevitsky Conducting Prize and consequently, in 1990, the first woman to conduct the Boston Symphony Orchestra.
These and other musical programs being offered in the county are listed below.
BRONXVILLE -- Reformed Church, Pondfield Rd., today 4:30 P.M., Nativity pageant with traditional carols by choirs and congregation.
Dec. 24, 5:30 P.M., Nativity pageant with live animals and carols on the front lawn.
At 7:30 P.M., family service with candlelighting and carols.
At 11 P.M., Festival of Lessons and Carols: excerpts from Bach's "Christmas Oratorio," the traditional carol "Adam Lay Ybounden," "The Stable Lamp Is Lighted" by Allan Mahnke, "The Holly and the Ivy" by Jonathan Willcocks, "Hymn for Christmas Day" by John Goss, the French carol "Whence That Goodly Fragrance" and "Born Is He the Child Divine," with choirs, organ and Kirk Handbell Ringers.
Johnette Schuller, organist; Rodney Schuller, music director.
BRONXVILLE -- Christ Episcopal Church, 17 Sagamore Rd., today 3 P.M., seasonal chamber music by a trio of faculty members from Juilliard, sponsored by the Metropolitan Japanese Ministry in Manhattan. $16. 337-3544.
Dec. 24, 4:30 P.M. traditional carols.
At 10:30 P.M., Service of Lessons and Carols: music by Tomas Luis de Victoria, Edmund Rubbra, Peter Wishhart, David Willcocks, Benjamin Britten and George Malcolm, with choir and organ.
Geoffrey Clark-Smith, music director.
HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON -- North Yonkers Community Church, 95 Broadway, Dec. 24, 8 P.M.
"Jesu Bambino" by Pietro Yon, "Long, Long Ago" by Carlisle Floyd, "Carol of the Bells," "Evergreen" by Daniel Pinkham," Brahms's "Cradle Song," "O Holy Night" by Adolphe Adam, with choir, handbells, organ. Margaret Geard, soprano; Eunice Hill, mezzo-soprano; William Watson, violist; Cindy Veazey, autoharpist. Richard Glasge, music director.
IRVINGTON-ON-HUDSON -- Church of St.
With Meredith Salisbury, soprano; Cara Tucker, alto; Richard Bond, tenor; John Farrell, bass; choir and organ.
Dec. 24, 10:30 P.M., carol sing, and "A Lute Carol" by Mary E. Caldwell, with Edie Rosenbaum, soprano, "Sussex Carol" and "In Dulce Jubilo" by Bach, with Ruth Negri, harpist.
Donald Butt, music director.
IRVINGTON-ON-HUDSON -- Irvington Presbyterian Church, North Broadway, today, 11 A.M., "Cantata Domino" by Heinrich Schutz, "I Will Glory in Song and Rejoicing" by Bach, with Mark Stenroos, tenor; John Thomas, baritone.
At 4 P.M., Service of Lessons and Carols: "Il Est Ne" French carol, "I Saw Three Ships," "Angels" (with Marge Hone, flutist; Margaret Sanzo, harpist), "Carol of the Bells" by Denman Thompson, "Allegro" for musical clock by Handel (with handbells), "The Friendly Beast," "He Comes, Noel" Catalonian carol, "Sing, O Heavens" by Berthold Tours, "Resonet in Laudibus" by Bartlomiej Tekiel, with choir and organ.
Next Sunday, 11 A.M., "Seek Ye the Lord" by J. V. Roberts, "Hear Ye, Israel" by Mendelssohn, with Mary Beth Mahony, soprano.
Dec. 24, 11 P.M., "The Star That Shone on Bethlehem" by Larry Shackley, "Lullaby to the Savior" by Crawford Thoburn, "Child of the Stable's Secret Birth" by Valerie Ruddle; with choir, organ and brass.
Dec. 26, 11 A.M., "The First Noel" and "Silent Night," new versions by John Carter with flute, choir and organ.
Thomas Zachacz, music director.
KATONAH -- John Jay Homestead, Rte. 22, today, 1 and 3:30 P.M., the Bedford Bellringers, holiday music from Bach to Broadway. $4; children and older than 65, $2.
LARCHMONT -- Larchmont Avenue Presbyterian Church, 60 Forest Park Avenue, today, 10 A.M., "Merry Salutation" by Johnann Eccard, "Magnificat" by Charles V. Stanford, with choir, organ, handbell choir; Phoebe Yadon-Larson, soprano.
Next Sunday, 10 A.M., Nativity pageant, "Magnificat" of Vaughan Williams, with Patricia Kelby, mezzo-soprano; "Hush, My Babe" by J. W. Lindh, "Peace, Peace," with children's choir and Karla Moe, flutist.
Dec. 24, 5:30 P.M.
"The Gift Most Treasured," "O Holy Night" by Adolphe Adam.
At 7:30 and 10:30 P.M., "Maria Wiegenlied" by Max Reger, "Shepherd's Carol" by William Billings, Fantasia on "Greensleeves" by Vaughan Williams, Appalachian carol "Jesus, Jesus, Rest Your Head," Polish carol "Rocking," German carol "Still, Still, Still," Spanish carol "El Naciento," French carol "What Is This Lovely Fragrance," Brahms's "Cradle Song," with Ms.
Yadon-Larson, Ms.
Kelby and Charles Tackett, tenor; George Wozniak, violinist; Lisa Hansen, flutist; Judith Brown, organist.
At 8 P.M.
"A La Ru" Spanish carol, "Huron Carol," with choir, soloists and handbells.
At 11 P.M., "What Sweeter Music" by John Rutter, "Susser Trost Mein Jesus Kommt" from Cantata 151 by Bach, for soprano and flute.
Judith Brown, music director.
MOUNT KISCO -- St.
Mark's Episcopal Church, Main St., today, 10 A.M., "Benedictus" by Thomas Tallis, "This Is the Record of John" by Orlando Gibbons, with J. F. Kelley, tenor; "Prepare Thyself, Zion" by Bach.
At 5 P.M., "Nunc Dimittis" and "Magnificat" by Thomas Tallis, "Rejoice in the Lord Alway," anonymous, with choir and organ, congregational carol sing.
Next Sunday, 10 A.M., "My Heart Ever Faithful" by Bach, "Ave Maria" by Victoria, "We Wait for Thy Loving Kindness" by William McKie.
At 4 P.M., "Messiah" sing-along, with Charlotte Holton and Cynthia Carlaw, sopranos; Shirley Tennyson, mezzo-soprano; Alexander Oveis, boy soprano; Christopher Hux, tenor; Daniel Simpson, bass, David Graf, organist.
Bring or borrow score.
Donation, $7.
Dec. 24, 5:30 P.M., Festival of Lessons and Carols: music of Britten, Howells, Bach.
At 10:30 P.M., music of Marcel Tournier and Carlos Salzedo, with Debra Whitman, harpist.
At 11 P.M., "O Magnum Misterium" by Victoria; George Malcolm's "Missa ad Praesepe," Howells's "Spotless Rose," Poulenc's "Hodie Christus Natus Est," with choir and organ.
David Graf, music director.
NEW ROCHELLE -- Our Lady Queen of Peace Chapel, Arrigoni Center, Iona College, 715 North Ave., Wednesday, 7:30, Sacred Celtic Songs for Advent and Christmas, with Noirin Ni Riain, Irish vocalist. $10. 633-2590.
NEW ROCHELLE -- Holy Trinity Lutheran Church, 30 Lockwood Ave., next Sunday, 4 P.M., Service of Lessons and Carols: "In the Bleak Midwinter" by Holst, "Lo, How a Rose E'er Blooming" by Michael Praetorius, "Carol of the Bells" Ukrainian carol, "Christmas Carol" by Charles Ives, with Barbara Belon, contralto; musicians and choirs from Holy Trinity Lutheran, New Covenant Baptist and Holy Lighthouse Churches of New Rochelle and St.
Michael's Church of New Canaan.
Dec. 24, 8 P.M., "Puer Natus Est" by Everett Titcomb, "In Dolce Jubilo" by Bach, "Cantique de Noel" by Adam, with Viola Brewster, soprano, choir and organ.
Robert Canfield, music director.
NORTH SALEM -- St.
James Episcopal Church, Old Rte. 124 and Rte. 116, next Sunday 4 P.M., excerpts from Handel's "Messiah" and Mendelssohn's "Elijah," Palestrina's "Adoremus te," Victoria's "Jesu, the Very Thought of Thee," with Anita Zander, flutist; Lucianne Kamalski, organist.
Spencer Welch, music director.
OSSINING -- Trinity Church, 7 South Highland Ave., next Sunday, 3:45 P.M., Service of Lessons and Carols: "Une Vierge Pucelle" and "Puer Nobis Nascitur" by Nicholas LeBegue, "Wachet Auf" by Bach, "The King Shall Come When Morning Dawns" by Joseph Goodman, Noels by Louis Claude Daquin for choir, organ and bell choir.
Dec. 24, 10:30 P.M., "Joyfully My Heart Sings" by Johann Walther, Noels by Daquin, "Christmas Pastorale" by Corelli, with Rachel Golub, violinist, organist and handbell player.
Janet Jacobson, music director.
PEEKSKILL -- Paramount Center for the Arts, 1008 Brown St., Saturday, 8 P.M., Bach's "Christmas Oratorio," with the Taghkanic Chorale, Amor Artis Orchestra, and soloists. $18, $20, discounts. 621-1240.
PELHAM -- Parish of Christ the Redeemer, 1415 Pelhamdale Ave., next Sunday, 10 A.M., Service of Lessons and Carols: "King Jesus Hath a Garden," "Dixit Maria" by Hans Hassler, "Up! Good Christian Folk" by G. R. Woodward, with organ and choir.
Dec. 24, 10 P.M., carols by Britten, Martin Shaw, Leo Sowerby, Jean Joubert, "Hodie Christus Natus Est" by Poulenc, "Missa Iste Confessor" by Palestrina, with Barbara Sherburne, soprano; Cary Mountjoy, alto; Kenneth Anders, tenor; Doug Cooper, bass, and choir and organ.
John Lettieri, music director.
PLEASANTVILLE -- United Methodist Church, 70 Bedford Road, Dec. 24, 7:30 P.M., "Christmas Night," with Bernice Banker, pianist; June Riss, organist, "From Heaven Above to Earth I Come" by Garth Edmundson, "Sonata No. 4" by J. Blazet with Peggy Derivan, flutist, "Good King Wenceslas," with Kathleen Phelan, soprano; Kenneth Rodgers, baritone, "Fum, Fum, Fum" Catalonian carol for choir and organ, "O Holy Night" by Adam, with Peggy Derivan, soprano.
At 11 P.M., "Christmas Fantasy," with Suzanne McCormack, pianist; June Riss, organist, "Masters in This Hall" for piano and organ, "Christmas Day" by Holst, "The Holy Infant Lullaby" by Norman Dello Joio, "As It Fell Upon a Night," "Carol of the Birds," "The Angels and the Shepherds." June Riss, music director.
PURCHASE -- Performing Arts Center, SUNY Purchase, Saturday, 8 P.M., "Hallelujah Holidays," Westchester Choral Society, Master Singers of Westchester, Dobbs Ferry Harmonaires, Andre Solomon-Glover, baritone; Diana Solomon-Glover, soprano; Robert Sherman, narrator, Phoenix Theater vignettes from "A Christmas Carol." $25, $30, $35. 682-3707.
Next Sunday, 3 P.M., Philharmonia Virtuosi Holiday Baroque Concert, works by Bach, Handel, Vivaldi and traditional carol sing-along. $15, children 5 through 15 free. 693- 5595.
PURCHASE -- Manhattanville College, 2900 Purchase St., today, 4 P.M., excerpts from Bach's "Christmas Oratorio," other seasonal music, with the college chorus, Rye Handbell Choir. $5; students and older than 65, $3. 694-2200, ext. 260.
RYE -- Presbyterian Church, Post Road at Parsons St., today, 10 A.M., Bach's "Magnificat," with choir and orchestra, Susan Shassagnoux, soprano; Wanda Brister, alto; Douglas Thom, tenor; Thomas Woodman, baritone.
"Orchestral Suite in D" by Bach, Pastoral from Corelli's "Christmas Concerto," with Robert Moncrief, harpsichordist.
Next Sunday, 10 A.M., Vivaldi's "Magnificat," with choir, string quartet, and Lucille Beer, alto, and other soloists; Randall Thompson's "Magnificat," with Ms.
Beer and strings.
At 4 P.M., children's Nativity pageant, "How Will We Know Him?" by Charlotte Algozin, "Listen, Shepherds, Listen" by Carolee Curtright, "So Gentle the Donkey" by John Barnard, "All the Sky Is Bright" by Thomas Keesecker, "To Us Come Emmanuel" by John Horman.
Dec. 24, 4 P.M., children's anthems, and "O Holy Night" by Adam.
At 7 and 11 P.M., "The Slumber of the Infant Jesus" by Henri Busser, "Ye Who Hover Over the Palms" by Brahms, "Jesu Bambino" by Pietro Yon, "Rejoice and Sing This Christmas Morn" by Eleanor Daley, "Australian Lullaby" by William James, "O'er the Cradle of a King" by Vernon Detar, "Light Up the Sky" Swedish carol, "Hallelujah" from Handel's "Messiah," "Shepherd's Pipe Carol" by John Rutter, with brass quintet, choir and soloists.
Robert Moncrief, music director.
RYE -- Church of the Resurrection, 910 Boston Post Road, Dec. 24, 11:30 P.M., "A Christmas Cantata" by William Maul, with chorus, Rita Lilley, soprano; Assunto dell'Aquilia, harpist; John Wyant, flutist; "In the Bleak Midwinter" by Harold Darke, "A Child Is Born in Bethelehem" 15th-century carol, "In Natus Est Emmanuel" by Praetorius, "Of the Father's Love Begotten" chant, "The King of Glory" by William Maul, with handbells, choir, organ.
William Maul, music director.
SCARSDALE -- Congregational Church, 1 Heathcote Rd., Next Sunday, 10:30 A.M., "Star Carol" by Rutter, "A Maiden Most Gentle" by Andrew Carter, with choirs and organ.
Dec. 24, 11 P.M., "Tomorrow Shall Be My Dancing Day" by John Gardner, "Love Came Down at Christmas" by John Rutter, "Torches" by John Joubert, "Suo-gan," "O Holy Night" by Adam, and Noels by Claude-Louis Balbastre, with choirs and organ.
Dr.
John F. Schuder, music director.
VALHALLA -- Westchester Community College, Student Center Theater, 75 Grasslands Rd., today, 3 P.M., Hoboken Renaissance Singers a capella choir, 10th- to 20th-century sacred and secular holiday songs with snacks and beverages. $3 and an unwrapped toy. 285-6567.
WHITE PLAINS -- County Center, Bronx River Pkwy. at Central Ave., Saturday, 8 P.M., "Too Hot to Handel," new version of "Messiah," with Concordia Orchestra, Morgan State University Choir, soloists; Marin Alsop, conductor. $15, $20. 454-3388.
WHITE PLAINS -- Grace Episcopal Church, 33 Church St. next Sunday, 4 P.M., Festival of Lessons and Carols: "Christmas Cantata" by Daniel Pinkham, works by Palestrina, "Tota Pulchra Es Maria" by Bruckner, "Mary Had a Baby," spiritual, "Make We Joy" by Walton, "Whence Is That Goodly Fragrance Flowing" French carol, and works by Holst, Rutter, Taverner, with Downtown Music Brass Quintet and choirs.
Works for organ and brass by Bach and Gabrielli.
Dec. 24, 9:45 P.M., works by Telemann, Hovhaness; Noels by Daquin and Balbastre for choir and organ.
"All This Time" by Walton, "Ding, Dong, Merrily on High," "Ceremony of Carols" by Britten, with Pattee Cohen, harpist; Thomas Freas, trumpeter.
Dec. 25, 10 A.M., "Up, Good Christian Folk," excerpts from "Ceremony of Carols." Timothy M. Lewis, music director.
YONKERS -- Church of St.
John the Baptist, 670 Yonkers Ave., Dec. 24, 5 P.M., traditional carols, choir, bells and organ.
At 11:30 P.M., traditional carols with bells, choir, trumpet and organ; Maryl Cannon, soprano.
Barnaby Miles, music director.


Fantasy Island on the Hudson
THE crowd outside the Loews Astor Plaza Theater on Monday, where the premiere of "Six Degrees of Separation" was letting out, didn't pay much attention to John Guare, the internationally acclaimed playwright who had adapted his play for the screen.
They were more intrigued by Donald Sutherland and Stockard Channing, who star in the film, and by Marlo Thomas, Phil Donahue and Kiefer Sutherland, who'd just seen it.
Mr.
Guare, an urbane 55-year-old with a face and attitude so youthful that his full head of white hair seemed premature, if not precocious, greeted some friends on the sidewalk and had a chat with Chuck Close, who's an extra in the film.
He then got into a limousine, where he joined his wife, Adele Chatfield-Taylor; Bernard Gersten, who has produced many of his plays, and Mr.
Gersten's wife, Cora Cahan.


Leafs Win, Pass Rangers for Point Lead
Maple Leafs 3, Flames 1
Dave Andreychuk had two goals and an assist to extend his point streak to five games and goaltender Felix Potvin stopped 37 shots to lead the Toronto Maple Leafs to a 3-1 home victory over the Calgary Flames last night.


Clothes Make The Woman?
To the Editor:
Is The New York Times actually suggesting that clothes make the woman?
Or is Emily Prager simply convinced that girls' only interests are clothes (and Barbies, of course) as reported (and I use the term very loosely) in "The Clothes Ponies" (Nov. 28)?


Manager's Profile
Alan J. Folkman  Fund: Columbia Special; $730 million in assets.
Manager since 1985 inception. (Sponsor: Columbia Funds Management Company, Portland, Ore.)


Cancun
There comes a moment in every trip to Cancun when visitors confront the fact that the whole thing -- the 19,000 hotel rooms, the 1.5 million visitors a year, the nearly 260,000 permanent residents -- is part of a computer-generated plan hatched by the Government of Mexico 23 years ago as a way to raise hard currency.
When work began on the new resort in 1970, Cancun was nothing but a thin barrier island.
The Mexican Government connected both ends of the island to the mainland with bridges, put in roads, drainage and electricity and invited developers to build the rest.


Killings Leave Yonkers Now Talking About Violence
This tough old riverfront city has endured two multiple shootings a half-mile apart on consecutive nights.
And the talk today, from City Hall to the shoppers braving wind-whipped snow squalls on Getty Square, was of guns, drugs, crime, teen-age gangs and shrinking civility, here and elsewhere.
Mayor Terence M. Zaleski called the shootings of four men in a tiny neighborhood grocery on Thursday and four more last night in the cramped elevator of a high-rise apartment building acts of "senseless violence that have been plaguing the whole country."


Raffle Planned
Taking the lead in a Long Island-wide effort to raise funds for victims of the Dec. 7 Long Island Rail Road shooting, the Islanders will contribute $1 from every ticket sold for the Dec. 17 game against Toronto to the L.I.R.R.
Victims Assistance Fund.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Port Morris; Florists Get Another Invitation to Relocate
A South Bronx developer has renewed an invitation for flower dealers to leave Manhattan's Flower District, and the offer has been sweetened.
But though several wholesalers plan to make the move, it is not clear if the new offer will be sweet enough to lure more.
In a meeting last month between representatives of the developer, the Galesi Group, and the New York Florists Association, the florists were offered a chance to rent in a development in a rail yard along the Harlem River near the Willis Avenue Bridge, said Jim Weisse, treasurer of the association.
The Galesi Group is redeveloping the rail yard and plans to build industrial buildings that could be used by flower distributors.
But Mr.
Weisse said renting did not appeal to him any more than an earlier offering, under which the wholesalers would have bought space.


Use of AIDS Study Challenged
To the Editor:
By citing a study by the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force Policy Institute in "Attitudes Clash on Jobs and AIDS" (At Work, Nov. 7), Barbara Presley Noble supports the misconception that AIDS is a homosexuals' disease.
Federal health officials have said that H.I.V. can be spread by "having sex with an infected person," and anyone who has unprotected homosexual or heterosexual sex is at risk.
We must be careful not to support myths but to understand the truth.
JENNIFER DEAN Seguin, Tex., Dec. 8.
The writer is a student at Texas Lutheran College.


BEST SELLERS: December 12, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
6
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
2
2
70
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
3
9
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
4
4
16
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
5
7
2
THE TRUCE AT BAKURA, by Kathy Tyers. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The "Star Wars" Rebel Alliance responds to a call for help from a threatened outpost.
6
6
11
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
7*
5
5
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined to kill him and take his place.
8
9
35
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
9
11
39
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
10
8
8
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in Victorian England's high society.
11
14
14
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Concluding the "Griffin &amp; Sabine" trilogy, about an artist and his secret admirer.
12
12
3
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Talese/Doubleday, $23.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly reappears in their lives.
13
10
7
DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) An architect-engineer gets caught between the warring factions of a clan that owns an English racecourse.
14
1
THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.
15
2
HOTEL PASTIS, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $23.) An Englishman is harried by intrigues and machinations after he becomes an innkeeper in Provence.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
2
2
8
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
3
4
14
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
4
3
16
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
5
5
31
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
6
6
10
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
7
7
2
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
8
9
10
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Thoughts on 43 years of marriage.
9
1
LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The country singer's memoirs, with an account of her relations with daughters Wynonna and Ashley.
10
8
5
THE DOWNING STREET YEARS, by Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins, $30.) The former British Prime Minister recalls her 11 1/2 years in power.
11
10
8
STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski. (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played Capt.
James Tiberius Kirk.
12
12
70
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
13
11
2
THE BEST CAT EVER, by Cleveland Amory. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A third volume about the trials and tribulations of the feline Polar Bear and his owner.
14
13
10
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
15
6
CASE CLOSED, by Gerald Posner. (Random House, $25.) A reassessment of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
4
20
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
2
3
4
AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes from the golf instructor.
3
1
30
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
4
2
9
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 27, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
AND BEAR IN MIND THE BOOK OF NIGHTS, by Sylvie Germain. (Verba Mundi/Godine, $22.95.) In this work of magic realism by a French philosopher living in Prague, the protean world of the Brothers Grimm meets Nazi Germany.
THE COMPLETE LYRICS OF IRA GERSHWIN, edited by Robert Kimball. (Knopf, $45.) More than 700 lyrics displaying the fresh and inventive rhymes, supple phrasing, intelligence and wit that made Gershwin a lyricist nobody can read for one minute without humming.
THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER, edited by Mark Tucker. (Oxford University, $30.) A fascinating anthology of 70 years' worth of writing about (and occasionally by) Ellington, who clearly inspired powerful emotions in even the most sober minds.
EXIT INTO HISTORY: A Journey Through the New Eastern Europe, by Eva Hoffman. (Viking, $23.) Seeking out the ordinary, a Polish-born writer with a touch of American objectivity makes a tour of Mitteleuropa, returning with subtle insights about a world in transition.
EXTRA INNINGS: A Memoir, by Doris Grumbach. (Norton, $22.) Well into her 70's, Ms.
Grumbach says she is trying to "learn to sit still" and mining what she calls her "mental compost heap." GENET: A Biography, by Edmund White. (Knopf, $35.) A monumental biography, meticulously researched, that places Genet's literary vision squarely in his homosexuality and confronts the mystery of how a man who left school at 12 became a great master of the French language.
GHOSTS, by John Banville. (Knopf, $21.) Rattling around in this Irish writer's witty, startling and nearly plotless novel are echoes of "The Tempest," entrancing visual elements, an obscure and intricate mystery, violence and a houseful of threatening oddballs.
A HISTORY OF WARFARE, by John Keegan. (Knopf, $27.50.) Mr.
Keegan, the most readable and original of military historians, argues that war is an omnipresent cultural ritual of mankind, from which the ruthless modern notion of disciplined total war was an aberration.
NEVER STOP RUNNING: Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American Liberalism, by William H. Chafe. (Basic Books, $28.) A historian captures the rootlessness and personal insecurity of an aggressive reform politician from New York who could accomplish almost anything except getting himself elected.
RETURN TO PARADISE, by Breyten Breytenbach. (Harcourt Brace, $22.95.) A bleak, beautiful, subjective collage of reminiscences, political rants and prose poems about this Afrikaner poet's troubled sojourns in South Africa.
THAT'S THE WAY I SEE IT, by David Hockney.
Edited by Nikos Stangos. (Chronicle Books, $35.) The second volume of the artist's recollections, taken from the tape recorder of Mr.
Stangos, is a long, perky monologue -- autobiography alternating with ruminations on vision and the reproduction of images.


Sublet Policy In Co-ops
IT may be high time for New York co-ops to take a hard look at sublet policies.
In addition to the changing market conditions, three events in the last few months suggest the need for a comprehensive review.
A workshop devoted to sublet policies attracted more participants than any other at the annual conference of the Council of New York Cooperatives in November, and many people stayed after the formal session to share their concerns.


Fatal Robbery Leads to Chase And Hostage Situation in Bronx
The robber did not take any money, just a medallion and a chain from the neck of an employee of a Bronx car radio store.
But by the time he was arrested yesterday, bleeding from a self-inflicted wound to his chest, the man had shot a welder to death in front of his two children, led the police on a wild foot chase through the snow, fired at two police officers and had taken a family of seven hostage.


An Alluring Yet Quite Casual Pasta Cafe
LONG ISLANDERS enthusiastically embraced pasta cafes when they appeared in the mid-80's.
The love affair continues, but the arrival of another casual Italian restaurant is no longer news, unless it is a standout.
The Siena Cafe in Syosset is.
In September, hibiscus, crotons and other lush plants spilled into the parking lot and heralded the opening of this strip shopping-center storefront.
As fall progressed, pumpkins, chrysanthemums and corn shocks appeared.
The interior is also charming.
Pale gray walls are splashed with colorful art posters.
Tables are bedecked with white cloths and fresh flowers.
Seating is well spaced in this long, narrow, carpeted room, but the noise level is, nevertheless, a bit high.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CRITICISM  PASSING STRANGE AND WONDERFUL  Aesthetics, Nature, and Culture.
By Yi-Fu Tuan.
Island Press, $25.


Anne Spencer Lindbergh Is Dead; Flier's Daughter and Writer, 53
Anne Spencer Lindbergh, a writer and the elder daughter of the aviation pioneer Charles A. Lindbergh and Anne Morrow Lindbergh, died Friday at her home in Thetford Center, Vt.
She was 53.
The cause was cancer, said her husband, Noel Perrin.


Smaller Architects Find Their Niche
NEIL MURPHY is not the first architect who has been asked to do something extra to please a client.
But he is probably one of few who has ever been asked to scratch a client's tongue.
The client in question was a young beluga whale at the Aquarium for Wildlife Conservation in Coney Island, where Mr.
Murphy is working on a permanent tent-like structure to cover the 180,000-gallon oceanic tank.
Greeting the architect, the whale opened its mouth wide.


Hobby or Hangup?
COLLECTING An Unruly Passion: Psychological Perspectives.
By Werner Muensterberger.
Illustrated. 295 pp.
Princeton, N.J.:  Princeton University Press. $24.95.


ECONOMIC PULSE: The Great Plains; Plains, While Still Bleak, Offer a Chance to the Few
Survival has always demanded ingenuity in the Great Plains, where 19th-century settlers, making do without timber and nails, used mud and grass to build their homes.
Today vast stretches of this region are about as lonesome as they were a century ago.
But some small economic miracles, born of creative ideas and the willingness to take a chance, are thriving in the scrub and dust of America's least populated quarter.


It Doesn't Add Up
To the Sports Editor:
A simple college-football word problem: Team A and Team B have identical records.
Both have played solid schedules, and both have shown the sort of offensive power that befits a national champion.
However, Team A has beaten Team B in their only meeting of the year.
If it were your task to rank those two teams, wouldn't it make sense to put Team A before Team B?
Of course.
But in the case of Notre Dame (Team A) and Florida State (Team B), America's sportswriters of influence have turned logic on its head.
Give Notre Dame the shot at the national championship; send the sportswriters back to school.
BENJI WHALEN  San Francisco


Drugs, Performance and Tests
To the Editor:
William L. Holstein didn't mention the possibility of using the relatively inexpensive impairment tests on students in our public schools.
With the reported success in measuring alertness (accidents reduced by 67 percent), taxpayers and school administrators should feel justified requiring all students to do a daily 30-second, 30-cent demonstration of their readiness to learn.
LEWIS PHILLIPS  Rockville, Md., Nov. 29


After a Dismal Start, Oilers Are Now Firing on All Cylinders
You remember those highly touted Houston Oilers, who were supposed to be a Super Bowl contender this year only to limp off to a 1-4 start?
Now they have won seven straight games and are solid favorites to make it eight straight by beating the Cleveland Browns today.
What happened?
Everything.
The defense learned to play the complex system of their new coordinator, Buddy Ryan.
The offense caught fire and in that seven-game stretch averaged 28.7 points an outing.
And the warring coaches are pals again.


Desegregation Order in Louisiana Is Rejected
A Federal appeals court has rejected a lower-court order that found Louisiana's fragmented governing-board system for higher education had perpetuated segregation in its state colleges and universities.
The appellate court's decision, issued late Friday, sent the case back to Judge Charles Schwartz of Federal District Court, whose ruling last year was criticized by many supporters of historically black colleges.
Those critics said that switching to a single governing board would weaken the colleges and deprive black students of the nurturing environment offered there.


James the Ripper?
THE DIARY OF JACK THE RIPPER Narrative by Shirley Harrison.
Illustrated. 323 pp.
New York: Hyperion. $21.95.


New York Area Is Teeming With Talent
The talent pool in the New York metropolitan area hasn't been this rich since Kenny Anderson (Archbishop Molloy in Queens) and Bobby Hurley (St. Anthony in Jersey City) ruled the courts in the late 1980's.
Felipe Lopez of Rice in Manhattan and Zendon Hamilton of Sewanhaka in Floral Park, L.I., are both members of Street &amp; Smith college basketball preview's all-America senior team.


Alison Hunter And Scott Lief
Alison Mary Hunter, a daughter of Thomas and Pat Hunter of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Scott Lief, the son of Inez Lief of Morristown, N.J. and the late Ted Lief.
Msgr.
John McDermott and Rabbi Charles Davidson officiated at Gatsby's in Cresskill, N.J.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Retail sales, Nov., percent change
1.5
0.4
Auto sales, early Dec., millions, annual rate
7.0
6.9
Wednesday
Industrial production, Nov., percent change
0.8
0.6
Capacity utilization, Nov., percent
82.4
82.8
Business inventories, Oct., percent change
0.3
0.2
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
335
335
Friday
Housing starts, Nov., millions, annual rate
1.40
1.41
Housing permits, Nov., millions, annual rate
1.31
1.32
This Week's Developments
Wednesday
Treasury announces 2- and 5-year note auctions
Thursday
Bundesbank council meeting


A Theme Shop for the Shiny-Red-Engine Set
A RETIRED lawyer was buying a plastic fire helmet "guaranteed to survive one birthday party" for his 2-year-old grandson.
A group of Japanese tourists arrived, eager to buy T-shirts emblazoned with the message seen on a New York City fire truck: "Keep Back 200 Feet."
A giggling off-duty firefighter from the Bronx purchased a pair of women's panties with the Fire Department logo.
One fellow lost all interest in an antique leather fire helmet after being told it sold for $1,580.


Northeaster, One Year Later


Job-Loss Anger: Age Bias Cases Soar in Region
At 57 years old and unemployed after 32 years with Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, James Vincent Rooney has angry words for his former employer, the nation's largest brokerage concern.
"The thing that aggravates me the most is how happy they are to train the young people," he said in a telephone interview from his daughter's home in Pennsylvania.
He moved there in November, a month after selling his Staten Island home to raise money, and 10 months after being abruptly dismissed from his $70,000-a-year position as a computer specialist at Merrill Lynch.
His search for another job has proved so frustrating that he said he had given up.


Leaps of Faith
Monday. -- Face facts.
Decorative, gray, lead-tainted festoons hang, peeling free and uninhibited, from the ceilings of our apartment.
Why is having an apartment painted such a big bourgeois moment?
Why must it be a gesture of taste, a statement of one's place in the social and home decorating order?
Why must the four walls of home, so private, be so public?
Will I even live here a year from now?
New paint says: "Yes! Bring on the future!" Paint is optimism.
The responsibility weighs heavily upon me.
We've run away to stay at my mother's while the deed is done.
Tuesday. -- I chose the colors over the phone, by sound.


Why Is Marriage Like Electoral College?
THE BOOK OF GUYS Stories.
By Garrison Keillor.
Illustrated. 340 pp.
New York: Viking. $22.


Beth A. Weiss, D. J. Pendergast 3d
Beth Amy Weiss, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray J. Weiss of West Long Beach, N.J., was married yesterday to Daniel J. Pendergast 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pendergast Jr. of Warwick, R.I.
Justice Laurence C. Stamelman officiated at the Shackamaxon Country Club in Westfield, N.J.
Mrs.
Pendergast is a health care administrator at the Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore.
She graduated from the University of Maryland and received a master's degree in health services from George Washington University.
Her father, now retired, was a deputy director at the United States Army Communication Electronics Material Command at Fort Monmouth, N.J.
Her mother is a learning disabilities teacher consultant in the Holmdel Township (N.J.) school system.


Jennifer Cohen, Jonathan Zonis
Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome J. Cohen of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Jill Cohen, to Jonathan Zonis, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Melvin Zonis of Quincy, Mass.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cohen, 26, is a publicity administrator in New York for the Buena Vista Pictures division of the Walt Disney Company.
She graduated from Harvard University.
Her father is a partner in Carter, Ledyard &amp; Milburn, a law firm in New York.
Her mother, Elaine Cohen, is the president of Cohen Gilbert Associates, an educational consulting concern in New Canaan.


Where Restrooms Aren't for Patrons Only
IT may be the most dreaded sign a New Yorker can encounter: "Bathrooms for Customers Only."
New York has many advantages, but having an adequate number of restrooms open to the public is not among them.


Give Peace a Chance
The Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. used to say that the nation had to reach a "state of readiness" before it could pass effective civil rights legislation.
He used nonviolent demonstrations to help create that state.
In our day, the random violence that Dr.
King regarded as a societal plague has created a new kind of readiness.
At long last, the American public is demanding effective controls on the manufacture and sale of handguns and an end to the shooting wars on American streets.


Sound Bytes; A Glimpse Into the Future As Seen by Chairman Gates
AS chairman of the Microsoft Corporation, the world's largest maker of personal computer software, Bill Gates is arguably the industry's most powerful executive.
Microsoft makes the DOS, Windows and Windows NT operating systems as well as programming languages and tools, and the company is the top producer of application software for Windows and Macintosh computers.
After dominating the business software market the last decade, Microsoft last week announced a new division to create and market software and services for the home.
Before making the announcement, Mr.
Gates met with editors and reporters of The New York Times to discuss the new venture.
Following are excerpts from the discussion:


Trying to Revive La Marqueta
A generation ago, the enclosed marketplace straddling Park Avenue between 111th and 116th Streets was vibrant.
Crowds surged through the aisles of the five big buildings known collectively as La Marqueta, haggling over the price of platanos.
Vendors trumpeted in Spanish the freshness of their eggs, the tenderness of their pork.
Today, only about a dozen merchants, including two butchers, a clothier, a fishmonger and a perfumer, are housed in the single market building that remains open.
On a recent Saturday afternoon, the market's busiest time, only a handful of shoppers strolled the cavernous corridors.
But now there is hope in El Barrio that La Marqueta will have a new beginning.
Three community organizations are vying for a $5 million contract with the city to rejuvenate the site, and a decision is expected this week.


Award for Molitor
PAUL MOLITOR, the most valuable player in Toronto's World Series victory, was named yesterday as the American League Most Oustanding Designated Hitter for 1993.


THE PHONY ISLAMIC THREAT
It's about time a prestige journal did something to counter the rising tide of Arab and Islam bashing in America ("The Phony Islamic Threat," by Edward W. Said, Nov. 21).
Said rightly points out that there is no necessary conflict between the culture of Islam and the West.
Muslim fanatics are a menace to both.
Witness their attempt to overthrow the moderate Egyptian regime.


Theresa Neubauer, Arthur Minson Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph L. Neubauer of New Hyde Park, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Theresa Louise Neubauer to Arthur Thomas Minson Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Minson of New York.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Neubauer, 22, and Mr.
Minson, 23, graduated cum laude from Georgetown University.
They are both accountants at Ernst &amp; Young in New York.


THE PHONY ISLAMIC THREAT
A photo caption about finding "satisfaction in patterns of Islamic conformity" implies that "a scarf over the head"' is a comforting fashion choice of Muslim women.
That would be news to those in Iran and Saudi Arabia who have endured acid attacks, scissor-wielding fanatics and the moral police who periodically sweep through streets to make sure that women are sufficiently covered.
SUSAN ADDELSTON New York, N.Y.


School Integration: Summing Up the Case; For the Plaintiffs: At Issue, Lack of an Equal Education
ON Thursday in Rockville Superior Court, Judge Harry Hammer will hear the final summations in the lawsuit known as Sheff v.
O'Neill, which is seeking to overcome the segregation of poor Hispanic and black children in Hartford's schools by linking the schools with those in 21 surrounding towns.
The suit seeks to improve the education of Hartford children by breaking up the concentration of minority students in the city's schools, where the enrollment is more than 93 percent Hispanic and black, and by obtaining more state aid to overcome the educational obstacles posed by poverty.
Judge Hammer, who heard opening arguments in the case on Dec. 16, 1992, is expected to issue his decision in the spring.
After nearly three months of testimony earlier this year, each side has summarized their arguments in briefs submitted to Judge Hammer.


Housing Plan In Luxury Site Under Attack
A plan to transform a luxury condominium complex into low- and moderate-income housing has become the target of community leaders, and last week a local Congressman joined the opposition.
Representative Edolphus Towns, Democrat of Brooklyn, asked city officials to delay approval of a loan that would get the project going.
Homes for the Homeless, a nonprofit group, applied last month for a $7 million loan from the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development to buy the eight-story building at 63 Tiffany Place and open its 70 apartments to working-class residents and homeless families.
The building is owned by Skopbank, a Finnish bank.


On Sunday; Putting Garden City On the Map
OUTSIDE the 7-Eleven store, the scene the morning after the commuter carnage was a mix of blue skies, clean frame houses and murmurings over fresh hot coffee of random murder and retribution.
Four television news camera crews, one from Boston, were still dishing up satellite remotes into the blue abyss above the railroad station that faced the store's quiet porch.
The lethally edged stillness of the suburb after the morning rush hour could have set an insightful scene in a David Lynch movie, were we not already inured to his take on everyday violent aberrance in mid-America.


Who Cares About Religion? Nobody Lives It Anymore
To the Editor:
The Dec. 5 article "The Glorious Mosaic," about the large number of churches in the city and the high percentage of residents claiming a religious faith, must be some comfort to those in the religion business but says little about how meaningful, or meaningless, religion is to those who claim to be adherents.


New York Is Still Waiting for Its Own Holocaust Museum
The 50th anniversary of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising made 1993 a landmark year for museums commemorating the Holocaust.
In February, the Simon Wiesenthal Center opened a Museum of Tolerance in Los Angeles.
Six weeks later, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum opened in Washington, becoming so successful that officials recently asked people to postpone visiting.
But a dozen years after former Mayor Edward I. Koch proposed a similar memorial for New York City, home to the greatest number of Holocaust survivors outside Israel, the vision remains unfulfilled.


Cosby Solves the Mystery of What to Do Next
Two years removed from the biggest triumph in recent television history, Bill Cosby has a new character to play.
The genre is different -- mystery instead of comedy -- but surrounded by writers, producers, directors and a living-room set cluttered with art and books of his choosing, the star is still very much in control.
Even though Mr.
Cosby, the biggest television star of the 1980's, has been absent from prime time, he has hardly been out of the headlines.
For months rumors circulated that he would put together a bid to buy NBC from the General Electric Company.


The Value Of Street Trees
To the Editor:
In response to M. Jennifer Martin's letter (Nov. 28) about Anne Raver's Cuttings column "Why Street Trees Live or Die" (Nov. 14): New York City has stumbled in its delivery of services by failing to care for and maintain the basic facilities, equipment and installations needed so that it can function as a place where people live.


Avoiding Drug and Alcohol Abuse
ON this crisp morning, a cluster of teen-agers are having an animated discussion about whether another youngster should have driven home from a party after having had a drink or two.
The argument becomes more heated as other students join in, to debate whether that youngster's friends should have stopped him from leaving the party.
What might appear to be a cafeteria or hallway gossip session is part of these Byram Hills High School sophomores' health class.
The situation that has captured their attention is one of several video simulations designed to trigger teen-agers' awareness of the consequences of drug and alcohol abuse.


What It's All About
To the Editor:
Tim Rice's notion that "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat" might be "stretched as thinly as it could go" is refreshing and frank  [ "The Amazing Growth of 'Joseph,' " Nov. 7 ] .
But an explanation for the musical's popularity may have been voiced by the playwright James Kirkwood (co-author of "A Chorus Line") who sat baffled though a production of the show muttering, "What's it about? What's it about?" Finally, when Joseph appeared in his amazing Technicolor dreamcoat and took the stage, Kirkwood looked relieved and announced, "I get it! It's a musical about the world's first male model."  STEVEN BACH  Munich, Germany


Budget Vote Still Hounds Lawmaker
Marjorie Margolies-Mezvinsky knew she would pay a high price for providing the crucial vote that pushed President Clinton's budget package through the House of Representatives in August.
So the freshman Democratic Representative extracted a favor from him: he would make a personal appearance in her affluent Main Line district to talk about the budget and, it goes without saying, give her his blessing.
That time is at hand.
President Clinton and Ms.
Margolies-Mezvinsky are scheduled to speak on Monday at Bryn Mawr College at a conference on Federal spending for social programs like welfare and Social Security.


Rhythms of the Andes For a Yonkers Festival
The busy schedule today offers a large selection of vocal and instrumental concerts that should satisfy lovers of holiday and regular music alike.
The yearly Texaco Holiday Festival for children of all ages lights up the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers from 1 to 4 P.M. today.
The events include Latin American folk songs and dances, performed by the Andean ensemble Antara del Barrio, plus story-singing sessions with Christine Campbell and Virginia Davidson, a greeting-card workshop, a Punch and Judy puppet show and free refreshments.
The number to call for information is 963-4550.


New Forest Chief Faces Test Over Alaska Timber
The new chief of the National Forest Service, facing his first major decision, is being pressed by conservationists to cancel a big timber sale in the Tongass National Forest in Alaska.
Jack Ward Thomas, who was appointed last month, must decide on Monday whether he will review the planned logging of a vast section of the Tongass forest on Prince of Wales Island in southeastern Alaska.


Knights Make a Quiet Return for Indiana
Indiana 79, Washington State 64
Bob Knight kept his cool.
After a shaky first half, so did Indiana's 12th-ranked Hoosiers.


Holiday Biscotti for Dipping or Munching
THE tradition of Christmas cookies depends heavily on German recipes, an inventory that includes pfeffernusse, springerle, lebkuchen, zimtsterne and spekulatius.
English ginger cookies and Austrian vanilla crescents are some others that are popular.
These cookies all keep well, making it possible to bake them weeks in advance of serving or giving as gifts.
And now it is time to add Italian biscotti to the list.


A Summer Weekend Among the English
"Trust me, please, Greg; I promise there is no one else. I love you." That's Ginny talking.
So why, Greg wonders, is he finding other men's boots and slippers under Ginny's bed?
When the phone rings, how come Ginny says, "Yes" or "No" and hangs up right away?
And what about the hidden flowers and the heart-shaped candy boxes?
For all that, Greg is off to Philip and Sheila's country home to ask for Ginny's hand in marriage.
Only Philip and Sheila are not Ginny's parents and neither of them knows who Greg is.
In fact, Philip, who has his own suspicions about his wife's fidelity, deduces that Greg must be having an affair with Sheila.
But Philip, you see, is "the bloke on the phone" who has been sleeping with Ginny.


Two Temples Dedicated To Relaxing
THE resorts of Phoenix are like city-states, founded on the right to relax.
Everyone here seems to be perpetually relaxing, if not for a lifetime, at least for a long weekend, especially at this time of year, when the days are as warm as the Caribbean in January and the nights as cool as New England in September.
Many of the resorts follow the simple golf-swimming-palm tree formula, but not those at the ends of the spectrum.
At the quiet end is the newly renovated Arizona Biltmore, the only hotel in the nation in the style of Frank Lloyd Wright.
At the brassy end is the Phoenician, where the world according to Aaron Spelling has been fully realized.


Workers Face Loss of Tax Break on Flexible Health Plans
MILLIONS of workers would lose Federal tax breaks averaging several hundred dollars a year under a little-noted provision of the Clinton Administration's health plan.
And even if the plan does not pass, the breaks could well be eliminated.
Flexible health spending accounts, which allow workers to deduct out-of-pocket medical costs from their incomes for tax purposes, are about to go the way of another popular tax break that was sharply curtailed, the individual retirement account.


Variety in the Selection of Basement Flooring
FINISHING a basement floor is neither as easy nor as inexpensive as painting the walls or installing suspended ceiling tiles, the two most popular basement repairs.
Knowing the pitfalls can help choose materials and techniques.
Almost any flooring can be installed over concrete.
Resilient flooring -- sheet vinyl or vinyl tiles -- is a popular and inexpensive choice, but wood flooring and carpet are also possibilities.
Stone, clay or ceramic tiles generally lack necessary warmth, both in appearance and underfoot, for most installations.
But do not write them off as choices in half-basements receiving ample light from patio doors or large windows.
Before making a selection, test the moisture content of the concrete floor and consider the preparations needed for various materials.
Choose three to six spots about two feet square in different locations.
At least two spots should be near corners.
The others can be in open areas.
Scrub the areas with a dry brush to clean them thoroughly.
Cut pieces of plastic sheeting, kitchen wrap or aluminum foil and place them over the cleaned areas, sealing their edges with duct tape.
Remove the tape and check the undersides after 24 hours.
If the plastic appears foggy or wet, the floor is too wet for installing any finish flooring.
On a new basement floor, waiting up to two months for the concrete to fully cure may eliminate the moisture problem.
On older floors, the foundation may require more effective drainage, which is usually a job for a waterproofing contractor.
Test the floor for evenness.
A floor does not have to be level to accept finish flooring, but the surface has to be flat, without bumps or hollows greater than an eighth of an inch in height or depth.
To check for those, place a long straight-edged board on the floor in as many different places and at as many different angles as practical.
A board that rocks back and forth indicates a bump.
Light beneath the edge of the board indicates a hollow.
Small bumps can sometimes be chiseled away.
More often, though, flattening involves filling the low spots with a liquid or paste compound, which is spread with a flat trowel called a float and hardens like cement.
If a concrete floor is dry and flat, any type of flooring except hardwood planks or strips that require nailing can be directly installed.
Resilient flooring, cushion-backed carpet, parquet and wood-laminated flooring are installed with adhesive.
Stone, clay and most ceramic tiles are installed by embedding in mortar.
Ceramic tiles can also be installed with adhesive.
For insurance against moisture in cases where a basement slab may not have been poured over a vapor barrier of polyethylene -- standard practice at least since the 60's -- such sheeting or an equivalent material should be applied to the surface of the concrete beneath or between layers of flooring adhesive or beneath mortar.
To further flatten a floor, to protect large areas of leveling compound and to permit nailing solid wood-strip or plank flooring, a plywood underlayment is needed.
For flooring fastened with adhesive, a single layer of half- or three-quarter-inch-thick plywood is adequate.
Where a nailing surface is required, two layers of three-quarter-inch are best.
Use ACX-grade plywood, which has one good face and is rated for exterior use.
Do not use particleboard or another manufactured-wood product.
They do not hold fasteners well and are easily damaged by water.
On dry floors protected by a vapor barrier beneath the slab, underlayment panels can be fastened directly to the concrete with masonry nails, concrete screws or hammer-activated gunpowder-driven fasteners.
Afterward, adhesive can be applied on top or solid wood flooring can be nailed directly to it.
Where a vapor barrier is needed above the slab, there are three ways to proceed.
One is to spread a layer of asphalt mastic over the floor with a trowel, allow it to harden and then cover the mastic with overlapping sheets of polyethylene film.
On top of that can be placed plywood underlayment panels, fastened by the methods described above.
A second way is to cut underlayment panels into manageable 4 X 4-foot pieces, saw or rout grooves in a grid pattern on their backs and then press them into a bed of mastic applied to the slab.
No fasteners are necessary.
The third way, and the most common when installing solid wood flooring or when major flattening is needed, is to bed four-foot lengths of nominal one- or two-inch-thick preservative-treated lumber on the slab with mastic.
The boards, called sleepers, are placed with their wide surfaces against the slab and their ends overlapping by at least four inches.
Hollows underneath are filled by adding shims.
If desired, closed-cell foam insulation board can be placed between the sleepers for a warmer floor and to deaden footfalls.
Polyethylene sheeting is spread on top of the sleepers and fastened with staples.
Solid wood flooring can be nailed directly above the plastic, with nails spaced to enter the sleepers.
For flooring requiring full support, first attach plywood underlayment panels.


High Up in the Box
You get so used to wallowing in bad sports metaphors when you cover politics, that you know a Hail Mary moment when you see one.
It happened at the mid-September Redskins-Phoenix Cardinals game, when the Redskins were desperately trying for a touchdown.


Alberts Honored
TREV ALBERTS of the University of Nebraska won the Butkus Award yesterday as the nation's top collegiate linebacker.
Alberts, who helped Nebraska gain a New Year's Day Orange Bowl showdown against Florida State for the national championship, won out over Florida State's DERRICK BROOKS and U.C.L.A.'s JAMIR MILLER.


UP AND COMING: Leonardo DiCaprio; The Actor Is Boyishly Handsome, and That's a Liability
Leonardo DiCaprio manages to sit still for 23 minutes.
It may be a record.
If the 19-year-old actor has anything in common with the brain-damaged boy whose body he inhabits in the new film "What's Eating Gilbert Grape," opening on Friday, it is the need to be constantly in motion.
Mr.
DiCaprio fidgets and squirms, leans on the table to pick slices of eggplant out of his panini, twirls his lemonade glass, drums on his collarbone, drinks his caffe latte with a straw.
His wheat-colored hair dances against his forehead as he twists and turns.


County to Offer Loans To Create New Jobs
WESTCHESTER will offer up to $27 million in low-cost financing to qualified applicants next year in a program to attract new businesses and help existing ones expand, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke announced late last month.
The new plan, called the Section 108 Loan Guarantee Program, is part of the United States Housing and Urban Development Community Block Grant program.
But it is separate from the Federal block grant program that allocates money for downtown beautification projects to eliminate slums and blight, said Barry N. Sussman, director of planning and research for the county's Planning Department.


U.N. Aides Angry at the Serbs' Blocking of Relief
United Nations officials here are angered and frustrated at what they say is the Serbian forces' systematic blocking of relief convoys to nearly 3 million civilians threatened by cold and hunger in Bosnia.
"We are having blockages, blockages, blockages," said Lieut.
Col.
Bill Aikman, spokesman for the United Nations peacekeeping forces.


Haul Out the Old Cliches, It's Time to Shoot an Author Photo
ON one of my first writing gigs in the late 1960's, I was sent out on assignment with a photographer who told me that there are just four basic cliches of portrait photography.
If it's a woman, he explained, pose her in front of a body of water or a tree.
Men are easier.
Just stick them in front of a bookshelf, or pose them in the classic lounge lizard chin-in-the-hand position.
A stroll through any bookshop raises the suspicion that very little progress has been made in the world of big-time portrait photography cliches over the past 25 years -- at least when it comes to author photos.
John Updike, Bernie Siegel, David Halberstam, Dominick Dunne, Barbara Grizzuti Harrison and Caryl Phillips all lean forward uncomfortably, their chins or cheeks supported by a fist or hand. (Presumably their own hands, but who knows?) They all look like failed lounge acts appearing at your local piano bar.
Mr.
Updike appears ready to launch into an angst-laden version of "Sometimes When We Touch."


RESULTS PLUS
OLYMPIC HOCKEY  U.S.
Wins Again  Peter Ferraro scored a goal and had three assists last night to lead the United States Olympic team to a 7-4 victory over Russia in Memphis.
Korda saved five match points for a 3-6, 7-6 (7-3), 3-6, 7-6 (12-10), 13-11 victory in 4 hours 31 minutes in Munich, Germany.
Michael Stich, the defending champion, fought back from two sets down to beat Stefan Edberg, 2-6, 3-6, 6-3, 6-3, 6-1. (AP)


Whose Idea Of Style?
To the Editor:
I found the The Dressing Room column on Nov. 28 ("The Clothes Ponies") nauseating.
Don't these girls and boys have anything to do with their time and energy?
What kind of values are their parents teaching them?
In fact, where are the parents?
The 4-year-old with her vest trimmed in white skulls made a special impression.


The Noise Inspector Visits Nightclubs in the Afternoon
To the Editor:
Regarding "Turn Down the Volume!" -- your Nov. 14 article about noise pollution -- those of us who have spent the last few years trying to get the Department of Environmental Protection to take action know how ineffective such complaints are.


Variety in the Selection of Basement Flooring
FINISHING a basement floor is neither as easy nor as inexpensive as painting the walls or installing suspended ceiling tiles, the two most popular basement repairs.
Knowing the pitfalls can help choose materials and techniques.
Almost any flooring can be installed over concrete.
Resilient flooring -- sheet vinyl or vinyl tiles -- is a popular and inexpensive choice, but wood flooring and carpet are also possibilities.
Stone, clay or ceramic tiles generally lack necessary warmth, both in appearance and underfoot, for most installations.
But do not write them off as choices in half-basements receiving ample light from patio doors or large windows.
Before making a selection, test the moisture content of the concrete floor and consider the preparations needed for various materials.
Choose three to six spots about two feet square in different locations.
At least two spots should be near corners.
The others can be in open areas.
Scrub the areas with a dry brush to clean them thoroughly.
Cut pieces of plastic sheeting, kitchen wrap or aluminum foil and place them over the cleaned areas, sealing their edges with duct tape.
Remove the tape and check the undersides after 24 hours.
If the plastic appears foggy or wet, the floor is too wet for installing any finish flooring.
On a new basement floor, waiting up to two months for the concrete to fully cure may eliminate the moisture problem.
On older floors, the foundation may require more effective drainage, which is usually a job for a waterproofing contractor.
Test the floor for evenness.
A floor does not have to be level to accept finish flooring, but the surface has to be flat, without bumps or hollows greater than an eighth of an inch in height or depth.
To check for those, place a long straight-edged board on the floor in as many different places and at as many different angles as practical.
A board that rocks back and forth indicates a bump.
Light beneath the edge of the board indicates a hollow.
Small bumps can sometimes be chiseled away.
More often, though, flattening involves filling the low spots with a liquid or paste compound, which is spread with a flat trowel called a float and hardens like cement.
If a concrete floor is dry and flat, any type of flooring except hardwood planks or strips that require nailing can be directly installed.
Resilient flooring, cushion-backed carpet, parquet and wood-laminated flooring are installed with adhesive.
Stone, clay and most ceramic tiles are installed by embedding in mortar.
Ceramic tiles can also be installed with adhesive.
For insurance against moisture in cases where a basement slab may not have been poured over a vapor barrier of polyethylene -- standard practice at least since the 60's -- such sheeting or an equivalent material should be applied to the surface of the concrete beneath or between layers of flooring adhesive or beneath mortar.
To further flatten a floor, to protect large areas of leveling compound and to permit nailing solid wood-strip or plank flooring, a plywood underlayment is needed.
For flooring fastened with adhesive, a single layer of half- or three-quarter-inch-thick plywood is adequate.
Where a nailing surface is required, two layers of three-quarter-inch are best.
Use ACX-grade plywood, which has one good face and is rated for exterior use.
Do not use particleboard or another manufactured-wood product.
They do not hold fasteners well and are easily damaged by water.
On dry floors protected by a vapor barrier beneath the slab, underlayment panels can be fastened directly to the concrete with masonry nails, concrete screws or hammer-activated gunpowder-driven fasteners.
Afterward, adhesive can be applied on top or solid wood flooring can be nailed directly to it.
Where a vapor barrier is needed above the slab, there are three ways to proceed.
One is to spread a layer of asphalt mastic over the floor with a trowel, allow it to harden and then cover the mastic with overlapping sheets of polyethylene film.
On top of that can be placed plywood underlayment panels, fastened by the methods described above.
A second way is to cut underlayment panels into manageable 4 X 4-foot pieces, saw or rout grooves in a grid pattern on their backs and then press them into a bed of mastic applied to the slab.
No fasteners are necessary.
The third way, and the most common when installing solid wood flooring or when major flattening is needed, is to bed four-foot lengths of nominal one- or two-inch-thick preservative-treated lumber on the slab with mastic.
The boards, called sleepers, are placed with their wide surfaces against the slab and their ends overlapping by at least four inches.
Hollows underneath are filled by adding shims.
If desired, closed-cell foam insulation board can be placed between the sleepers for a warmer floor and to deaden footfalls.
Polyethylene sheeting is spread on top of the sleepers and fastened with staples.
Solid wood flooring can be nailed directly above the plastic, with nails spaced to enter the sleepers.
For flooring requiring full support, first attach plywood underlayment panels.


Zaire Is in Turmoil After the Currency Collapses
They call it "Wall Street," and as in its celebrated counterpart in New York bank notes with a face value of hundreds of billions are exchanged daily in what amounts to this country's only truly functioning currency market.
Trouble is, most of the money being traded here is virtually worthless.
Nothing so unusual about that, a stranger might think, given that Zaire's economy has been virtually bankrupt for nearly a decade, a result of endemic official corruption and monetary ineptitude.
Indeed, average real incomes here are now a fraction of what they were in the early 1960's, though under current circumstances comparative statistics, too, are probably worthless.


Bring Back the Old Carrot and Stick
To the Editor:
A recent news article about the inspection of North Korean nuclear installations carried this blurb: "Christopher brandishes a stick but offers no carrot." It reminded me of a comment that President Clinton made recently in which he referred to the choice between using the carrot or the stick when dealing with a policy matter.


'Hungry' Islanders Feast in 3d Period
It was rarely artistic, and it was definitely less spectacular than the weather, but when was the last time an Islander-Flyer confrontation took a turn for the lyrical?
By grinding, grabbing and dumping in four third-period goals for a 5-2 victory tonight, the Islanders ended a three-game winless streak and also put an unloved division rival in its place at Nassau Coliseum for the seventh straight time.
"We had a real gritty, gritty type of effort in the third period; we were hungry," said Islander Coach Al Arbour, who has lately made a habit of questioning his players' appetite for competition.


Dec. 5-11: Massachusetts Movement; Rights for Gay Students In Public School
Without any of the fanfare that had been expected, Gov.
William F. Weld quietly signed into a law last week a bill that makes Massachusetts the first state in the country to outlaw discrimination against gay and lesbian students in public schools.
The law is intended to affirm the rights of openly gay students to all the same rituals of school life as heterosexual students -- to form alliances and clubs, to take a date to the prom, to participate freely in sports.
Sexual orientation becomes the latest category to be protected against discrimination in school; other categories include religion, national origin, race, color and sex.


Meet Me in St. Louis, And Paris, London Chicago . . .
The Parthenon and the Roman Senate were built of stone and meant to last, but time and circumstance had other plans.
Oddly enough, in the last two centuries some of the most lavish buildings and a few of the most significant have been built to perish.
It is astonishing how much talent, ingenuity, money and energy have been expended on the temporary architecture of world's fairs, usually built to stand no longer than a good run on Broadway.
Fair sites, in fact, exist as a species of public theater set, where local, national and international dramas play to paying audiences.
At the end of the run, the set is struck, save for a few monuments built for permanence, like the Eiffel Tower in Paris, the St.
Louis Art Museum, and the New York City Building of the 1939 fair, a building in Flushing that later served a stint as a skating rink.
Fortunately, photography was on hand to extend the life of these performances.
Early in the history of the medium, it was apparent that photographs would have few rivals as souvenirs and historical records, and that they could do useful publicity work.
The fairs quickly appointed official photographers.


'Squeegee' Crackdown Displays Insensitivity
To the Editor:
As the screenwriter and executive producer of "The Saint of Fort Washington," now playing in New York City, I read with amazement the policy of the incoming Commissioner of Police, William Bratton, to "attack the largest crime problems by focusing first on the smallest," namely "to order a crackdown on 'squeegees,' the men and women who wipe the windshields of motorists waiting in traffic" (news article, Dec. 4).


A Magazine Unbound
VISIONAIRE magazine arrives four times a year, as reliably -- and unevenly timed -- as eagerly awaited packages from an eccentric, gifted aunt.
And that is the suspense it brings on opening, whether that means tugging at spindly threads or cotton laces, ripping at Velcro, or snapping elastic off a brown paper package.
Its unbound pages each issue are filled by assigning a theme to willing creative types, who delight in warping those parameters.
"The theme is like a little quiz each time," said Stephen Gan, 28, who is assembling the 10th issue of Visionaire, due in bookstores on Wednesday.
"And people come up with ingenious answers."


Fighting to Save a Family
First she raised her own children, two girls and a boy.
Now, at the age of 49, a Brooklyn woman finds herself raising her grandchildren after their mother fell victim to crack.
"I was really on the verge of losing my mind," she said, until a program financed in part by donations to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund came to her rescue.
Another agency supported by the Neediest Cases Fund took two teen-age brothers from Harlem to a rural leadership camp for a dose of self-esteem.
Articles, page 57.


Uh, What I Meant to Say Was . . .
I AM a firm believer in putting off till tomorrow what I didn't get around to last week.
Procrastination is one of my lesser charms, I know, but it only bothers me at times like this, with the year fading and Santa totting up my naughty- or niceness.
In that regard, there are all these 1993 nuggets that I haven't found time to collate, write or (heaven forfend) throw away.
The pile of paper on the desk threatens to topple.
If that happens I won't be able to find September's bills.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, a picture last Sunday with an article about the Antioch Baptist Church in Bedford Hills carried an incorrect caption.
The picture showed the congregation, not the choir.


Elise M. Kaplan, Jason H. Brett
Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin B. Kaplan of Dix Hills, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elise Michele Kaplan to Jason Howard Brett, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor H. Brett of Woodmere, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Kaplan, 26, graduated from the University of Michigan.
She and her fiance are fourth-year medical students at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
The future bride's father owns LSI Computer Systems Inc., an electronics company in Melville, L.I., where her mother, Barbara A. Kaplan, is the purchasing agent.


MAIL-ORDER AMERICA
At our Halloween party, we used just five weeks of catalogue (unsolicited) mail to cover the floors of three rooms ankle deep in the trash.
All present were happy to trample it.
DOROTHEA TANNING New York, N.Y.


When Portuguese Aristocrats Went Shopping
AS BRAZILIAN GOLD AND GEMS flowed steadily to Portugal throughout the 18th century, Lisbon's aristocrats shopped Europe for palatial trappings.
The treasures they bought with mining profits transformed their palaces and churches into the opulent settings suggested in "The Age of the Baroque in Portugal," an exhibition at the National Gallery of Art, through Feb. 6.
The Portuguese nobility, then among the world's wealthiest, embraced the sumptuous style of Versailles and acquired lavishly decorated items throughout the continent.
The show's 120 works include crown jewels, silver ornaments, scientific instruments and exuberantly carved furnishings.


In the Region/Westchester; Home Buyers Get Space on the Ground Floor for Less
WHEN Paul Schefflein and his wife, Arleen, began shopping for a house almost three years ago, they narrowed their search to houses less than five years old.
Having lived in apartments most of his life, Mr.
Schefflein said he did not think he had the skills necessary to maintain a house any older than that.
"I can't fix anything," he said.
"I needed a house I could just move into and not have to repair anything up front."


Region Is Hobbled By First Snowfall
On the anniversary of 1992's devastating northeaster, an unexpected snowstorm swept through the New York City metropolitan area yesterday, coating roadways with a slick sheet of ice and disrupting auto and air traffic in the first snow of the season.
The storm resulted in many minor accidents, especially in Brooklyn and New Jersey, and forced the partial shutdown of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, and the closure late last night of the Manhattan-bound Queens Midtown Tunnel after a truck slid into the tunnel wall and burst into flames.
Icy conditions closed the Triborough Bridge in both directions between 10:20 and 11:30 P.M.


Hotel Restaurants Express Optimism
Forget what you thought about hotel restaurants.
Provare at Doral Arrowwood in Rye Brook, Bayfields at the Hudson River Inn in Ossining and the recently opened Fenimore's Bistro at the Holiday Inn-Crowne Plaza in White Plains have changed their hotel image by revamping their menus, their decor and their names.
Aggressive marketing of their new identities resulted in more holiday-party bookings this season than have been seen for many a Christmas.
Hotel executives say the new look in hotel restaurants is part of a growing trend to make their restaurants competitive with outside establishments.


Variety in the Selection of Basement Flooring
FINISHING a basement floor is neither as easy nor as inexpensive as painting the walls or installing suspended ceiling tiles, the two most popular basement repairs.
Knowing the pitfalls can help choose materials and techniques.
Almost any flooring can be installed over concrete.
Resilient flooring -- sheet vinyl or vinyl tiles -- is a popular and inexpensive choice, but wood flooring and carpet are also possibilities.
Stone, clay or ceramic tiles generally lack necessary warmth, both in appearance and underfoot, for most installations.
But do not write them off as choices in half-basements receiving ample light from patio doors or large windows.
Before making a selection, test the moisture content of the concrete floor and consider the preparations needed for various materials.
Choose three to six spots about two feet square in different locations.
At least two spots should be near corners.
The others can be in open areas.
Scrub the areas with a dry brush to clean them thoroughly.
Cut pieces of plastic sheeting, kitchen wrap or aluminum foil and place them over the cleaned areas, sealing their edges with duct tape.
Remove the tape and check the undersides after 24 hours.
If the plastic appears foggy or wet, the floor is too wet for installing any finish flooring.
On a new basement floor, waiting up to two months for the concrete to fully cure may eliminate the moisture problem.
On older floors, the foundation may require more effective drainage, which is usually a job for a waterproofing contractor.
Test the floor for evenness.
A floor does not have to be level to accept finish flooring, but the surface has to be flat, without bumps or hollows greater than an eighth of an inch in height or depth.
To check for those, place a long straight-edged board on the floor in as many different places and at as many different angles as practical.
A board that rocks back and forth indicates a bump.
Light beneath the edge of the board indicates a hollow.
Small bumps can sometimes be chiseled away.
More often, though, flattening involves filling the low spots with a liquid or paste compound, which is spread with a flat trowel called a float and hardens like cement.
If a concrete floor is dry and flat, any type of flooring except hardwood planks or strips that require nailing can be directly installed.
Resilient flooring, cushion-backed carpet, parquet and wood-laminated flooring are installed with adhesive.
Stone, clay and most ceramic tiles are installed by embedding in mortar.
Ceramic tiles can also be installed with adhesive.
For insurance against moisture in cases where a basement slab may not have been poured over a vapor barrier of polyethylene -- standard practice at least since the 60's -- such sheeting or an equivalent material should be applied to the surface of the concrete beneath or between layers of flooring adhesive or beneath mortar.
To further flatten a floor, to protect large areas of leveling compound and to permit nailing solid wood-strip or plank flooring, a plywood underlayment is needed.
For flooring fastened with adhesive, a single layer of half- or three-quarter-inch-thick plywood is adequate.
Where a nailing surface is required, two layers of three-quarter-inch are best.
Use ACX-grade plywood, which has one good face and is rated for exterior use.
Do not use particleboard or another manufactured-wood product.
They do not hold fasteners well and are easily damaged by water.
On dry floors protected by a vapor barrier beneath the slab, underlayment panels can be fastened directly to the concrete with masonry nails, concrete screws or hammer-activated gunpowder-driven fasteners.
Afterward, adhesive can be applied on top or solid wood flooring can be nailed directly to it.
Where a vapor barrier is needed above the slab, there are three ways to proceed.
One is to spread a layer of asphalt mastic over the floor with a trowel, allow it to harden and then cover the mastic with overlapping sheets of polyethylene film.
On top of that can be placed plywood underlayment panels, fastened by the methods described above.
A second way is to cut underlayment panels into manageable 4 X 4-foot pieces, saw or rout grooves in a grid pattern on their backs and then press them into a bed of mastic applied to the slab.
No fasteners are necessary.
The third way, and the most common when installing solid wood flooring or when major flattening is needed, is to bed four-foot lengths of nominal one- or two-inch-thick preservative-treated lumber on the slab with mastic.
The boards, called sleepers, are placed with their wide surfaces against the slab and their ends overlapping by at least four inches.
Hollows underneath are filled by adding shims.
If desired, closed-cell foam insulation board can be placed between the sleepers for a warmer floor and to deaden footfalls.
Polyethylene sheeting is spread on top of the sleepers and fastened with staples.
Solid wood flooring can be nailed directly above the plastic, with nails spaced to enter the sleepers.
For flooring requiring full support, first attach plywood underlayment panels.


Religion Case May Broaden Disabilities Law; Church-State Wall
To the Editor:
The Supreme Court's decision to review, and possibly overturn, the New York Court of Appeals decision invalidating the creation of a special school district for handicapped Orange County children in a Hasidic community insures that the prominence of First Amendment church-state law will continue next term of Court (front page, Nov. 30).


Education Chief Vows to Deliver Report on Newark Schools
The State Education Commissioner, Dr.
Mary Lee Fitzgerald, emphasizing her concern about failure in the Newark schools, said today that she would deliver a status report on the system to Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman by Inauguration Day, Jan. 18, even if the state's investigation were not completed and her own term had expired.
"We're preparing as expeditiously as possible to complete the report as well as we can and hand it over to the Governor," Dr.
Fitzgerald said of the effort to decide whether the Newark schools should be taken over by the state.
"My term is up Jan. 18, and our team finishes its work. But we have a responsibility as long as we're in Trenton to continue the investigation and we're trying to be responsible, to meet our obligation and do as much work as we possibly can."


In SoHo, the Art Isn't Just on the Wall
ALISON ON DOMINICK STREET **  (212) 727-1188; 38 Dominick Street, between Varick and Hudson Streets; $$$; all major credit cards


The GATT In the VAT
THERE are many who dreaded the long morning after
"Landslide Bill" Clinton won passage of Nafta.
Addicted to trade, instead of to crack,
They feared that their whole world was fading to black.
The issues that fill them with secret delight,
Send most of us screaming into the night.
Undaunted, they smile as they pass to and fro,
Mulling on exports too high or too low.
The topics they prize as glorious beauties,
Are tariffs and quotas and levies and duties,
On produce prosaic like corn, rice and wheat,
And food more exotic like pickled pig's feet.
Dumping's a subject they argue all day,
But not tossing the trash in a ditch or a bay.
It's dumping of apples and autos and grapes,
And airplanes and cheeses and videotapes,
That are sold overseas for less than at home,
So mozzarella is cheaper in Maine than in Rome.
They ponder a VAT on new wine in old bottles,
And argue on imports of rare axolotls.
They chortled with glee "By Gosh!" and "By Golly!"
When Al Gore invoked the names Smoot and Hawley.
Yet with Nafta receding into the past,
They're lowering flags to fly at half-mast.
Deprived of a chance to palaver on trade,
These obsessive folks were turning afraid.
Just when they feared all hope would be gone,
From Europe a grand new word came along.
It's simple to say and so easy to spell,
It's saving these trade fanatics from hell.
GATT is the word -- take note, double T's.
(The same as this poet's last name, if you please.)
It means General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade,
And Geneva's the town where it just might get made.
To add cliff-hanging qualities to this accord,
A deadline is looming! (Nah, we're mostly still bored.)
Wednesday's the day GATT talks must be done,
But trade fanatics pray they've only begun.
They're just starting to trade jokes about GATT,
Like: "Uruguay round?" "No, Uruguay flat!"
They note with delight GATT's roiling the French,
The folks who make teeth around the world clench.
The French claim our movies, TV and such,
Will put their own film makers in Dutch.
They clamor their culture's in peril, the French,
Terrified Spielberg will make them retrench.
Overshadowed by "Jaws" and "Terminator 2,"
How will Gerard get his Depar-dieu?
The French fracas does give GATT something it lacks,
Tabloid-esque headlines like "Big Rift Snags Trade Pacts."
Will the world's trading nations say O. K. to GATT?
You'll have to read Thursday's headlines for that.
(Assuming, of course, that this doggerel epic
Hasn't made the GATT-wary masses dyspeptic.) STUART ELLIOTT


Guns Don't Kill People. Bullets Do.
The suspect in the Long Island Rail Road shootings is said to have obtained the murder weapon, a 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistol, through a formal licensing process with a 15-day waiting period.
That this did nothing to prevent the slaughter should make us think.
As we do, it might help to go back to the early 60's, when we were trying to cope with what was then called the slaughter on the highways -- the deaths and injuries from automobile crashes at a time when, rather suddenly, nearly everybody had a car.


Julie Frohman and Daniel Badion
Julie Mara Frohman, a daughter of Joan B. Frohman of East Hampton, L.I., and Gerald G. Frohman of New York, and Daniel Chu Badion, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Diosdado Badion, were married yesterday evening at the Stanhope Hotel in New York.
Rabbi Nathaniel Schwartz officiated.
The bride, who graduated from New York University, is the creative director at the Colligan Group, an advertising agency in New York.
Her father, now retired, was the president of Knitcrest Fabrics, a textile manufacturing company that was in Hauppauge, L.I.
Her mother is a speech and language pathologist in private practice in East Hampton.


MAIL-ORDER AMERICA
Brubach's article is so full of pseudo-psychoanalysis that she loses sight of the reason the public continues to support the better catalogue companies like L. L. Bean and Lands' End year after year: friendly and helpful operators; good quality at low prices; clothes cut for real people and a no-hassle return policy.
You would have to pay me to set foot in one of those suburban shopping centers.
RURIK B. HALABY Ridgewood, N.J.


F.Y.I.
The Bus Stops There
Q.
Why are bus stops in Manhattan almost always placed beyond traffic lights rather than at the lights?
It seems to be a waste of passenger time as well as fuel since the bus must usually stop twice: once at the light and again at the bus stop.
Can this actually be deliberate?


Finding a Stand-In for Words, And Even for an Unlived Life
Mendelssohn wrote that the feelings expressed in music could not be put into words, "not because they are too vague, but on the contrary because they are too particular." Notes can sometimes say what words cannot.
Perhaps they can even stand in for words, even for a life that otherwise fails to find a way of living itself.
When Ada McGrath, the mute woman played by Holly Hunter in "The Piano," arrives on the rough New Zealand beach, she carries her voice outside herself, in the bulky square piano (the year is 1850) that is precariously brought to shore with her trunks and her young daughter.


Corrections
A review on Sept. 12 about "Exploding the Gene Myth," by Ruth Hubbard and Elijah Wald, misstated the history of tenure awards to women in scientific subjects at Harvard.
A letter from a reader dated Nov. 13 pointed out that Professor Hubbard, a biologist who received tenure in 1974, was not the first to get it, citing Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin, an astronomer who became tenured in 1956.
Harvard's archives show an even earlier award of tenure to Clara A. Du Bois, an anthropologist, in 1954.


Lawsuits and Lawyering
Connecticut residents should be disappointed by John Williams's admission that he settles or wins only approximately half of his numerous police-misconduct lawsuit ("Relishing the Risks and Rewards of the Law," Nov. 7).
With approximately a 31-month backlog for tort cases in our state courts and a 20-month backlog in Federal courts, it is astonishing to realize that a lawyer may file civil suits that have no more chance of winning than could be predicted by the flip of a coin.
We must suspect that our judicial system is hopelessly capricious if plaintiff attorneys cannot distinguish lawsuits that have the intrinsic merit to be successful from those that have only the potential to tie up our courts for extended periods of time.
Whether Mr.
Williams's record is typical for plaintiff attorneys in Connecticut is difficult to determine because the statistical branch of the Supreme Court of Connecticut does not compile data on whether plaintiff attorneys are winning or losing civil cases.
It is noted by the Connecticut lawyer James Rosenblum, however, in his book "Malpractice Solutions" that fewer than 30 percent of suits alleging medical malpractice are ultimately successful.
He reports that only approximately 25 percent of cases that go the full distance to a jury verdict are won by the plaintiff attorney.


Pie on the Lake
To the Editor: In "What's Doing in the Adirondacks" (Oct. 3), James Dao said a good place to have lunch or a drink while waiting for the Lake Champlain Ferry at Essex, N.Y., was the Old Dock Restaurant.
I beg to differ.
On Oct. 1, my wife and I went there for lunch, which was extremely disappointing.
We first ordered a cup of New England clam chowder.
After 10 minutes in an uncrowded restaurant, the soup arrived.
It was sour; my wife said hers was the same.
I told the waitress I would pay for the soup, but would not eat it.
It cost $1.95 a cup.
We then ordered cherry pie and coffee.
The pie, a tiny serving, was unappetizing and $2.95 a piece.
I am not poor or cheap, but like to get my money's worth.
AL BACHMAN  Chappaqua, N.Y.
Mr.
Dao responds: I had only apple pie and coffee, which was fine and did not strike me as particularly expensive.
If the price seems high, it might be in part because the customer is paying for a sweeping view of Lake Champlain.


Jennifer Pierce, Edward Barr 3d
Dr. and Mrs.
Donald S. Pierce of Brookline, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Emmet Pierce, to Edward Evan Barr 3d, the son of Erika Barr and Edward E. Barr, both of Englewood, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Pierce, 26, is a features associate at Vogue magazine in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Colby College, as did her fiance.
Her father is a clinical professor of orthopedic surgery at Harvard Medical School in Boston and a visiting orthopedic surgeon at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.


Holiday Biscotti for Dipping or Munching
THE tradition of Christmas cookies depends heavily on German recipes, an inventory that includes pfeffernusse, springerle, lebkuchen, zimtsterne and spekulatius.
English ginger cookies and Austrian vanilla crescents are some others that are popular.
These cookies all keep well, making it possible to bake them weeks in advance of serving or giving as gifts.
And now it is time to add Italian biscotti to the list.


Y(oung) A(mericans in) P(rague)
Is Prague to the Nineties what Paris was to the Twenties?
The number of YAP's (the local acronym for Young Americans in Prague) is hard to calculate; estimates run from 4,000 to 30,000.
But their presence in the pubs and clubs of this ancient brooding city has become a cultural phenomenon, one of the most visible aftershocks of the fall of Communism.
Like the American expatriates who once gathered in the cafes of the Left Bank, the YAP's have a creative bent; but it's not just the literary life they're after.
For every aspiring writer drawn by the ghost of Kafka and the playwright President Vaclav Havel, there's a budding entrepreneur.
Computer programmers and investment analysts crowd the Repre Klub, a popular American hangout, along with poets and screenwriters -- the Hemingways of our day.
There's an American-style Laundromat (Laundry King) and an American rock band (Dope).
John Bruce Shoemaker, a former journalist, has opened two bars -- the Thirsty Dog and the Martini Bar -- in a turn-of-the-century building in the historic Municipal House, Obecni Dum.
Jennifer Yeager runs a catering service and sells her wares to local bakeries and restaurants.
"I'm a true capitalist," she explains.
"I'll bake anything people want." Scott Rogers and Marketa Janku (American-born despite her Czech-sounding name) founded the Globe, an English-language bookstore and coffeehouse favored by expats.
"It's just amazing all the things I've been able to do here," Janku says.
"The opportunities are what really blew me away."


Camp Helps 2 Siblings Embrace Self-Esteem
Television and radio were forbidden.
There was a mandatory quiet hour for reading or writing in a journal.
And in the sultry heat of late August, campers had to be out of bed at 6 A.M.
But Leonardo G., 17 years old, and his brother, Javar S., 14, residents of northern Harlem and typical teen-agers whose rooms are plastered with posters of rap groups and basketball stars, hope to return to the camp in High Falls, N.Y., for its leadership retreat next summer.


Catherine Fay, John McCarthy
Catherine Butler Fay, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis R. Fay Jr. of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Patrick McCarthy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Thomas McCarthy of Los Angeles.
The Rev.
Dennis P. Keane performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church in Larchmont, N.Y.
The bride, 27, graduated from Georgetown University, as did the bridegroom.
She is an associate promotions manager at the Lever Brothers Company, the consumer products manufacturer in New York.
Her father is a vice president of Prudential Securities in New York.
Her mother, Carole C. Fay, teaches religion at the Ursuline School in New Rochelle, N.Y.
The bride's maternal grandfather, Andrew J. Corbett Sr., is the chairman of A. J. Corbett &amp; Sons, a maritime shipping firm in Manhattan.


Public &amp; Private; Method And Madness
When initial reports suggested that Colin Ferguson, accused of blowing away a car full of commuters on the Long Island Rail Road, was a black man who hated whites, race rage was seized upon as the Rosetta stone of an unfathomable act.
But when Mr.
Ferguson was arrested, the notes found in his pocket contained a litany larger and more wide-ranging.
He seemed to have dozens of grievances against whites, it was true, but it seemed he also had it in for Asians, Adelphi University, the E.E.O.C., the New York City transit police, the Workers' Compensation Board and "the sloppy running of the #2 train."


Dori Friedman, Andrew Schwartz
Reuben and Dorothy Friedman of North Caldwell, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dori R. Friedman and Andrew Charles Schwartz, a son of Belle Schwartz of Brooklyn.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Friedman, 29, is an international economist at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, a securities brokerage in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University and received master's degrees in economics from both the London School of Economics and New York University.


Alison Micca And John Maggio
Alison Margaret Micca, a daughter of John S. Micca of Commack, L.I., and the late Ellen M. Micca, was married yesterday to Dr.
John Burke Maggio, a son of Mrs.
Vincent S. Maggio of Jamesburg, N.J., and the late Dr.
Vincent S. Maggio.
Rev.
George J. Michell performed the ceremony at Christ the King Roman Catholic Church in Commack, L.I.
Mrs.
Maggio is a registered nurse at St.
John's Episcopal Hospital in Smithtown, L.I.
She graduated from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., and received a master's degree in health and hospital administration from Hofstra University.


Folkies Who Like It Looser
No matter what the year, folk performers seem suited to an era before music was big business.
For those pledged to simple chords and unostentatious instrumentation, media image remains a mystery, and sophisticated technology is a shackle.
They would argue that the video that wows MTV cannot compare with the naked dramatics of a small stage.
As evidence, they might point to Loudon Wainwright 3d's "Career Moves" and Timbuk 3's "Espace Orano." Here are two recent folkie concert albums that are looser and more forceful than most tightly choreographed rocker rebels ever manage.


Persona Goeth Before a Fall
"Michael Jackson cracks up," People magazine screamed on its cover several weeks ago, adding beneath the banner, "Sex, Drugs and the Fall of the World's Biggest Star." Naturally the supermarket tabloids have also been weighing in weekly on Mr.
Jackson's fate after accusations of child molestation, one tabloid even suggesting that his problems are threatening the marriage of his good friend Elizabeth Taylor, and the local news has been providing daily updates.
Indeed, in this holiday season of movie blockbusters and television specials, the latest installment of Mr.
Jackson's life promises to upstage every other entertainment.
Call it: "Michael Jackson, The Fugitive?"
Since there may be no crime more heinous, it is doubtful that any star could survive accusations of child-molesting unscathed.
Merely being accused has already cost Mr.
Jackson his lucrative endorsement contract with Pepsico.
Yet his putative fall seems not only a function of his possibly having transgressed morally.
It seems equally a function of his having transgressed against the terms of his own persona: strange but harmless, the eternal child, the fragile savant, the asexual naif.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-25  MISSILE DEAL UNCOVERED  Despite complaints from Washington, Russia allowed cargo planes to fly from North Korea to Syria last summer carrying equipment commonly used for mobile missile launchers, and the United States kept the fact quiet.  1  BOSNIAN ATHLETES TRAIN IN EXILE  Young Bosnian athletes are training for the Olympics as guests in other countries, but concern for their homeland makes it difficult. 1


Just Another Innocent Abroad?
To the Editor:
I am astounded by Scott McNealy's naivete.
He praises Singapore's low taxes, its mandatory savings instead of social security and says he's "more of a capitalist than ever."
His political outspokenness, however, would not be tolerated in Singapore, whose citizens pay for their economic miracle with a lack of free speech.


One-Man Band


Corrections
The foreign exchange chart on page 3 of the Travel section today misstates the values for the British pound.
On November 19, $100 in traveler's checks would have bought $:66.13, a 3.7 percent increase from a year earlier, when the figure was $:63.76. (The figures in the chart are the number of dollars needed to buy $:100.)


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
A Santa Who Really Flies
Look up in the sky.
Is it a bird?
Is it a plane?
No, it's Lenny Epstein eating his box lunch.
No time to dine leisurely when you're the helicopter Santa Claus.
Children are waiting in parks all over Nassau County.
And Santa-Lenny would never disappoint the children.
So it's up, down, ho-ho-ho, and pass the mayo.


Weight Jackets Banned
When Bill Hardesty, a national youth sailing champion, races on a windy day, he is apt to jump overboard first -- wearing a sweatshirt and shorts.
Although his behavior may look strange, it is a calculated move.
Hardesty, an 18-year-old college student from San Diego, is trying to increase his upper body weight.
By allowing water to soak the sweatshirt, Hardesty is adding as much as two pounds to his upper torso.


Nancy Weber, C. J. Culver
Nancy Winthrop Weber, the daughter of Priscilla P. and G. Hunt Weber of Ambler, Pa., was married last evening to Christopher James Culver, a son of James R. Culver of Atlanta and Joy D. Prior of Cheboygan, Mich.
The Rev.
Jamie L. Hamilton performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
The bride, 34, is the vice president of the marketing and sales department at McCall's magazine.
She graduated from the University of Colorado.


Cleanliness Isn't Always Next to Godliness
THERE IS A DISTURBING TREND in the art world, and James Beck, many an art restorer's bad dream, has done a good deed by calling attention to it in a new book.
Mr.
Beck is the Columbia University art historian so outspoken in his opposition to certain high-profile restoration projects that he was threatened with jail in Italy for defaming a restorer.
Whereas most discussions of art restoration are carried out in scholarly peri odicals, Mr.
Beck has expressed his views in People magazine.
His ceaseless and not altogether coherent attacks on the widely endorsed cleaning of Michelangelo's frescoes in the Sistine Chapel at the Vatican have earned him the enmity of powerful colleagues and made him something of an outcast.


Showy Plants That Have Staying Power
THIS may seem like an odd time of year to be praising a particular deciduous plant.
Shade trees are leafless, the lawn has been raked for the last time.
The hand tools are tucked away on racks and hooks in the tool shed.
Yet one deciduous plant persists in showing off and it deserves a plug.
It is the oakleaf hydrangea (Hydrangea quercifolia), which remains spectacular to see quite late in the year.
The leaves are large and resemble those of an oak tree except that they are larger, perhaps seven inches long.
In late fall they have a purple-bronze hue, an unusual coloration that is spectacular and can be seen for quite some distance.


Streetscapes/Make-Overs on Lower Sixth Avenue; In a Department Store Graveyard, New Signs of Life
THE latest resurrection in the department store graveyard on lower Sixth Avenue is the Adams &amp; Company building, on the west side of the avenue between 21st and 22d streets.
It was a huge shopping emporium, finished in 1902 with a tall, central atrium, and it closed after only 11 years.
Barnes &amp; Noble is renovating the ground floor for a new store, to open in March 1994.


The Russians Knew A Good Thing
To the Editor:
I enjoyed Kenneth Furie's article " 'I Lombardi' Was Just an Opera Away From a Masterpiece"  [ Nov. 28 ] .
I used to think I was musically unsophisticated in liking this Verdi opera.
An interesting fact in the opera's history is that Moscow's Bolshoi Theater performed it in 1849.
However, more importantly, the Bolshoi mounted a new production of it in 1873.
This occurred after the Bolshoi performed "Macbeth," "La Traviata," "Il Trovatore," "Un Ballo in Maschera," "Rusalka" and Glinka's great works "A Life for the Czar" and "Ruslan and Lyudmila." MICHAEL D. BENVENGO  Warwick, N. Y.


Ms. McMahon And Mr. Smith
Meghan Ratchford McMahon, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian J. McMahon of Old Saybrook, Conn., was married yesterday to Ross Hewson Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David R. Smith of East Grand Rapids, Mich.
The Rev.
Bruce Comiskey, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Stowe Community Church, a Congregational church in Stowe, Vt.
The bride, 28, is the women's varsity tennis coach at Columbia University.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in social work from the University of Illinois.


Point-and-Shoot Protection
Camera bags for compact models are made by L. L. Bean.
There are two sizes: regular, with a main compartment that is 6 1/4 inches high, 4 inches wide and 1 3/4 inches deep, and mini, with a main compartment 5 3/8 by 3 1/8 by 1 1/2.
Each is padded and has a pouch for carrying film, a belt loop and a shoulder strap.
There are three colors -- black; a combination of gray and black, and teal and black -- and all the bags display the company's logo.
The regular bag is $15, the mini $12; shipping is $3.95.
The item number in the Christmas catalogue is HL13291.
Call (800) 221-4221.


SUNDAY, December 12, 1993; For That Special Someone
Have a niece with more ornaments in her nose than you have on your tree?
An uncle who loves spiders?
A friend who's a recovering narcissist?
They deserve gifts, too, this season.
And here are a few ideas:
"The 'Priest' They Called Him." William S. Burroughs reads a tale one critic generously called a "junkie adaptation of 'A Christmas Carol' " to guitarist Kurt Cobain's "savage deconstruction of 'Silent Night.' "


Holiday Biscotti for Dipping or Munching
THE tradition of Christmas cookies depends heavily on German recipes, an inventory that includes pfeffernusse, springerle, lebkuchen, zimtsterne and spekulatius.
English ginger cookies and Austrian vanilla crescents are some others that are popular.
These cookies all keep well, making it possible to bake them weeks in advance of serving or giving as gifts.
And now it is time to add Italian biscotti to the list.


Not So Mysterious
To the Editor:
In James R. Kincaid's review of Catherine Peters's book "The King of Inventors: A Life of Wilkie Collins" (Nov. 14), Mr.
Kincaid attaches to Collins's two best-known novels the misleading label "murder mysteries." Villainous Godfrey Ablewhite is indeed murdered in "The Moonstone," and villainous Count Fosco in "The Woman in White," but both crimes occur late in those books, and neither is in any way mysterious.
Though usually cited as a forefather of modern murder mysteries, Collins did not write them himself.
WALTER KENDRICK  New York


Abigail Pogrebin and David Shapiro
Abigail Pogrebin, a daughter of Letty Cottin Pogrebin and Bert Pogrebin of New York, was married last evening to David Shapiro, the son of Phyllis and Milton Shapiro of Evanston, Ill.
Rabbi Mychal Springer performed the ceremony at Jalousie Plantation in St.
Lucia, West Indies.
The bride, 28, is an associate producer for Ed Bradley at the CBS News program "60 Minutes" in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University.
Her mother, a founder and a contributing editor of Ms. magazine, is an author in New York.
Her father is a senior partner in Rains &amp; Pogrebin, a law firm in Mineola, L.I.


Urban Aspirations and Island Mysteries Assessed in the Bronx
FORDHAM ROAD, here, is a relatively short stretch between the Major Deegan Expressway and the Bronx River Parkway.
Yet, to traverse it on a business day is to see people from all continents and seemingly every nation.
Similar cross-sections can be found elsewhere in the Bronx, notably at Lehman College and Hostos Community College, both of which have exhibitions reflecting the borough's polyglot character.
The show at Lehman College Art Gallery is "Contemporary Public Art in the Bronx," the one at Hostos a sampling of Haitian art called "Myths Redefined."
Although this is not the most populous borough in New York City (Brooklyn has that distinction), until the 1880's the area was but a collection of villages in what was then southern Westchester.
And its incorporation in 1898 was less a result of growth than of "colonization" by Manhattan real estate interests, reacting to the immigrant influx.


Europe to Defy Greece on Ties to Macedonia
Despite a long campaign by Greece to isolate the tiny Balkan country of Macedonia until it changes its name, the rest of the European Community is likely to establish diplomatic relations with Macedonia by the end of the year, diplomats say.
Britain, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and Denmark are preparing to establish full diplomatic ties as soon as next week, the diplomats say.


France Protects Authors' Moral Rights
To the Editor:
Further to "Dumas Family History Is Marked by Drama" (letter, Nov. 28): The refusal of the producers of the film "The Three Musketeers" to acknowledge Alexandre Dumas as the author of the original work, as reported in your Nov. 14 Topics item, could prevent the showing of that film in France unless and until full credit is given.


Recent Job Gains Conceal a Harsh Truth
To the Editor:
Your description of recent hiring trends (Business Day, Dec. 2) requires an important caveat.


A Cassandra Without the Histrionics
New big female voices emerge from France only rarely.
"Too many French singers come out of the Paris Conservatory with a first prize and think all they have to do is sit at the telephone and wait for engagements," said Francoise Pollet, a dramatic soprano who is the current French hope.
Ms.
Pollet, in range and repertory a direct descendant of the prewar soprano Germaine Lubin and the great postwar artist Regine Crespin, makes her Metropolitan Opera debut on Thursday in Berlioz's masterwork "Les Troyens."
Berlioz's retelling of Virgil's "Aeneid" is an opera in two parts: "The Fall of Troy" and "The Trojans at Carthage." In Part I of the current Met production, Ms.
Pollet sings Cassandre, the seer who is unheeded when she foretells the downfall of Troy ("Beware of Greeks bearing gifts").
She eventually leads her countrywomen in a mass suicide rather than succumb to the invading troops.


Giants Math: 1,000 Plus 1,000 Plus X Equals Hampton
Marcus Allen, one of the best ever, says he has watched Giants running back Rodney Hampton since Hampton came into the National Football League four years ago, eight years after Allen did.
Allen thinks Hampton is one of the league's best, which puts the Giants running back in Allen's class.
That would be first-class.
"I've watched him over the years and I have to say that Rodney is a great back," said the Kansas City Chiefs running back, who himself is destined for the Hall of Fame.
"He's one of the hardest running backs I've ever seen."


POSTINGS: $600 Million for the Northeast; Freddie Mac Returns To Multifamily Loans
After a three-year moratorium, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, or Freddie Mac, has re-entered the multifamily housing market.
Freddie Mac, a stockholder-owned corporation established by Congress in 1970 to provide a flow of funds to primary mortgage lenders, started taking applications for multifamily housing loans on Dec. 1.
No deals have been made yet, but the corporation expects to lend about $2 billion nationwide and about $600 million in the Northeast region from New Jersey to Maine in 1994.


Johnson's Cutbacks Cut Down the Redskins
The Redskins were quick to admit the Jets outplayed them today in a 3-0 victory, and they knew why.
"It was those cutback runs by Johnny Johnson," said Monte Coleman, the Redskins' 15th-year outside linebacker.


County Board Juggling With State's Error And the Budget
When County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke released his proposed 1994 budget early last month, before Election Day rather than after it as had been customary, he said it was necessary to demonstrate the validity of a campaign pledge: that his spending plan contained no tax increases.
The document seemed to support Mr.
O'Rourke's claim as well as his principle campaign theme: that Westchester was in capable fiscal hands.
He went on to win the election by less than 2 percent of the vote, thus seemingly supporting the need to validate his point.


Gift Books: To Hell and Back; Down There
This book is a hell of a bargain.
Not only does one get for the price of an extra-large novel more than two score color reproductions of gruesome pictures of the underworld (and more than 40 pages of black-and-white plates) in THE HISTORY OF HELL (Harcourt Brace, $29.95), one also receives an insightful and balanced popular history of the growth and, one might almost say, the flowering of imagination about that place at the entrance of which all hope is abandoned.
As Alice K. Turner, the fiction editor at Playboy, notes, human creativity has been much more fascinated by hell than by heaven, for heaven is clearly a metaphor that attempts to hint at the ineffable, while hell is "oddly fleshly, with tortures that hurt and an atmosphere that is . . . excessively gross." Moreover, as Ms.
Turner notes, hell has what Hollywood might call an "entertainment quotient," even in some imaginative work a comic dimension.
For these reasons it is no exaggeration to claim, as Ms.
Turner does, that "hell is the largest shared construction project in imaginative history," the work of geniuses from Homer to Blake and including St.
Augustine, Michelangelo and Hieronymus Bosch.


Mogul of the Moguls: Weinbrecht Picks Up Where She Left Off
"And now ladies and gentlemen, in the starting gate, making her return to the World Cup circuit: Donna Weinbrecht of the U.S.A."
At the top of the windy, snow-swept course, the race announcer's words did not go unnoticed.


Family Drifts Through Death To Escape Hardship in Cuba
Desperate to escape a deteriorating economic situation in Cuba, Diosdado Reyes, his wife, 1-year-old son and 10 other members of his family ventured out in a 15-foot, motor-driven wooden boat he had built.
In the first hours at sea, a storm swamped the boat's motor and swept most of the scant provisions and fresh water overboard and left the group adrift.
They moved with the currents, scavenging for algae and small fish, and drinking salt water.


'The Downing Street Years'
To the Editor:
Henry A. Kissinger raises a most important question in his review of Margaret Thatcher's book, "The Downing Street Years" (Nov. 14).
He concludes his critique by saying that "free peoples owe her a debt of gratitude -- whether or not they agree with all her conclusions."
But if we don't agree with all her conclusions, why should we owe her a debt of gratitude?
H.
ROGIE ROGOSIN  Laguna Hills, Calif.


Marketer's Dream, Engineer's Nightmare
JOHN SCULLEY, chief executive of Apple Computer Inc., traveled the world last year to preach about products he predicted would set his company apart from the rest of its industry.
The star of his show was a palm-sized computer that would read handwritten notes jotted on its screen with a special pen, convert them to text, store them for future use, even transmit them wirelessly to other computers.
More than that, the computer would anticipate its master's needs like a secretary -- for example, automatically entering into the machine's electronic datebook an appointment time transmitted from someone else.
Dubbed the Newton, the new device would arrive, he promised, not in the 21st century but well in time for a place under the Christmas tree in a year or two.


Migrating With Wolves
Helping scientists track the migration and breeding patterns of the North American gray wolf is the focus of tours to Quebec Province in February.
The program, organized by a company called Natural Habitat Adventures in Sussex, N.J., centers on Jacques Cartier Park, about 30 miles from Quebec City; the itinerary includes snow-mobiling, snow-showing and flying in small planes.
The eight-day tours are scheduled to depart Feb. 5, 12 and 19.
The price of $1,995 includes accommodations and meals; air fare to Quebec City is extra.
Call (800) 543-8917.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a review on Nov. 21 about "Running as a Woman," by Linda Witt, Karen M. Paget and Glenna Matthews, cited the book erroneously for an omission.
The book does include mentions of the Supreme Court's 1989 decision in the case of Webster v.
Reproductive Health Services, upholding certain state restrictions on abortion, and of the decision's effects on political parties, candidates and voters.


THERE'S NO SIMPLE SUICIDE
Suicide as an act, and as a concept, bears ancient connotations of sin, cowardice, anger and failure.
The word should be stricken from use.


The Ageless Mr. Palmer
To the Editor:
I enjoyed your coverage of the wedding of Susan Layton and William Palmer (Vows, Nov. 28).
Their love story was appealing, the photos were lovely, the bride looked adorable.
But there was something missing.


Not the Times Square Redevelopment Project
What's all this about Clara Bow coming back to town?
What was that long line of Model A's, Packards, even an early Checker cab?
Why was the Academy Theater marquee advertising O'Neill's "Marco Millions"?
Look inside.
With reports from Bayside, Port Morris, Brighton Beach and the Upper West Side.
PAGES 6-12


Credit Twist: Fun Is Back For Consumers
AMERICANS entered the holiday season charging at a record rate.
And as a Christmas present, the people who provide the credit are asking less in return.
"We're seeing a 20 to 30 percent increase in the charges on each card this holiday season," said James L. Bailey, an executive vice president of Citibank, the largest issuer of bank credit cards.


Susan Shaffet, Lawrence Kanter
Susan Ellen Shaffet, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael S. Shaffet of East Hills, L.I., was married yesterday evening to Dr.
Lawrence Eric Kanter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Kanter of Melrose Park, Pa.
Rabbi Lee Friedlander performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Sholom in Roslyn, L.I.
Mrs.
Kanter, 30, graduated from Duke University.
She is a manager at M. Fabrikant &amp; Sons, a wholesale jewelry concern in New York, of which her father is the chief financial officer.


Holiday Sounds, Traditional and New
CHRISTMAS in Connecticut may not be accompanied annually by postcard-perfect snowfalls, but it always brings a deluge of seasonal music.
Churches, theaters and concert halls have scheduled hundreds of performances of sacred and secular, traditional and contemporary music throughout the state.
Bearing in mind that the holidays are a time for children, it is appropriate to highlight Chorus Angelicus, composed of 40 boys and girls 8 to 14 years old.
They will perform at 4 P.M. today in St.
Joseph's Church in Winsted, and on Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. at the Westminster School in Simsbury.


No Headline
"In many of these little towns on the Plains, we're reaching the point where the noose has begun to concentrate the mind." MARK DRABENSTOTT of the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank, on declining rural population.  [ 28:1. ]


U.S. SAYS RUSSIANS HELPED DAMASCUS IN A MISSILE PLAN
Over the objections of the United States, Russian cargo planes flew special truck chassis that are commonly used for mobile missile launchers from North Korea to Syria last summer, Clinton Administration officials say.
Aides familiar with classified intelligence reports said two large Russian Condor planes had flown the vehicles in August from Sunan airfield in North Korea to Damascus.
American intelligence officials said the vehicles had probably been taken from there to a missile plant at Nasariya for use in Syria's Scud missile program.


Young Artists on Stage
The Hartt School is rushing toward its holiday break, but not before several young players and singers get their chance in the performing spotlight.
In Berkman Auditorium this afternoon at 3, John Zei directs staged opera scenes by Donizetti, Bizet and Verdi, among others; while at 8 tonight, Gene Young leads the Connecticut Youth Symphony in Millard Auditorium, the program listing more Bizet -- the second suite from "L'Arlesienne" -- Saint-Saens's "Carnival of the Animals" and Mendelssohn's "Italian" Symphony.
Tomorrow at 8, Millard is host to the Hartt Early Music Ensemble in an evening of song and dance from the English Renaissance; next Sunday in the same auditorium, 3 o'clock is downbeat time for the Greater Hartford Youth Wind Ensemble with a program conducted by Daniel D'Addio and featuring John de Miej's "Lord of the Rings." The opera and early music concerts are free, the other events have a $5 admission charge with tickets available at the door only.


Local Groups, in a Video, Tell How to Organize
To the Editor:
I would like to add one more resource to your list for New Yorkers wanting to organize around community issues ("Community Groups: Call the Roll," Nov. 7).
The office of the Deputy Mayor for Public Safety has produced a 40-minute video, "Neighborhoods: A Source for Change."


Guns, Laws And Giuliani
Just when he was eyeball-deep in resumes, job applications and the minutiae of assembling a city government, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani suddenly blossomed this week into a national spokesman for handgun licensing.
But in moving to the forefront of an issue long championed by those more liberal than he, Mr.
Giuliani, the first Republican elected mayor of New York in two decades, came face-to-face with the potential for political paradox in his new job leading a traditionally liberal Democratic city.


Europeans Back French Curbs on U.S. Movies
European Community leaders today gave full support to demands by France that its system of protecting and subsidizing its movie industry be preserved in any world trade agreement.
This subsidy system, bitterly contested by Washington and Hollywood, has become the chief remaining obstacle in a seven-year-old negotiation, known as the Uruguay Round, whose goal is updating and extending trade rules to stimulate the world economy.
Four days remain until Wednesday's agreed deadline for the talks.


Violence and the Schools: A Search for Safety
JARRELL TOMPKINS, 15 years old, has been wondering how to protect himself at Intermediate School 52 in Melrose in the Bronx ever since a classmate grabbed him and pressed a razor to his throat in a hallway robbery.
Judith Huggins, a teacher at Public School 149 in East New York, Brooklyn, has been wondering how best to comfort a fourth grader who came to class weeping because her teen-age brother had been shot dead.


Manager Retiring at Board 11
Since Helen C. Philbin took over as the manager of Community Board 11 nearly 15 years ago, the district has seen many changes for the better -- and local officials say that is not just a coincidence.
Now that Mrs.
Philbin is retiring next month, they are wondering what the future holds for the board and district without her.
Her influence has been widely felt.
Some 1,200 acres of parkland have been added in Udalls Cove and Alley Park.
Other parks that had fallen into disrepair have been renovated.
When developers started invading neighborhoods to replace single-family homes with multiple-family houses, the board pressed for a zoning law amendment that halted the practice.
Main arteries like Horace Harding Expressway, Francis Lewis Boulevard and Northern Boulevard have been rebuilt, as have side streets that had not been overhauled for half a century.


In a First Novel, an Author Wallows in the Banality of Evil
IT'S a setup.
An author creates a borderline psychopath and imbues him with endearing, positively humanistic characteristics.
It's Stephen King's dictum: "I try to create sympathy for my characters, then turn the monsters loose."
But how many young authors can aggrandize this deceptively smiple trick all the way to domestic and international publishing and film rights riches the first time out?
The rights riches the first time out?
The odds of being charred by a flash of lightning are about as good.


Amid Joblessness, The Joys of Tenure
IN the halls of academia, only a few doctrines are as sacred as free trade.
One of them, not surprisingly, is tenure, the almost ironclad guarantee of job security that most professors enjoy.
Curiously, many of the same arguments scholars make in favor of removing international trade barriers can also be used to make the case against their own lifetime job protection.


On a Balmy Isle, Eggnog and Fir Trees
I'VE always thought that the author of "White Christmas" had it exactly wrong.
Forget the white stuff.
I grew up in southern California, and my idea of a real, traditional Christmas is heavy on palm trees and flowers.
Since these are rare in a New York December, last year I persuaded my husband, Tom, that we should go someplace benign for the holiday.
A few days in Bermuda sounded just right.
We arrived on the island on Christmas Eve and checked into Waterloo House, a small establishment just outside the city of Hamilton.
We were shown to an enormous, chintz-filled room, newly painted in a pretty shade of peach.
A little present of fruit and chocolates was displayed on the dresser, and a private porch looked out into a walled garden with blooming red hibiscus and a palm tree, which was swaying softly in the balmy -- the temperature was hovering in the low 70's -- breeze.


Polyester Mysticism
It's catalogue time again and we're all awash in glossy booklets offering holiday consumables.
As the tide grows more tsunamic each year, the game becomes more subtle.
Whispering Pines of Piermont, N.Y., sells Adirondack-cabin nostalgia in the form of things made from twigs, or bearing moose motifs.
Daily Planet markets a style best described as International Ironic, offering obsolete Communist lapel pins from the former Soviet Union, French Foreign Legion capes and Afghan carpets with AK-47's woven into the design.


A Song Slipped In Enriches a Killer
By including a secret track of a song by Charles Manson on its new album, Guns n' Roses has borrowed a little of the ghoulish allure of a cult killer.
Lots of bands thrive by talking a violent game -- advocating sacrifices to Satan or killing police officers, for example -- but this is the rare time when a band's actions will actually help a murderer.
The band's decision to include the song "Look at Your Game, Girl" -- recorded by Mr.
Manson in the late 1960's when he was trying to launch a folk-rock career -- means the jailed cult leader could earn hundreds of thousands of dollars.
Mr.
Manson is serving a life sentence in California for his part in the 1969 murders of the actress Sharon Tate and six other people.
His followers slashed their victims to death and scrawled slogans like "Kill the Pigs" on the walls in blood.


Dec. 5-11; Nor Any Drop to Drink
Washington found itself under a "boil water" alert last week, the result of possible contamination of the city's water supply by a micro-organism.
Recent heavy rains triggered a soil run-off into a reservoir that supplies the District of Columbia and some northern Virginia cities, overwhelming the filtration system and causing cloudiness, or turbidity, in the water.
The run-off, government officials warned, could contain cryptosporidium, a protozoan that can cause diarrhea, nausea and abdominal cramps in humans.
It can also cause death in those with organ transplants, AIDS or other immune-system problems.


When Arts Proponents and Educators Clash
An ambitious, federally financed arts and education program designed to change how the core elementary and middle school curriculum is taught in Westchester County has galvanized the county's arts community and raised a host of concerns among local arts administrators.
The main issue is not whether the arts can provide suitable tools for learning, these administrators say, since most of the county's leading arts institutions already collaborate in various ways with local school districts.
Rather, some museum, orchestra and theater-company directors are asking whether the Westchester Arts Council, which received a $250,000 matching grant from the National Endowment for the Arts for the three-year program, called Arts Excel, is following a sound agenda as it proceeds with the plan.


THE WORLD: Going Underground; In Retreat, Europe's Neo-Nazis May Be More Perilous
NEO-NAZI extremism has been widely seen as a threat to the stability of Central Europe since the euphoria over the end of the cold war gave way to recession deepened by the steep costs of German reunification and nationalist resentment of immigrants and refugees.
The hostility and discontent has been evident in Germany both at the polls, where far-right parties have made gains in a number of state elections since 1990, and in the streets, where extremists have frequently rioted and attacked foreigners, sometimes killing them.
Last week fears of the spread of virulent neo-Nazism were raised again by the news of a series of letter bombings in neighboring Austria tied to right-wing extremists, attacks that injured Vienna's Mayor and four others.


Fire Forces Evacuation of Nursing Home


Shelley Longmuir, Jonathan Feld
Shelley Alexann Longmuir, the daughter of Mrs.
Thomas A. Longmuir of Norwalk, Conn., and the late Mr.
Longmuir, was married yesterday to Jonathan Samuel Feld, a son of Barbara K. Feld of Detroit and the late Dr.
David Feld.
Judge Maryanne Trump Barry of Federal District Court in Newark officiated at the couple's home in Washington.
The Rev.
Shirley Coll, a Congregational minister, took part in the ceremony.
Miss Longmuir is keeping her name.
She is the senior counsel for governmental affairs at United Airlines in Washington.
In the Bush Administration, she was the counselor to the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and later, the counselor to the Deputy Secretary of Transportation.


Landslide Topples Building in Malaysia, Killing 1 and Trapping 50


Dec. 5-11; Banking's Latest Test
For years, community groups and banks complained about Federal enforcement of the law requiring banks to make loans and operate branches in poor or minority neighborhoods.
Banks called the regulations burdensome; community groups called them inadequate.
But both sides welcomed a new approach proposed by the Clinton Administration last week.
It would oblige a bank to pass tough statistical tests in order to avoid sanctions.
Dropping the vague standards now used by bank examiners, the tests will be based on data about how much a bank lends in different parts of its local market.


Directors Battle Over GATT's Final Cut and Print
With the clock ticking and high noon approaching, the global trade talks have suddenly riveted the movie industry, turning into the kind of improbable melodrama embraced by Hollywood studios.
There are prominent names involved, like Martin Scorsese and Steven Spielberg, there's snappy and angry dialogue, there's big money at stake, and there's an unpredictable finale on Wednesday.
At issue in the usually eye-glazing and arcane global negotiations known as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trades, or GATT, is the flow of American movies and television programs and new audiovisual technology to lucrative markets overseas.
Essentially, the entertainment industry, backed by President Clinton, wants open access.
And the Europeans, led by the French, seem adamant about keeping restrictions that diminish profits, and perhaps jobs, in the United States.
American films produce the second largest trade surplus, after airplane sales, of any American industry. 'Simple Protectionism'
"This is simple protectionism, it's arrogant, as anti-American as you can get," Frank Price, former chairman of Columbia Pictures and Universal Pictures, and now a producer, said.
"What they don't like is that audiences find American entertainment desirable. They want to prevent that."


Dec. 5-11: California Beating; Maximum Sentence Eases Little in Los Angeles
"I was just caught up in the rapture," said Damian Williams in explaining to a local newspaper his part in the violence of the Los Angeles riots 19 months ago.
Of the scores of men who could be seen on videotape attacking and beating passers-by, Mr.
Williams was one of the few identified and brought to trial, and last week he received his sentence: 10 years in prison.
In this divided city, the punishment satisfied some but angered many, who called it either too harsh or too lenient.


Space Artifacts of Soviets Soar at a $7 Million Auction
In what may have been history's most audacious sale of a used vehicle, Sotheby's yesterday auctioned off a research vehicle the Russians left on the surface of the moon in 1970.
The price was $68,500.
"We made sure we didn't promise to deliver it," said David N. Redden, the senior vice president of the auction house who organized the sale over a three-year period.


West Point Choir Also Volunteered
The article on West Point cadet volunteer efforts (Nov. 21) neglected to mention an important cadet contribution on Veterans Day.
In addition to the more than 300 cadets volunteering with church and community groups that day, the West Point Cadet Gospel Choir entertained foster-care students at Edwin Gould Academy in Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
JAMES G. DONLEVY North Tarrytown


In the Region/Westchester; Home Buyers Get Space on the Ground Floor for Less
WHEN Paul Schefflein and his wife, Arleen, began shopping for a house almost three years ago, they narrowed their search to houses less than five years old.
Having lived in apartments most of his life, Mr.
Schefflein said he did not think he had the skills necessary to maintain a house any older than that.
"I can't fix anything," he said.
"I needed a house I could just move into and not have to repair anything up front."


Susan Weinstein and Carl Kanev
Susan Weinstein, the owner of a public relations concern that bears her name, and Carl Kanev, a lawyer, were married yesterday evening in Philadelphia.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Mayer Selekman officiated at the home of the bridegroom's parents, Charles and Miriam Kanev.
Ms.
Weinstein, 42, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Temple University.
She is a daughter of Mayer and Millicent Weinstein of Wynnewood, Pa.


Modern-Day Pashas?
To the Editor:
In his review of Robert D. Kaplan's book "The Arabists" (Oct. 17), Evan Thomas merely echoes Mr.
Kaplan's simplistic hyperbole on the role of Foreign Service officers who have mastered the Arabic language and served, for the most part, in the Arab world.


Miss Kapsimalis And Mr. Vales
Dr. and Mrs.
Peter Kapsimalis of Summit, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Pamela Mary Kapsimalis, to Joseph Anthony Vales, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Vales of Sewickley, Pa.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Kapsimalis is an associate at Connell, Foley &amp; Geiser, a law firm in Roseland, N.J.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received a law degree from Seton Hall University.
The future bride's father is an endodontist in Summit.


Chefs for a Day
The Relais et Chateaux association of hotels and restaurants is marking its 40th anniversary on Feb. 24 by importing 40 French chefs, one for each of its North American members; for example, Michel Troisgros of the renowned restaurant Troisgros in Roanne is scheduled to come to the Auberge Hatley in Quebec Province, and Georges Blanc, of the restaurant bearing his name in Vonnas, will be at the Meadowood Resort Hotel in the Napa Valley.
The French chefs will collaborate with the chefs at each property.
Information: (212) 856-0115.


As She Lay Dying
AVA By Carole Maso. 274 pp. Normal, Ill.: Dalkey Archive Press. $19.95.


A Rain Forest Comes to Colorado
Colorado is hardly rain forest country, but the calls of jungle animals can now be heard amid lush tropical growth in Denver -- in the Denver Zoo, to be specific Tropical Discovery, a 22,000-square-foot structure that houses 240 tropical animal species and about 150 types of plants.
In addition to a jungle inhabited by venomous snakes, howler monkeys, crocodiles and giant water monitor lizards, the exhibit, which opened last month, recreates the habitats of a mountain cave, mangrove and cyprus swamps, a forest clearing and an offshore coral reef.
Rather than using pesticides to protect the plants -- many of them endangered species -- the zoo has released 9,500 predator insects.


Let Children Sing
LATE one weekday afternoon, Dianne Berkun was standing before a fidgety crowd of schoolchildren in a dusty chamber of the downtown Brooklyn Y.W.C.A.
She was trying to get them to sing Vivaldi's "Laudamus Te," music from the Baroque era that has no immediately apparent connection to their lives.
"Do you remember what the main quality of Baroque music is?" she patiently asked.


POSTINGS: Renovation on Gouverneur Slip; Matching the Inside View to the One Outside
First it was the patients at Gouverneur Hospital, then the recovering drug addicts at the Lower East Side Service Center, who have had the best river views around.
But over time the internal views at 7 Gouverneur Slip -- the 50,000-square-foot masonry structure abutting the FDR Drive in lower Manhattan and designed by Mc Kim, Mead &amp; White in 1914 -- have grown a lot less esthetic.
Crumbling plaster, floors worn down to the concrete, leaky ceilings, all were part of the interior landscape.
Now residents and staff will get the best of both worlds.
The New York State Office of Alcoholism and Substance Abuse Services has come through with $5 million to renovate the 145-bed facility, which houses both long-term and short-term substance-abuse treatment programs.
Wiring, windows, kitchens, plumbing, air-conditioning -- pretty much everything will be new, according to the architect Jack Esterson, whose firm, Thanhauser &amp; Esterson, is doing the redesign.


De La Hoya Decision Has Its Costs
Steve Nelson, a mortgage banker, saw his most complex investment go sour the other day: Oscar De La Hoya dropped him as a manager.
"Maybe if we had a boxing commissioner, it never would have come to this," said Nelson.


Lawsuits and Lawyering
I thoroughly enjoyed your Nov. 7 interview with John Williams.
It conveyed a portrait of a dedicated and dynamic community servant who has much to be admired for.
I would, however, like to clarify one point.
In presenting his views on hate-crime legislation, Mr.
Williams commented that "arresting people for words . . . is unconscionable, fundamentally un-American."


Business Diary: December 5 - 10
COMPANIES Bank or Mutual Fund?
Suddenly, the Line's a Lot Fuzzier  Should you buy a certificate of deposit or put your money under the mattress?
These days, it's a toss-up: depending on your car's make and model, the pennies in interest may or may not buy enough gas to get you to the bank.
As banks know all too well, the deposits of yesteryear are sprinting to mutual funds, so many banking companies have faced the music and ventured into the fund business.
But none have done it on the scale that Mellon Bank did last week when it bought Dreyfus, the nation's No. 6 mutual fund company, for $1.85 billion in stock.
Dreyfus manages $80 billion in 130 or so funds; no other bank exceeds $20 billion.
But a word of caution: as banks rush into peddling mutual funds, will half-informed consumers keep up?
Or will they, conditioned to think any money taken to the bank is Government-insured, be misled into ignoring mutual funds' risks?


Kelly Armstrong, Michael De Marco
KELLY ARMSTRONG, 30, and Michael De Marco, 34, described their Dec. 4 nuptials as "the recyclable Christmas wedding." Almost everything that was left over from the ceremony and reception was given to charitable organizations or turned into a gift for someone.
Mr.
De Marco, an investment banker at Lehman Brothers in New York, and Ms.
Armstrong, an administrator in the assets management department at Lehman, were married in the Roman Catholic Church of the Blessed Sacrament on West 71st Street in Manhattan.


Serbia Threatened With Tighter Sanctions
European Community leaders threatened Serbia with tighter economic sanctions today and invited the warring parties in the Balkans to talk peace again in Brussels on Dec. 22.
The threat, an attempt to force Serbia to make territorial concessions to the Muslims in Bosnia, replaces an earlier offer to loosen sanctions progressively in exchange for Serbian concessions in Bosnia.


Showy Plants That Have Staying Power
THIS may seem like an odd time of year to be praising a particular deciduous plant.
Shade trees are leafless, the lawn has been raked for the last time.
The hand tools are tucked away on racks and hooks in the tool shed.
Yet one deciduous plant persists in showing off and it deserves a plug.
It is the oakleaf hydrangea (Hydrangea quercifolia), which remains spectacular to see quite late in the year.
The leaves are large and resemble those of an oak tree except that they are larger, perhaps seven inches long.
In late fall they have a purple-bronze hue, an unusual coloration that is spectacular and can be seen for quite some distance.


THERE'S NO SIMPLE SUICIDE
When will society accept that people need more than a physician's assistance to experience a peaceful death?
I have watched terminally ill friends, who intellectually accept euthanasia, live in excruciating pain because they could not conquer their fear of dying.
Bless Louise.
She didn't miss that window of opportunity while she was still coherent.
Letting go is never easy.
But she overcame fear and despair, and that is the best kind of victory.


Ruffling Some Feathers
Fate is apparent on those harsh late-autumn mornings when coveys of quails hide near marshes and the occasional pheasant fans an earth-toned wing skyward.
The leaves are parched, dry and umber.
The cold obliterates all olfactory evidence of change.
There is no regenerative slosh of leaves, twigs, grass and mud.
There is no scent, haunting or otherwise.
Every sniff gives the illusion of a clinically depressed world.
Hunters take advantage of this steely stillness to assert their need for dominance.
It isn't simply quail or pheasant, grouse or squab that attracts them; it is the eagerness for mastery, the need to call the shots, to affect the world before it affects them.
Gaming is a cognitive sport and game birds are points scored against the ultimate foe: the dreaded, immutable unknown.


IF THE FRENCH CAN DO IT, WHY CAN'T WE?
As President Clinton has shown by targeting resources for the expansion of Head Start, investing in quality preschool programs is a priority for this Administration.
We need to extend the high-quality comprehensive programming of Head Start into programs that serve parents who are in the work force.
KAREN NUSSBAUM Director, Women's Bureau Department of Labor Washington


Habitats/Signs of Change; Site First, House Second
MAYBE it has something to do with "For Sale" signs.
In 1954, the Mollisons were driving around looking for land to buy when they noticed a man putting up a cardboard "For Sale" sign on a craggy piece of land overlooking a tidal cove in Old Greenwich, Conn.
A scribbled address on the sign led to the owner and the Mollisons signed a contract that very day.
This fall, 40 years later, the family posted its own "For Sale" sign on the property.
Within a week there were three offers.
The house had been on the market for six months with a local agent.


Video's Starry Box Of Boxes
December is the month of the box in video stores: three boxed Cagneys for $49.92, say, or a four-pack of Steven Seagals for $79.92.
If there are extras like posters and documentaries about the making of the film, boxed sets of movies on tape or laser disk can run as high as $200.
But beyond even these is this year's box of boxes: "The Star Wars Trilogy," a big black slipcase of George Lucas films on disk, released by Fox Video and Image Entertainment in September and now, like other boxes, primed for the Christmas trade.


Steven Spielberg Faces the Holocaust
As a youth, Steven Spielberg says, he was ashamed to be a Jew.
Moving from Ohio to Arizona to California, the Spielbergs were often the only Jewish family in the neighborhood.
"I was embarrassed, I was self-conscious, I was always aware I stood out because of my Jewishness," the director recalls.
"In high school, I got smacked and kicked around. Two bloody noses. It was horrible." His family had direct ties to the Holocaust: relatives died in Poland and Ukraine.


THERE'S NO SIMPLE SUICIDE
Much of Louise's story was familiar to me.
As I read it, I realized what uncharted territory my family and I had traveled and how much it would have helped if we had known just one "real life story" like Louise's ("There's No Simple Suicide," by Lisa Belkin, Nov. 14).
Of course, we devoured what we could find to read, but neither my father's illness nor his death reflected the "textbook" examples of people who can identify the moment that's neither too soon nor too late, and who, after seizing the moment, die in a matter of hours.


A Lincoln With an Agit-Prop Subtext
As much as it recalls the early life of a monumental man, "Abe Lincoln in Illinois," Robert E. Sherwood's 1938 play now in gigantic revival at Lincoln Center's Vivian Beaumont Theater, recalls the era in which it was written and the manner by which the Lincoln legend has been shaped.
It also recalls the economics of a long-vanished Broadway theater that could support a cast of 49 actors in a play that hasn't a single production number, bare leg or specialty act.
That sort of prodigality is both instructive and entertaining in a show that evokes a lot of fascinating history, not all of it having to do with Honest Abe, the Rail-Splitter and Great Emancipator.


Jennifer Weiss, Alan N. Wolf
Jennifer Amy Weiss, a daughter of Stephen Weiss of Port Jefferson, L.I., and Dr.
Rachelle Weiss of Chicago, was married last evening to Alan Neil Wolf, the son of Irwin Wolf of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Rosalyn Wolf.
Rabbi Gary Bretton-Granatoor performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Ms.
Weiss-Wolf is a grant writer and planner for the American Civil Liberties Union Foundation in New York.
She graduated from Lafayette College and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father is the chief executive of the S. B. Merit Company, a construction concern in Yaphank, L.I.
Her mother is a research scientist for TAP Pharmaceuticals Inc., in Deerfield, Ill.


Correction
An article last Sunday about the haircutter Cristophe referred incorrectly to circumstances last May at the Los Angeles Airport when he cut President Clinton's hair there.
Contrary to rumor at the time, no runways were closed.


Canals Back in Venice (Los Angeles)
After 50 years of decay and delay, controversy and teeth-gnashing, the old Venice canals in Los Angeles have been restored.
The six canals, which officially reopened on Oct. 19, have been dredged, sidewalks and bridges rebuilt and -- in the most hotly debated part of the protracted project -- the banks lined with special sloping blocks that are supposed to allow natural wetlands plants to grow and children to climb out if they fall in.
Many residents along the canal wanted vertical walls for esthetic reasons, but such walls were ruled out because they are not amenable to plant growth.


The Sturdy Staghorn: A Fern Grows, Defiantly
I BOUGHT my staghorn fern (Platycerium bifurcatum) almost a year ago.
A little baby in a two-inch pot.
I think it cost about $3, and I bought it along with a half dozen or so other house plants, just as small and just as cheap.
I buy a few every year once the winter wind whips up and my Heavenly Blue morning glories have gone to heaven.
I can grow house plants, I tell myself -- and then I promptly kill them all through neglect.
North light and old radiators that fire up to about 100 degrees don't help.


. . . And See Who Salutes


Elevation Vs. Devaluation
To the Editor:
Why do you repeatedly give space to pop-music critics who treat rap not only with seriousness but with reverence?  [ "Snoop Dogg's Gentle Hip-Hop Growl," Nov. 21 ] .
Even after acknowledging the fact that posing permeates rap, Toure solemnly notes: "It takes very critical listening to hear Snoop's implicit message." Then, under the headline "The Poet Laureate of the Homies," Toure quotes some of Snoop Doggy Dogg's lyrics, including such flat formulations as "mad as hell" and "it's driving the cops crazy." Toure proceeds to tell us that Snoop speaks with "the lyrical complexity of a poet." What an elevation of the easy and ordinary; what a devaluation of genuine poetry.


At Work; Helping a Union Find Its Way
DENISE MITCHELL and Ray Abernathy probably could be forgiven if they chose to indulge in an I-told-you-so or two.
Only they, the 21,000 members of the Association of Professional Flight Attendants, a few negotiators and people who reflexively root for lost causes thought American Airlines could be yanked to its knees by its attendants' union in a dispute about staffing and pay.
Surprise: Last month the attendants walked, chaos talked and the parties are back cogitating on how to arrive at mutual satisfaction.
American acknowledged last week that the five-day strike had cut its earnings by more than $160 million, more than three times the amount it had been claiming during the walkout.


Runaway Fashion; The spring '94 collections: Reeling from Milan to Paris to New York.
How do you design for a woman who is secure in a not-for-men-only work force, who is going to be a knockout tonight but isn't going home to change, who is her own person and her own accountant, who shops as if it was the women's 400-meter hurdles and who is as devoted to feeling sexy as she is to making her mortgage payments?
Is it any wonder that the scent in the air at the spring collections was the aroma of apprehension?
Wariness wafted through tents and showrooms the way the smell of lilies drifts over the Loire in May.
Few designers embraced any one idea and went runwaying with it.
Most offered some of this, some of that and something else just in case.
Here are six to consider.
Last season's free fall into shapelessness has been refined to a supple and body-conscious liquidity.
The collections of Dries van Noten and Victor Alfaro displayed such ease as to actually revive the word pretty.
Donna Karan eliminated all flouncy flourishes for a sleekness reminiscent of her earliest best work.
Todd Oldham, pared down to his simplest, revealed a lush femininity.
Issey Miyake's separates miraculously became an inseparable whole.
Gianni Versace floated through a Ziegfeld dream.
And Calvin Klein proved that great clothing can feel like underwear, without having to look like it.


Unfair, Jordan
To the Sports Editor:
It was difficult for me to contain my outrage after reading that Michael Jordan would receive his full $4 million salary for the 1993-94 season from the Chicago Bulls.
Certainly, Jordan has given us great moments, but this is certainly not "a gesture of gratitude" by the Bulls but another instance of sticking it to the public under the guise of generosity.


It's Abie and Rose, 70 Years Later
BY 1922, Eugene O'Neill had captured critical attention with plays like "The Hairy Ape," "The Emperor Jones" and "Anna Christie."
As is still often the case, however, the public turned in droves to lighthearted comedies and fluffy musicals for pre-Depression entertainment.
In May 1922 a new play by Anne Nichols opened on Broadway.
It was a critical failure but a popular success to a degree previously unknown on the New York stage.


Just Another Innocent Abroad?
To the Editor:
How could The New York Times waste a page of newsprint on the self-serving and naive generalities written by Scott McNealy of Sun Microsystems regarding Asia?
RICHARD HODGSON  Manhattan, Nov. 29  The writer is a former head of Fairchild Camera and Instrument.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 12, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A woman tells about killing her husband nearly 30 years earlier.
2
4
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
3
43
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
4
8
THE KILLER ANGELS, by Michael Shaara. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The Battle of Gettysburg.
5*
3
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Warner, $5.99.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a serial killer in Washington.
6
50
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
7
3
THE REMAINS OF THE DAY, by Kazuo Ishiguro. (Vintage, $11.) The life of an English butler and the "great gentleman" he served.
8
3
RED SQUARE, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The detective Arkady Renko returns to Moscow after the fall of Communism.
9
87
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions during a trial.
10*
7
INADMISSIBLE EVIDENCE, by Philip Friedman. (Ivy, $5.99.) A prosecutor struggles to convict a real estate tycoon of murder.
11
2
CLOSE COMBAT, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Jove, $5.99.) In Volume 6 of "The Corps," there are new challenges for the Marines in World War II.
12
7
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $6.50.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
13
15
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
14
1
PRIVATE PLEASURES, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A scientist's discovery results in sex and violence among a group of Floridians.
15
11
THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, by Edith Wharton. (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) The 1920 novel.
16*
6
THE COPPER BEECH, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) Behind closed doors in an Irish village.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
6
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photos by Walter Iooss Jr. and observations by the retired basketball superstar.
2
13
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.
3
527
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
4
3
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of murders.
5
7
SUBMARINE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $14.95.) A tour through a nuclear warship.
6
43
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
7
113
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
8
4
A CALL FOR REVOLUTION, by Martin L. Gross. (Ballantine, $8.99.) More examples of Government waste, and how to stop it.
9
7
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
10*
2
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy, as seen in the actions of an A.A.
Milne character.
11
17
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
12*
2
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
13*
10
THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH SECURITY PLAN. (Times Books/Random House, $8.) The Clinton Administration's health care proposals.
14*
33
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
15
38
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
16*
22
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) The veterinarian's memoirs.
17*
10
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Bantam, $6.99.) The autobiography of the general.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
11
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
5
THE FAR SIDE GALLERY 4, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of cartoons.
3
3
MTV'S BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD, by Sam Johnson and Chris Marcil. (MTV/Callaway/Pocket, $10.) Cartoon humor.
4
147
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 27, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Lisa Howe, Robert Garcia
Lisa Margaret Howe, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Alton Howe of Glen Head, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert Earl Garcia, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Garcia of St.
Petersburg, Fla.
The Rev.
Bruce Forbes performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Bartholomew's Church in New York.
Mrs.
Garcia, 30, until recently was the supervisor of tickets and office operations in the office of the president at Radio City Music Hall Productions, where her husband is the vice president of entertainment administration.
She graduated from Colgate University.
Her father, now retired, was a sixth grade teacher at the Sea Cliff (L.I.) Elementary School.
Her mother is an executive assistant at Time Warner Enterprises in New York.


Marching With Mom
To the Editor:
In her review of "Mother Daughter Revolution," by Elizabeth Debold, Marie Wilson and Idelisse Malave, and "Daughters of Feminists," by Rose L. Glickman (Oct. 31), Deirdre English stated that feminist mothering does not mean "dragging a child to protest marches or inculcating politics into little girls' heads." In her opinion, such behavior would probably pave "the road to rebellion."


Words to Travel By
One might expect to find the words of Homer in a collection of quotations about travel, but less likely sources are also tapped in a new 136-page book, "Flinging Monkeys at the Coconuts," edited by Trevor Cralle.
Those quoted include Charlotte Ford ("Traveling with another person -- friend or lover -- is one of the supreme tests of a relationship") and Dick Clark ("Jet lag is for amateurs").
The title is taken from "The Royal Road to Romance" by the adventurer Richard Halliburton.
The book costs $9.95; shipping is $2.50 from the publisher, Ten Speed Press in Berkeley, Calif; (800) 841-2665.


First a Hobby, Now Three Musicals
"First Lady Suite," Michael John LaChiusa's trio of one-act musicals about three Presidents' wives, is a perfect example of how a childhood hobby can spawn an adult piece of art.
The suite, which portrays incidents in the lives of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, Mamie Eisenhower and Eleanor Roosevelt, is the product of a lifelong fascination with women in the White House that began when Mr.
LaChiusa read Robert E. Sherwood's play "Abe Lincoln in Illinois" as a boy.
A Broadway modernist whose style can range from early Schoenberg to Richard Rodgers, the composer became a storehouse of First Lady lore.
His hobby evolved into a passion seven years ago, after he read Lady Bird Johnson's "White House Diary."


Allison P. Davis And Gray Hollett
Allison Paige Davis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Davis of Needham Mass., was married yesterday to Gray Titus Hollett, the son of Canon and Mrs.
Robert T. Hollett of Chestertown, Md.
The Rev.
Michael Kuhn performed the Episcopal ceremony at Emmanuel Church in Boston.
The bridegroom's father, the rector emeritus of Christ Episcopal Church in Oyster Bay, L.I., participated in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Hollett, 29, is director of publicity and advertising at Arcade Publishing in New York.
She is a graduate of Denison University.
Her father is the director of building operations at Harvard University Medical School in Boston.
Her mother is an accountant with a private practice in Boston.


Unrattled North Alabama Wins the Division II Title
North Alabama 41, Indiana U. (Pa.) 34
Cody Gross scored on a 1-yard sneak with 10 seconds remaining, the final blow in a wild fourth quarter yesterday as North Alabama claimed the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division II championship with a 41-34 victory over Indiana, Pa., in Florence, Ala.


Ex-Leader's Son Is Ahead in Chile Election
Eduardo Frei, son of a former Chilean President and leader of Chile's center-left coalition of parties, overwhelmingly was winning Chile's presidential election today.
With 54 percent of the vote counted, he was getting 57 percent of the vote.
The nearest challenger to Mr.
Frei, the conservative Arturo Alessandri, received 25 percent of the vote.


Dec. 5-11; Election, Russian-Style


The Man Who Mocks Talk Shows Inherits One
As the host of "Talk Soup," a daily cable program that samples confessional talk shows, Greg Kinnear has won a reputation as a deadpan satirist and perhaps the world's leading expert on bizarre on-screen behavior.
But what is there in his background that persuaded NBC to choose him as the new host of "Later," the 1:30 A.M. show in which one-on-one conversation is everything?
Mr.
Kinnear, at his table in a Sunset Boulevard hamburger restaurant, answers the question with a question: "Does the name Hart Bochner mean anything to you?"


NEW YORKERS &amp; Co.
As the Year Winds Down, Con Ed Clock Is Changing Each year at this time, light bulbs on the four clock faces atop the headquarters of Consolidated Edison on Irving Place take on the colors of Christmas.
But change is on the way, courtesy of fiber optics.


Weatherman's Cry: Same Time This Year


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Take 50 voices.
Add patience and the teachings of one Hungarian composer.
The result: the Brooklyn Youth Chorus.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Nate Freedman's SoHo shop has a very basic business plan: "If the firemen like it, the public will like it."


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GRAMERCY PARK AREA  $140,000
235 East 22d Street  (Gramercy House)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, fireplace, 2 exposures; maintenance $936, 55% tax-deductible; listed at $155,000, 40 weeks on market (Broker: Herbert H. Kleigerman &amp; Associates)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $575,000
40 East 83d Street  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,840-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, hardwood floors, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,848, 50% tax-deductible; listed at $595,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Ambrose Mar Elia)  UPPER WEST SIDE  $725,000
320 West 77th Street  5-family, 4 1/2-story town house; 2 baths, french doors in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms in two, 1 bedrooms and studio in other units; 1 bath in simplex units; 2 terraces, historic district; taxes $8,500; listed at $900,000, 26 weeks on market (Brokers: Corcoran Group; Douglas Elliman)  UPPER WEST SIDE  $275,000
527 West 110th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. prewar condo; part-time doorman, octagonal dining room, expanded kitchen, 2 exposures; common charge $704, taxes $2,400; listed at $299,000, 32 weeks on market (Broker: A.J. Clarke)  BRONX
CITY ISLAND  $185,000
63 Reynolds Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 24-year-old detached contemporary; dining area, c/ a, finished basement, near private beach; taxes $1,900; listed at $200,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall) WILLIAMSBRIDGE  $145,000
1114 Arnow Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old, detached, frame house; dining room, sun room, finished basement; taxes $871; listed at $165,000, 2 months on market (Broker: ERA/Besmatch Real Estate)  BROOKLYN
DITMAS PARK  $275,000
751 Westminster Road  2-family, 55-year-old house; 5 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary duplex, 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in simplex, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; 1-car garage; taxes $2,111; listed at $295,000, 32 weeks on market (Broker: J. Schawovitz Real Estate Corp.)  FORT GREENE  $290,000
352 Carlton Avenue  2-family, 63-year-old brick house; 4 bedroom, 2 baths, 2 fireplaces in primary triplex, 1 bedroom, 1 bath, in simplex, dining room in each; taxes $1,200; listed at $335,000, 28 weeks on market (Broker: Naida McSherry Realty)  PARK SLOPE  $370,000
88 Garfield Place  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 3-story brownstone; dining room, eat-in kitchen, library, original molding and detail; taxes $1,500; listed at $389.000, 5 weeks on market (Broker: Frederick Palmer Realty)  QUEENS
COLLEGE POINT  $151,000
605 College Point Boulevard  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,661; listed at $159,000, 36 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  FOREST HILLS  $98,000
69-10 Yellowstone Boulevard  (Mayflower)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, co-op in a prewar building; part-time doorman, dining foyer, eat-in kitchen, 2 exposures, remodeled lobby and hallways; maintenance $534, 50% tax-deductible; listed at $125,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Kraham Realty)  STATEN ISLAND
NEW BRIGHTON  $89,000
26 Prospect Avenue  2-family, 80-year-old detached frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit, 2 bedrooms in other, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each; semi-finished basement, new heating system; taxes $650; listed at $99,000, 16 weeks on market (Broker: Pearl Foreman Real Estate)  SUNSET HILL  $184,500
692 Bement Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old ranch; dinette, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 50- by 109-ft. lot; taxes $1,400; listed at $189,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Linda Nasta Ltd. Realtor) LONG ISLAND
AMITYVILLE  $210,000
217 South Ketcham Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 70-year waterfront colonial; eat-in kitchen, dining room, legal 2-family with two 2-bedroom apartments; taxes $5,200; listed at $239,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Harbor Light Realty).
EAST WILLISTON  $433,000  30 Orchard Drive 3-bedroom  1 1/2-bath, 55-year-old center hall colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $6,800; listed at $445,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Atanas Realty Corp.)
SEAFORD  $325,000
1745 Conway Street
6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, family room; taxes $7,800; listed at $349,000, 5 weeks on market (Broker: A-1 Realty Network of Homes; All Island Estates Realty Corp.)
SEA CLIFF  $328,000
4 Laurel Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 26-year-old center hall colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room with fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $6,200; listed at $349,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Harmonious Homes).
NEW JERSEY
ENGLEWOOD CLIFFS  $410,000
15 Lynn Drive  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 30-year-old ranch; fireplace, c/a, patio, 2-car garage; taxes $4,574; listed at $410,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Higgins Realtors; Shadek-Diasparra Realty Inc.)  FAIR LAWN  $240,000
8 Barry Place
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 48-year-old colonial; living room with fireplace, family room, finished basement; taxes $4,977; listed at $254,900, 13 weeks on market (Broker: T.P. Mabey Realtors)  FRANKLIN TOWNSHIP  $202,500
508 South Plaza Road
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 34-year-old colonial; enclosed porch, studio over garage, fireplace; taxes $2,823; listed at $215,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert Realtors)  SKILLMAN  $335,000
41 Fieldstone Avenue
5-bedroom 2 1/2-bath, new brick colonial; nine-foot ceilings, gas heat, easy access to major highways; taxes TBA; listed at $339,490, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential New Jersey Realty; ReMax Preferred)
WESTCHESTER
DOBBS FERRY  $232,000
905 Hunters Run Three-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, seven-year-old condominium; fireplace, deck; taxes $6,100, common charges $240; listed at $239,900, 13 weeks on market (brokers: Furumoto Realty; and Weichert Realtors).
EASTCHESTER$ 145,000
14 Channing Place  Three-bedroom, two-bath, 33-year-old co-op; entry hall, dining room, patio; maintenance $889; listed at $160,000, 34 weeks on market (brokers: Prudential Ragette; A.T. White Realty).
IRVINGTON  $240,000
70 Sunnyside Place  Three-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, five-year-old condominium; marble floors, whirlpool, fireplace, pool; taxes $5,672, common charges $198.41; listed at $249,000, four weeks on market (brokers: Prudential Treefrog Realty; Ye Village Realty).
MOUNT VERNON  $250,000
216 North Columbus Avenue  Five-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 93-year-old Victorian; pantry, family room, fireplaces; taxes $3,827; listed at $260,000, nine weeks on market (broker: Lindsey Real Estate).
CONNECTICUT
FAIRFIELD  $120,000
1115 Black Rock Turnpike  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft., 11-year-old condominium; dining area, eat-in kitchen, free parking; common charge $100, taxes $2,586; listed at $126,900, 10 weeks on market (Brokers: Tom Brennan Real Estate; Century 21/Coastal Real Estate)  NEW MILFORD  $182,500
295 Aspetuck Ridge  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 63-year-old Dutch colonial; dining room, fireplace, inground pool, 1-acre lot; taxes $2,055; listed at $192,500, 21 weeks on market (Brokers: Settlers &amp; Traders; Coldwell Banker/Schlott Realtors)  NORWALK  $175,000
111 West Norwalk Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 38-year-old ranch; new kitchen, fireplace, 0.25-acre lot; taxes $2,976; listed at $184,500, 6 weeks on market (Brokers: Wolfe &amp; Mehlman; Prudential Connecticut Realty)  WESTPORT  $442,500
31 Gaston Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, pool, 2-car garage, 1.13 acres; taxes $4,890; listed at $479,000, 3 years on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker; William Pitt Real Estate)


Beneath Moscow, a Piece of Its Soul
THE turbulence afflicting Russia these days can disorient even a frequent traveler to Moscow.
For one thing, you can't find Feliks Dzerzhinsky.
The statue of the founder of the Soviet secret police was toppled by demonstrators against the failed coup in August 1991.
His pedestal in Lub yanka Square is adorned now by a simple wood cross.
Once you could set your watch by the honor guard that goose-stepped to Lenin's tomb on the hour.
The ritual has been canceled.
And what about all those statues and other monuments paying public homage to Lenin and his Bolshevik cronies?
They are vanishing even as the onion domes are being repainted on the old churches once closed under the Communists.
Moscow's streets, whose names evoked a pantheon of Soviet heroes, have reverted to names that predate, and puzzle, the city's current inhabitants.
But my favorite landmark has been left virtually untouched, and it's still affordable.
The Moscow Metro, or subway system, survives as an island of rational continuity in the sea of economic and social upheaval.


As Gunfire Gets Closer, Fear Comes Home
FANS of evolution, people who find that silver thread of adaptive progress in the darkest, most random events, might just as well focus on one particular passenger in last week's Long Island commuter train carnage who took out his cellular phone and tenderly approached the coherent among the bleeding gunshot victims waiting aboard the train for trauma aid.
"Who can I call for you? Give me a number?" the man pleaded.
Good: Fight the national rage of 9-millimeter technology with electronic highway technology.
Do something.
Don't just wallow there in the mortal phenomena.
Cling to the appearances of reasonableness, even as our latest gunman did.
"Reasons for this" the stalker had thoughtfully jotted down beforehand in a pocket list of aggravations that seemed the usual welter of paranoid precision.
At the end he punctiliously added: "In case of emergency, call. . ." and gave his phone number back in New York City where he lived alone and stoked his rage, preparing an emergency, indeed, for strangers not to be spared his sense of grievance.


Correction
An article in the Neighborhood Report last week about plans for development of a building on West 103d Street misstated a neighborhood group's proposal for the building.
The group, Neighborhood Artists, has proposed rehabilitating the building as low- and moderate-income housing for artists.


Where Time May Be the Most Precious of Gifts
The holidays are a time of giving.
And the gift of time can be very precious.
The following is a list of some organizations around the five boroughs that can use help this holiday season and beyond.
NEW YORK CARES , 116 East 16th Street, Manhattan.
New York Cares requires a one-hour orientation at which volunteers receive a monthly calendar that lists 100 to 200 volunteer opportunities to help at 100 to 150 organizations.
No long-term commitment required.
Orientation is by appointment only.
Office hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 228-5000.


Missing the Revolution
To the Editor:
"From Sibling Rivalry to Civil War" by Edmund L. Andrews (Nov. 28) misses the mark on the strategies and cable-telephone consolidations that are reshaping the telecommunications industry.
By focusing exclusively on the competition that will ensue in plain old telephone service and home entertainment, he has missed the point of the "information superhighway."


Rationing A Holiday Classic
FRANK CAPRA'S "It's a Wonderful Life" always seems to be on television during the holiday season -- any time, any day.
It won't seem that way this year though, because its owner, Republic Pictures, plans to limit broadcasts to less than a handful.
Exactly how many times will depend on where you live and whether you are a cable subscriber.
Here are some reactions:
KENNETH JAY LANE , costume-jewelry designer.
"I believe in exclusivity. I think there's a danger in over exposure. Just think what happened to Lady Godiva -- she became a chocolate."


On St. Lucia's Day, a Festival Celebrates the Triumph of Light
EVERY year around the time of the winter solstice, Swedes, Swedish-Americans and others with actual or spiritual ties to Sweden celebrate St.
Lucia's Day.
In New Jersey, many church groups and social and fraternal organizations hold traditional Lucia pageants, with a teen-age girl portraying the saint.
Clothed in a white robe and red sash and crowned with a wreath of lighted candles, Lucia represents the triumph of light over the winter's darkness.
St.
Lucia's Day, Dec. 13, is sometimes called "the Swedish Festival of Lights."


Sheila Peer, Christopher Pryor
Sheila Margrett Peer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman J. Peer of Little Silver, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher Courtney Pryor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Pryor of Katonah, N.Y.
The Rev.
Mark VanSant performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
George's-by-the-River in Rumson, N.J.


In America; A Sea Change On Crime
The one thing you might expect politicians to understand is which way the wind is blowing.
Right now the political wind is blowing at hurricane force against the national plague of violent crime.
There is almost no way to overstate the problem.
In Washington, black youngsters are so aware of the danger of being murdered that some are selecting the outfits they want to be dressed in for their own funerals.


Embarking on a Grand Tour of International Dance
The whole world has danced in New York this fall.
Or so it seems.
In a season that has been unusually rich in visiting companies, there have been evenings of Indian, Indonesian, Spanish, Hawaiian, Chinese and Korean dance, and several groups showed dances from many nations on a single program.
Thus Los Angeles-based Aman World Music and Dance choreographically visited Mexico, Hungary and the former Yugoslavia, not to mention Albania and Uzbekistan, at the Joyce Theater.
Such presentations reflect a growing internationalism in all the arts.
Despite their variety, these dance attractions are tied together by common threads.
Some companies try to preserve indigenous forms.
Others adapt old forms in new ways.
Still others deliberately blend disparate styles, leaping over boundaries in a spirit of adventure akin to that of modern dance at its least doctrinaire.
Whether they are traditionalist or innovative, all these groups are products of a world in which information can be almost instantly shared and travelers can speed from continent to continent in hours.


Brighter Outlook for Construction Workers
At the site of a dusty and noisy shopping center construction project on Bloomingdale Road here, Livingston J. Walker was grateful to be driving a front-end loader again.
Until recently, Mr.
Walker had been out of work, like many of his fellow workers in Local 137 of the Operating Engineers Union.
"Every day during the last few years was a black Friday for me," the 38-year-old father of five said.
"The recession took a devastating toll on my life."


France Fears Fallout From Algerian Turmoil
Still bearing the scars of its painful loss of Algeria more than 30 years ago, France is increasingly fearful of being drawn into the violent conflict between Islamic fundamentalists and a besieged army-backed junta in its former North African possession.
But with nearly one million Algerians living here and with Algeria still looking to France as its most important European partner, Paris is finding it difficult to shield itself from the repercussions of the violence tearing Algeria apart.


Groups That Welcome Clothing, Toys, Furniture . . .
The following agencies accept items for the needy, including food, clothing, toys and furniture.
AMERICAN RED CROSS , 150 Amsterdam Avenue, Manhattan, accepts new, unwrapped toys and books for children who are homeless, victims of disasters or in H.I.V./AIDS wards in hospitals.
Hours: Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (212) 787-1000.


Young Dancers Pride Of a Russian Emigre
VERA VON-WIREN GARCZYNSKI of Glen Cove went to St.
Petersburg, Russia, carrying a photograph of her husband, Stanley, and the black armband that he wore in his five- year imprisonment at the Auschwitz death camp.
Dr.
Garczynski, who is Russian Orthodox and a retired professor of Russian and Slavic studies at City College, was determined to locate other survivors of concentration camps.
But finding them was not easy.


'Summer Feet Hearts' Gets a World Premiere
"SUMMER FEET HEARTS" is a small, earnest, sincere play that begs you to like it.
Consider a potpourri of heart-pulling moments: Jewell, 9 1/2, wants to know whether people have to remain angry forever.
The stray cat she cuddles runs away.
Her mother, Jonell, has just met her own father, B. L. "I missed you all my life -- don't let me go, Daddy," Jonell says.
The play, which is having a world premiere at the George Street Playhouse, is about forgiving, about love reborn.
So what's the problem?


Deal School Is One Of State's Finest
Perhaps the most distressing part of Michael Winnick's Oct. 31 letter to the New Jersey editor regarding the Shore dispute over a synagogue is his cursory dismissal of one of the finest public schools in the state.
Since when do religious edifices increase property values more than an outstanding public school?


SUNDAY, December 12, 1993; Mad Deer and Huntsmen
There have been 16 deer in New York's herd of about 800,000 native white-tails (and 2 penned deer) that have gotten rabies.
Yes, deer.
They catch the disease when rabid raccoons, in the "furious" phase of the illness, bite them (on the shins, presumably).
Just to be safe, the Department of Environmental Conservation has warned hunters, and some are staying out of the woods, although even rabid deer don't bite people.


At Yale, Carlo Gozzi's 'Green Bird'
This is Carlo Gozzi's year at Yale.
The playwright, a Venetian who was born in 1720 and died in 1806, spun romantic fables for the fancy of audiences and composers of opera.
"The Love of Three Oranges" and "Turandot" come from two of Gozzi's 10 fiabe, fairy tales for the theater.
The former play was staged as the opening thesis production by the Yale School of Drama last month.
Now, "The Green Bird" is having a rare outing at Yale Repertory where 1993 is, as well, the year for the visiting Theatre de la Jeune Lune.
The Minneapolis-based company's extraordinary staging of "Children of Paradise: Shooting a Dream" in January remains the year's singular event in Connecticut theater.


North Korea's Game Looks a Lot Like Nuclear Blackmail
WHEN historians and intelligence analysts search for the roots of North Korea's drive for atomic weapons, they are usually drawn back to a moment 43 years ago, when the Truman Administration contemplated the quick and decisive way to end the Korean War: a nuclear attack on Pyongyang.
It never happened, of course, but North Korea's leaders to this day throw Gen.
Douglas MacArthur's plan in the face of visitors as a symbol of American imperialist savagery.
The power of the bomb, even as a threat, made an impression that four decades later is coming back to haunt the White House.


MAIL-ORDER AMERICA
Holly Brubach hit almost every button in "Mail-Order America" (Nov. 21), but of course she may not have lived in rural Putnam County in the late 1920's, when we had to clothe ourselves from catalogues.
We got our mail at the Tompkins Corners General Store (there was no R.F.D. on Lake Oscawana Road then; it was still a dirt road) and were delighted to read L. L. Bean's prose.
If he didn't write his own catalogue, he made it seem that way.
He wrote in the first person: "This is the finest moleskin pant I have ever offered." He tested his hunting boot in swamps and on rocky Maine hills and supervised the manufacturing.
He offered enduring quality.
I purchased a pair of his elk skin mittens in 1929 (for about $1.59) and 20 years later I was still using them to carry out the garbage cans on Wednesday evenings.
JOHN WHITING Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


THERE'S NO SIMPLE SUICIDE
I see Ralph Mero and the Compassion in Dying organization as taking a step in the right direction, but only a baby step, because they act in the shadows.


The Tidy World of a New England Printmaker in Old Lyme
This week's action takes place at the Florence Griswold Museum in Old Lyme and at the Lyman Allyn Museum in New London.
Once in a while, the Griswold undertakes a show proving that there is, too, life after American Impressionism.
In the early 1980's, the example chosen was Thomas Willoughby Nason, a printmaker and, seemingly, the embodiment of New England values.
Except in a television re-creation, where would an artist be found today who seriously wore three-piece tweed suits, smoked a pipe and kept a gun rack in his studio, a spaniel at his heels?


Police Taming Bell's Bar Strip
A police strategy of "no tolerance" has sharply curtailed rowdyism along a strip of singles' bars on Bell Boulevard, the site of a widely publicized double murder by a bouncer in July 1992, the police and neighborhood leaders say.
The killings drew attention to complaints by residents and community groups about outsiders' parking in private driveways, drinking in public and urinating on lawns.


Wall Street; An Oilfield Company's Fortunes Seesaw in Russia
LIKE Russia, the country upon which much of its fortunes rest, Beta Well Service Inc. has endured a turbulent autumn.
Beta specializes in servicing and operating oil wells in bad climates, a rough-and-tumble industry that is now facing renewed pressures from sagging oil prices.
Beta, based in Leduc, Alberta, went public last January.
It has been attacked in recent months by some investors who contend that it failed to announce promptly that work on some of the oil rigs that it operates in Siberia had been temporarily suspended.


Giuliani Names His Press Secretary
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani has begun to give shape to his City Hall press office, selecting Cristyne Lategano, who has served as a spokeswoman for his campaign and the transition, to be press secretary when he takes office in January, his aides said yesterday.
Ms.
Lategano, who is 28, will serve as Mr.
Giuliani's chief spokeswoman, overseeing the Mayor's press office along with his speech writers, photographers and researchers.
The job is now held by Leland T. Jones under Mayor David N. Dinkins.


SUNDAY, December 12, 1993; Sonic Youth
What cartoon character owns the minds of boys?
Superman?
Batman?
A mutant ninja something or other?
No.
A hedgehog.
Sonic the Hedgehog, star of video games and television, mascot of the Sega company, is the most popular cartoon character in the nation among boys age 6 to 11.
There are people, adults mostly, who don't know who Sonic is.
There are parents who imagine that children are still attached to Bugs Bunny or Mickey Mouse.
And there are parents who still worry about sex and violence.


Part of the Game
To the Sports Editor:
Samantha Stevenson states that "John Sacca is not the first quarterback to leave Penn State, or to have disagreements with Paterno" ("Trials at Penn State Still Haunting Sacca," The Times, Nov. 28).
True enough, but what's the point?
The same thing could be said about virtually every major college football coach and program.
The truth is, highly regarded high school athletes who have been coaxed, flattered, praised and pampered during the recruitment process, are often disappointed after they enter college, and that disappointment (usually tied to the failure to win a starting position) leads some athletes to transfer to other schools where they believe they will be more appreciated.


Borne by Olympic Dreams, Bosnian Youth Train in Exile
The narrow streets outside the Rica Hotel were full of pre-Olympic cheer: pin-traders, snowball-throwers and grandmothers gliding from store to store on their wooden kick sleds.
Inside the hotel lobby, 15-year-old Sakib Birdzo was describing a telephone call from Sarajevo.
He had gone nearly three months without hearing his mother's voice, and, when she somehow reached him, they had only two minutes to talk.


Corrections
An essay on page 3 of The Times Book Review today, about the conventions of photographing authors for book jackets, misspells the surname of the executive art director of Bantam Books.
He is Jim Plumeri.


The Two Sides to Every Sin
Kurt Weill, long known to Americans principally as the man who wrote "Mack the Knife" and a string of Broadway shows with left-leaning political messages, has now assumed his place as one of the most thoughtful and original composers of this century.
The reassessment began in the 1970's with successful productions of Weill's opera "The Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny" in San Francisco and at the Metropolitan Opera and was further fueled by popular recordings of his songs by Teresa Stratas.
As proof of Weill's acceptance as a serious composer of the first rank, the New York Philharmonic is devoting a week to his music and that of his contemporaries.
In subscription concerts beginning on Wednesday at Avery Fisher Hall, the orchestra will perform "The Seven Deadly Sins," a mordant series of absurdist tableaux, with the soprano Angelina Reaux.
In a nod to the work's theatrical origin, the Philharmonic has commissioned the artist Oscar Hammerstein III to produce copies of the original stage designs by Caspar Neher.
Seven banners depicting the deadly sins will be hung in the promenade.


Superfluous Possessives
To the Editor:
The only thing more annoying than padding a title with a writer's or director's name is including a name that doesn't belong there  [ "The Possessive Is Nine-Tenths of the Title," Nov. 28 ] .
Back in 1965, American-International Pictures filmed a Vincent Price thriller based on H. P. Lovecraft's "Strange Case of Charles Dexter Ward." Recognizing its previous success with Vincent Price films based on Edgar Allan Poe stories, American-International shoehorned a fragment of a wholly unrelated Poe tale into the film's plot and released it as "Edgar Allan Poe's Haunted Palace."


Surgery to End Season Of the Saints' Warren
Defensive end FRANK WARREN will miss the rest of the New Orleans Saints' season and will undergo foot surgery next week.
Warren, a 12-year veteran, sprained his right arch against Atlanta on Oct. 24 and has not played in four of the last five games.
Coach JIM MORA said there was no chance Warren could be ready for the playoffs if the Saints qualify.
Warren, 34, ended the season with 14 tackles and 1 sack.


Dec. 5-11: Legalizing Drugs; Surgeon General Proposes, The White House Disposes And a Debate Continues
The frank style of Joycelyn Elders earned her the job as the country's senior medical official -- and got her into trouble last week when she suggested that the Administration study legalizing illicit drugs.
Long a target of conservatives and fundamentalist religious groups for her outspoken views on providing birth control for sexually active teen-agers, the Surgeon General's latest proposal opened the White House to charges from Republicans that it was soft on crime.


Jets' Code: Something Still Beats Nothing
In the wake of last week's 9-6 loss to the Colts, Jets strong safety Brian Washington was asked whether there was anything more the defense could do to help the team win.
"Don't give up field goals," Washington said, surprised that the reporter didn't grasp the simplicity of the logic.


Rockets Win the Showdown of No. 1 vs. No. 2
Rockets 82, SuperSonics 75
Otis Thorpe scored 20 points and helped host Houston through a rugged third quarter on its way to an 82-75 victory against Seattle in a matchup last night of the two teams with the best records in the National Basketball Association.


Resort on St. John Uses Sun and Wind Power
Called the world's first luxury resort to use sun and wind power exclusively, Harmony at the Maho Bay Campground on St.
John in the United States Virgin Islands is scheduled to open to the public this Wednesday.
The resort is being constructed primarily of such recycled materials as plastic bottles, crushed glass, newsprint, old tires and scrap lumber, and it will serve as a laboratory for researchers who study alternative energy systems.
All heat and electricity are to be provided by the sun and the wind, using solar panels, a windmill and storage batteries, and computers will monitor and adjust Harmony's daily energy use in accordance with prevailing conditions.


Seeing Bermuda
To the Editor: Enid Nemy's "What's Doing in Bermuda" (Oct. 31) echoed our sentiments exactly: Clean and friendly.
We also took advantage of the off-season prices.
A three-day pass for buses and ferries cost $15 and also gave free admission to Gibbs Hill Lighthouse.
Buses run on a regular schedule.
Several restaurants offered special menus and many of the hotels were in an eat-around program.


Gay and Conservative
A PLACE AT THE TABLE The Gay Individual in American Society.
By Bruce Bawer. 269 pp.
New York: Poseidon Press. $21.


Viewpoints; Is Russia the Next Economic Miracle?
IN Russia, the title of Lewis Carroll's "Through the Looking Glass" is translated as "In the World Behind the Mirror." And that is how many Russians describe the world in which they now live, as they head to the polls today.
It is a confusing, disturbing, threatening world in which all the certainties of Communist life have vanished.
Safety on the streets is gone, as is economic security.
Many professionals earn $20 a month, and the elderly spend almost 80 percent of their pensions on food.
Gross national product has plunged by more than a third in five years.
And Russia could soon face an unemployment crisis, as military plants shrink or go bankrupt.
Yet, unlikely as it seems, the Russian economy might well be laying the basis for what, a decade from now, could be described as "chudo" -- an economic "miracle."


NATIONS MOBILIZE TO LIMIT DESERTS
Africa's recurrent cycle of drought and famine is driving an international effort to halt the accelerating spread of deserts, a complex environmental phenomenon that is destroying agriculturally productive regions in drylands around the world.
The process, known as desertification, left indelible memories in the United States beginning in the 1930's, when a combination of overplanting, excessive grazing, drought and windstorms transformed millions of acres of prairie into the environmental disaster area known as the Dust Bowl.
But the global dimensions of the current problem are more daunting.


St. John's Uses Free Throws To Gain
Shawnelle Scott knew there was one thing he needed to improve, the one thing he was only 52 percent good at last season: foul shooting.
It's the most boring shot in the world to a big man, used to spinning and pump-faking and dunking inside.
Still, every single day this summer he shot 200 free throws.
"I don't even have to think about it anymore," said Scott.
"Now I'm shooting over 70 percent."


Reluctant Peacekeepers: Many U.N. Members Reconsider Role in Conflicts
After rampant growth in recent years, United Nations peacekeeping is facing a crisis brought about by the reluctance of governments to underwrite new operations, especially those that put their soldiers' lives at risk.
Stung by the loss of 18 American soldiers in a Mogadishu firefight two months ago and the swell of Congressional anger that followed, the Clinton Administration has put a lid on discussion of all new peacekeeping operations while it reconsiders its policy.
Most recently, Washington blocked efforts to send a force to Burundi, a tiny African state ravaged by civil war.


ROBERT DE NIRO
Robert De Niro is mistaken in his belief that using real people in "A Bronx Tale" was "the only way to do the film" ("Robert De Niro," by Elizabeth Kaye, Nov. 14).
"Even if they're a little awkward, the charm of that works," he says.
Ever since I witnessed his directorial debut, I have greater appreciation for actors.
Without professionals in a sustained performance, it's just home movies.
LOIS A. SERVAAS East Grand Rapids, Mich.


Q and A
The Proprieties In Tenant Screening  Q. I own a four-family house.
When screening prospective tenants, if I request the names and addresses of employers and former landlords, whom I would contact to determine a tenant's ability to pay the rent and the overall desirability of a tenant, would I be violating any anti-discrimination laws? . . .
Pauline Trott, Brooklyn


Anya Bernstein, Jonathan Bassett
June wedding plans have been announced by Thomas P. Bernstein of New York and Ellen H. Bernstein of Guilford, Conn., for their daughter Anya Elisabeth Bernstein and Jonathan Anderson Bassett, the son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Joseph A. Bassett of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Ms.
Bernstein, 25, graduated summa cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in political science from Harvard University, where she is a doctoral candidate in that subject.


Variety in the Selection of Basement Flooring
FINISHING a basement floor is neither as easy nor as inexpensive as painting the walls or installing suspended ceiling tiles, the two most popular basement repairs.
Knowing the pitfalls can help choose materials and techniques.
Almost any flooring can be installed over concrete.
Resilient flooring -- sheet vinyl or vinyl tiles -- is a popular and inexpensive choice, but wood flooring and carpet are also possibilities.
Stone, clay or ceramic tiles generally lack necessary warmth, both in appearance and underfoot, for most installations.
But do not write them off as choices in half-basements receiving ample light from patio doors or large windows.
Before making a selection, test the moisture content of the concrete floor and consider the preparations needed for various materials.
Choose three to six spots about two feet square in different locations.
At least two spots should be near corners.
The others can be in open areas.
Scrub the areas with a dry brush to clean them thoroughly.
Cut pieces of plastic sheeting, kitchen wrap or aluminum foil and place them over the cleaned areas, sealing their edges with duct tape.
Remove the tape and check the undersides after 24 hours.
If the plastic appears foggy or wet, the floor is too wet for installing any finish flooring.
On a new basement floor, waiting up to two months for the concrete to fully cure may eliminate the moisture problem.
On older floors, the foundation may require more effective drainage, which is usually a job for a waterproofing contractor.
Test the floor for evenness.
A floor does not have to be level to accept finish flooring, but the surface has to be flat, without bumps or hollows greater than an eighth of an inch in height or depth.
To check for those, place a long straight-edged board on the floor in as many different places and at as many different angles as practical.
A board that rocks back and forth indicates a bump.
Light beneath the edge of the board indicates a hollow.
Small bumps can sometimes be chiseled away.
More often, though, flattening involves filling the low spots with a liquid or paste compound, which is spread with a flat trowel called a float and hardens like cement.
If a concrete floor is dry and flat, any type of flooring except hardwood planks or strips that require nailing can be directly installed.
Resilient flooring, cushion-backed carpet, parquet and wood-laminated flooring are installed with adhesive.
Stone, clay and most ceramic tiles are installed by embedding in mortar.
Ceramic tiles can also be installed with adhesive.
For insurance against moisture in cases where a basement slab may not have been poured over a vapor barrier of polyethylene -- standard practice at least since the 60's -- such sheeting or an equivalent material should be applied to the surface of the concrete beneath or between layers of flooring adhesive or beneath mortar.
To further flatten a floor, to protect large areas of leveling compound and to permit nailing solid wood-strip or plank flooring, a plywood underlayment is needed.
For flooring fastened with adhesive, a single layer of half- or three-quarter-inch-thick plywood is adequate.
Where a nailing surface is required, two layers of three-quarter-inch are best.
Use ACX-grade plywood, which has one good face and is rated for exterior use.
Do not use particleboard or another manufactured-wood product.
They do not hold fasteners well and are easily damaged by water.
On dry floors protected by a vapor barrier beneath the slab, underlayment panels can be fastened directly to the concrete with masonry nails, concrete screws or hammer-activated gunpowder-driven fasteners.
Afterward, adhesive can be applied on top or solid wood flooring can be nailed directly to it.
Where a vapor barrier is needed above the slab, there are three ways to proceed.
One is to spread a layer of asphalt mastic over the floor with a trowel, allow it to harden and then cover the mastic with overlapping sheets of polyethylene film.
On top of that can be placed plywood underlayment panels, fastened by the methods described above.
A second way is to cut underlayment panels into manageable 4 X 4-foot pieces, saw or rout grooves in a grid pattern on their backs and then press them into a bed of mastic applied to the slab.
No fasteners are necessary.
The third way, and the most common when installing solid wood flooring or when major flattening is needed, is to bed four-foot lengths of nominal one- or two-inch-thick preservative-treated lumber on the slab with mastic.
The boards, called sleepers, are placed with their wide surfaces against the slab and their ends overlapping by at least four inches.
Hollows underneath are filled by adding shims.
If desired, closed-cell foam insulation board can be placed between the sleepers for a warmer floor and to deaden footfalls.
Polyethylene sheeting is spread on top of the sleepers and fastened with staples.
Solid wood flooring can be nailed directly above the plastic, with nails spaced to enter the sleepers.
For flooring requiring full support, first attach plywood underlayment panels.


After 5 Months of Drama, Brothers' Trials Near End
"A trial is not a novel," the judge said five months ago as he struggled to contain the melodrama surrounding the opening of the murder trial of Lyle and Erik Menendez.
He was wrong.
This one has become a potboiler, and it is now in its final tumultuous chapter.


Showy Plants That Have Staying Power
THIS may seem like an odd time of year to be praising a particular deciduous plant.
Shade trees are leafless, the lawn has been raked for the last time.
The hand tools are tucked away on racks and hooks in the tool shed.
Yet one deciduous plant persists in showing off and it deserves a plug.
It is the oakleaf hydrangea (Hydrangea quercifolia), which remains spectacular to see quite late in the year.
The leaves are large and resemble those of an oak tree except that they are larger, perhaps seven inches long.
In late fall they have a purple-bronze hue, an unusual coloration that is spectacular and can be seen for quite some distance.


Charity Catalogue; Dear Santa
The Times Square Business Improvement District has published a catalogue of 34 social-service agencies in the area and the items they'd most like to be given this holiday season.
Some 15,000 copies have been distributed in a project that cost the organization $38,000.
Copies of "Times Square Wishes" may be obtained from the improvement district office at 1560 Broadway, Suite 800, New York, N.Y. 10036; (212) 768-1560.


Lauren Picker, Christopher Ryan
Lauren Picker, a daughter of Arlene B. Spevak of Boca Raton, Fla., and Philip E. Picker of Suffern, N.Y., was married last evening to Christopher Ming Ryan, a son of John and Angela Shen Ryan of New York.
Rabbi Miriam Anciss officiated at the Pratt Mansions in New York.
The bride, 30, is a freelance writer in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father owns the Picker Reporting Service, a court stenography service in Port Chester, N.Y.
Her mother retired as a merchandise manager in New York for the former Alexander's department store chain.


The Executive Computer; A Growing Internet Is Trying to Take Care of Business
THE phenomenal growth of the Internet, a worldwide web of connected computer networks, was underscored earlier this year in a New Yorker magazine cartoon showing two dogs sitting at a computer.
The bigger animal, paws on the keyboard, turns to the smaller and says, "On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog."
Yet many executives may find themselves howling at the complexity of the Internet, which was not designed with business in mind.
Originally intended to serve the academic and research communities, the Internet has until recently been the playground of computer enthusiasts, government researchers and educators who have been willing to learn the intricacies of the Unix operating system and who have been patient enough to dig through its labyrinthine depths to find, amid the millions of pages of electronic data, the bits of information they needed.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen109.20108.55123.87
per Dollar
German Mark1.69731.72001.5780
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.32931.32841.2741
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.49451.49051.5560
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold383.00$376.50$335.10
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


A Pastor Delights In Diversity
Sunday's 10 A.M. service at Good Shepherd Lutheran Church of Bayside draws a mostly German- and Italian-American congregation, but it also includes a British Guyanese member.
At noon, a different set of worshipers files into the sanctuary, and it becomes the Man Min Korean Presbyterian Church.
At other times, the church is used by Swedish folk dancers, a yoga group, scouts, Gamblers Anonymous, Alcoholics Anonymous, a mothers' social club and the Sons of Norway.
Now this increasingly diverse parish has a new pastor, with a matching personal history of diversity.
The Rev.
Rhonda J. Hoehn is the first woman to lead the Bayside church.
Her father is a Lutheran of German descent; her mother is a Lebanese-American whose relatives include Melkite Catholic nuns, priests and bishops.
Her globe-trotting resume includes stints as a teacher, medical aide and student in Kenya, South Africa, Lesotho, Santo Domingo, the Philippines and Israel.


Famous Span Is Getting More Security
After a recent sexual assault on the pedestrian walkway of the Brooklyn Bridge, authorities have added a new police patrol and are considering changes in lighting and emergency telephones on the mile-long span.
On Dec. 4, a 23-year-old woman crossing the bridge after 8 P.M. was threatened with a knife, robbed, sexually assaulted, beaten and left unconscious in heavy rain.
The police have no suspect in the attack.


49ers Fumble Away a Punt, a Kickoff and a 24-7 Fourth-Quarter Lead to the Falcons
In the final eight minutes, after the San Francisco 49ers took a seemingly safe 24-14 lead, the Atlanta Falcons needed a door opened to get back into this game at the Georgia Dome.
They needed a gift.
The 49ers' kick returner, Dexter Carter, not only opened a door.
He busted the entry wide open for a rally and a victory for the Falcons by fumbling a punt and a kickoff.
The first fumble, of a punt with 7 minutes 46 seconds left, led to an Andre Rison touchdown reception of 6 yards and cut the 49er lead to 24-21.
The second fumble with 2:01 left -- of a kickoff after Norm Johnson's 47-yard field goal had tied it at 24-24 -- gave the Falcons the final boost they needed.


Foreign Aid Leaves Nicaragua in a Bind
To the Editor:
Public cynicism about foreign aid is fueled when the press quotes "experts" who argue more aid is good, less, bad ("A Foreign Aid of Words, Not Cash," Week in Review, Dec. 5).


Plan to Revise Student Code Leads to Uproar at Rutgers
Administrators' efforts to modernize a 20-year-old code of conduct at Rutgers University has sparked anger among students who protest that their constitutional rights are being ignored.
And this week a senior administrator said that he was forced out of his job because he did not support the university president's position on the code.
The new code would replace one established in 1974 that the university's president, Francis L. Lawrence, calls "too adversarial and vague."


The Ladies in Red
At Costume Institute's Party of the Year, a preview of 'Diana Vreeland: Immoderate Style,' Metropolitan Museum, Dec. 6.


Gifts of Gab
"The genius of democracies," wrote Alexis de Tocqueville in 1840, "is seen not only in the great number of new words introduced but even more in the new ideas they express."
To which Willa Cather countered in 1936, "Give the people a new word and they think they have a new fact."


No Selling by Underwriters
To the Editor:
In "Curbing Wall Street's Seamier Side" (Viewpoints, Nov. 21), Robert Nylen correctly urges that we reform the system of compensating brokers.
However, simply eliminating commissions will not solve much if broker-salespeople still must obey their firms' "seamy" instructions to sell questionable securities.


Prive's Ploy
IT is the fantasy of a 5-year-old: "It's my party, and I get to invite the people I want!"
The dictatorial glory of playground politics has inspired the owners of a new Upper East Side restaurant, Prive, which opened Dec. 2.
As its name implies, Prive is being run like a private club: its creators have plugged in their computer and, after many insertions and deletions, generated a list of 1,000 men and women who will be allowed to make reservations.


Voice in 'Aladdin' Helps Actor Steal Scenes in 'She Loves Me'
Everyone knows that the Genie comes out of Robin Williams's mouth.
But Jonhathan Freeman is just being found out.
On a recent Wednesday, after the matinee performance of "She Loves Me" on Broadway, one of Mr.
Freeman's 4-year-old fans was taken backstage to meet the man behind the voice of the malevolent Jafar in "Aladdin."


IF THE FRENCH CAN DO IT, WHY CAN'T WE?
The title of Steven Greenhouse's article asks, "If the French Can Do It, Why Can't We?" (Nov. 14).
The answer is: We can.
All we need is to agree that caring for and educating our youngest generation is important public policy for the richest nation in the world.
Every one of our international competitors provides families with more child-care support than we do.
Our children have become victims of a three-tier system.
In the first tier are affluent families who can purchase high-quality private care.
In the second tier are poor families who are eligible for Government subsidies.
And, at the bottom, receiving the poorest care, are working-class families, ineligible for subsidies but unable to meet the cost -- an average of 25 percent of their total income -- of quality child care.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
TOURS AT BOSCOBEL
Boscobel's annual Christmas house tours by lantern and candlelight will be enhanced this year by a collection of mannequins dressed for the holidays in early 19th-century costumes.
Representing members of the Dyckman family, once owners of the house, and their friends, some of them are gathered in the drawing room over afternoon tea, and others are upstairs in the bedrooms dressing for holiday parties.


Q and A
Renting in Rome Q. My husband and I would like to rent a one-bedroom apartment, studio or room in Rome for 10 days next February.
Can you help us with the names of renting agents? -- Katherine Callahan, Prattsville, N.Y.


Eros Should Surprise Us
AN ETHICS OF SEXUAL DIFFERENCE By Luce Irigaray.
Translated by Carolyn Burke and Gillian C. Gill. 217 pp.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Cloth, $29.95.
Paper, $13.95.


A Tormented Life -- A special report; A Long Slide From Privilege Ends in Slaughter on a Train
By the end of his long descent into fury and death on the Long Island Rail Road last week, Colin Ferguson's world had been reduced to black and white, good and evil, hate and non-hate: an Orwellian realm where shades of meaning were gone and only rage made sense.
It was a world of unjust laws and universal hostility, as uncaring as form letters from a government bureau, as lonely as the rented room in Brooklyn where night after night he had read aloud from a Bible and handled a gun and brooded over what he saw as the implacable racism of America.


Reaganites vs. Clintonites
To the Editor:
Joe Queenan, in his review of John Podhoretz's "Hell of a Ride: Backstage at the White House Follies, 1989-1993" (Nov. 7), does a wonderful job explaining how the young Reaganites view the Republican Party.
All this talk about youth invites the question "What is the difference between young Reaganites and young Clinton Democrats?"


Meridith Parks, Jonathan Rotman
Meridith Lynn Parks, the daughter of Diane L. Parks of Englewood, Colo., and Stephen M. Parks of Rumson, N.J., was married last evening to Jonathan Bruce Rotman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles B. Rotman of South Natick, Mass.
Rabbi Joseph Goldman performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Rotman, 23, is a promotion assistant for Allure magazine in New York.
She graduated from Pine Manor College.


THE NATION: In Search of an AIDS Vaccine; Once More, H.I.V. Refuses To Play by the Rules
IN clinical science, researchers consider it axiomatic that a new drug or vaccine be shown to work in the lab before it is tried on people.
If the product were proven ineffective, then, under ordinary circumstances, it would be abandoned.
After all, the thinking goes, why waste years and millions of dollars testing something in humans when it fails in the laboratory?
But now the AIDS epidemic is causing researchers to rethink this seemingly straightforward procedure.


A Versatile Artist's Return
At a time when pop music has splintered into a mosaic of subgenres, Linda Ronstadt is an increasingly rare exponent of a consensus pop sensibility.
In the 1970's she was one of the first singers to propose an updated canon of standards that aligns the best of Motown, rock, Nashville and folk with the pre-rock music popularized by Frank Sinatra, Billie Holiday and Ella Fitzgerald.
Over the last decade, she brought Mexican and Cuban music into the fold.
Even when Ms.
Ronstadt is working in areas that don't suit her flowing, country-folk style, her albums stand as ambitious musical term papers in which she challenges her own limitations to enlarge that consensus.
And her beautiful voice, eternally perky and eternally heartbroken, stamps everything she sings with the same California-shined signature.


Terry E. Adams, Clarke R. Keough
Mr. and Mrs.
Donnell G. Adams of Pinehurst, N.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Terry Elizabeth Adams, to Clarke Robert Keough, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald R. Keough of Atlanta.
Miss Adams graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
She is a stock-options specialist on the American Stock Exchange for Miceli Van Caneghan, a specialist firm in New York.
The future bride's father retired last year as a golf pro at the Country Club of North Carolina in Pinehurst and is now a managing partner in the Carolinas Golf Group, a company in Raleigh, N.C., that buys and sells golf courses.


A Film's Regards to Old Broadway
Billboards hawked Eugene O'Neill's "Marco Millions," "Strange Interlude" and "Journey's End." Women dressed as flappers and men in suspenders strolled the street.
A dozen Model A's, Packards and other vintage cars lined the street.
A poster proclaimed that Clara Bow would soon be in town.
Time travel -- circa 1928 -- came to West 43d Street last week as Woody Allen wrapped up shooting of his latest film, "Bullets Over Broadway." The scene left passers-by startled, one of those moments of serendipity that thrill even the most jaded New Yorkers.


Wendy Carlson, Joseph Cataldo
Wendy Leigh Carlson, the daughter of John and Judith Carlson of Far Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Joseph Paul Cataldo, a son of Paul and Jean Cataldo of Franklin, Mass.
The Rev.
Giles P. Hayes performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N.J.
Mrs.
Cataldo, 27, is an administrative manager in the Boston office of American Psychmanagement Inc., a mental-health insurance company.
She and her husband graduated from Trinity College in Hartford, and she received a master's degree in psychology from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of Allied Plastics Inc., a manufacturer of home products in Gastonia, N.C.


A Grandmother Fights For Her 2d Generation
When 6-year-old Trisha wants to get around without her aluminum walker, she crawls across her grandmother's worn and faded hardwood floors like an infant.
It's the best she can do.
She was born with cerebral palsy and additional motor damage to a part of her brain as a result of her mother's crack use.
Her 4-year-old sister, Tiffany, suffers from behavioral problems and hyperactivity because of the crack, making it impossible to leave Tiffany unattended.
Only their older brother, Tahiim, 7, escaped -- he was born just before the mother became addicted.


Commercial Property/Rockefeller Center; Surmounting the Hump of Lease Expirations
A YEAR or two ago, people seemed ready to sound a death knell for Rockefeller Center.
A mind-numbing 3 million square feet -- nearly 30 percent of its 10.2 million square feet of rentable space -- was on leases that were coming due in 1994.
Real estate brokers circled like vultures, promising tenants better space and cheaper rents elsewhere if only they would forgo their prestigious Rockefeller Center addresses.


THE WORLD: The Israeli-P.L.O. Deadline Is Tomorrow; And Hatred Begat What Is Called Peace
AS they stand nervously on the edge of the future, Israelis and Palestinians cannot shake the icy grip of the past.
Tomorrow, Dec. 13, is supposed to be a watershed date.
In the tempestuous territories it has held since 1967, Israel is scheduled to begin withdrawing its forces and transferring authority to the Palestinians, with the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho going first.
At least that's what it says in the "declaration of principles" signed on Sept. 13 by Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
There is still a tangle of unresolved security issues, and so the deadline may pass with more of a whimper than a bang, a murky situation that may become clearer after Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, meet today in Cairo.


Just How Bad Is It For Airline Workers?
WHEN American Airlines reported on Tuesday that last month's five-day strike by flight attendants had cut its earnings by more than $160 million, it was one of the few uncontested facts to emerge from the dispute.
The two sides have agreed on little else in their battle over the terms of a new contract.
American, for example, contended that the flight attendants' real wages rose by 32 percent after 1983; the union said the base pay of its members declined 40 percent, that nearly half earn less than $20,000 a year and that their median salary of $23,000 is below that of mail carriers and security guards.
The dispute is heading toward binding arbitration.


BENEFITS
Center for Living
MONDAY -- Susan Sarandon will be the host of an evening of performances by Anne Meara, Jerry Stiller, Betty Buckley and others to raise money for the Manhattan Center for Living, which provides nonmedical support services for people with life-threatening diseases.
The performances are at the Church of the Incarnation, 209 Madison Avenue at 35th Street.
They will be followed by a champagne reception at Eighty-Eight's, 228 West 10th Street.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 533-3550, ext. 20.


David Silver and Joanna Usher
Joanna Lynn Usher, the daughter of Drs.
Michael and Marion Usher of Washington, was married there last evening to David Maximus Kennedy Silver, a son of Cathy S. Prince of White Plains and John Silver of New York.
Rabbi Jeffrey A. Wohlberg performed the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel.
The bride, 25, is the special assistant to the senior vice president in New York at the Local Initiatives Support Corporation, a nonprofit organization that provides assistance to community development corporations.
She is a graduate of Columbia University, and she and her husband received master's degrees in public and private management from the Yale University School of Organization and Management.


Corrections
A report in the "Sunday" pages of The Times Magazine last week about baseball injuries misstated the location of the Institute for Preventative Sports Medicine.
It is in Ann Arbor, Mich., not Madison, Wis.


Australian Director Is Thinking Globally
Australian baseball has a long way to go to reach the level of play in this country, but it has something major league baseball doesn't have: a commissioner.
He is John Ostermeyer, and his role as executive director of the Australian Baseball Federation makes him the equivalent of major league baseball's commissioner.
It also gives him a platform from which to speak about baseball around the world, and he has been doing that fervently and eloquently in his effort to drag major league club owners into the 21st century of world sports interest.


Sports of The Times; The Hall of Fame Should Open for Cepeda
THIS is the season for lighting candles in the darkness, or at the very least for praising others who do light the candles.
For the last five years, Orlando Cepeda has been working in community relations for his old team, the San Francisco Giants.
It would be easy to sneer that Cepeda is paid to visit the cancer wards and the drug clinics and the youth groups, but we have all seen athletes who are paid to meet the public yet make everybody uncomfortable with their selfishness.
By all accounts, Orlando Cepeda lights up a room, which is not surprising, because Cepeda was a sunny ballplayer.
Not only that, but Cepeda was also an excellent player, who played 17 seasons, many of them with a ruined knee, batted .297, hit 379 home runs and drove in 1,365 runs.
The Baseball Writers Association of America should vote Orlando Cepeda into the Hall of Fame this month, on merit.


Day Care for Alzheimer's Cases Spreads
For three years Eva Woody, 87, has lived with her brother and his family in Port Jefferson.
When Mrs.
Woody, whose Alzheimer's disease was diagnosed several years ago, was no longer able to care for herself, her brother George Patterson hired an attendant.


SUNDAY, December 12, 1993; It's a Wonderful Science
For years thinking people of all political inclinations have puzzled over the problem of achieving full employment.
As one might have guessed, it is the French, with considerable help from economists, who have finally solved it.
With a logical clarity worthy of Descartes they have seen that the way to put more people to work is to have them work less.
France is considering instituting a four-day workweek, nationwide.
The Germans and Italians are interested, too.
Volkswagen workers recently agreed to a shorter week and less pay.
That's the downside of the shorter week -- less pay.
But somehow, and this is where the magic of economics comes in, the French think they can cut hours 15 percent and wages only 5 percent.
How?
They think they can just increase productivity 5 percent (the point where naysaying economists have some doubts), and subsidize the cost of labor to employers by cutting their national payroll tax.
Because more people will be working, the tax take will stay just as high.


Shopping for Ideas
ON a gray afternoon earlier this month, a 23-year-old graduate student left the Rutherford, N.J., offices of the Academic Research Group, carrying a large white envelope.
"I have a 30-page term paper that's due," she said.
"They sent me a catalogue and they had all the core information in one paper."


Rowan Falls to Ballard's Passes
Mount Union of Ohio capped an undefeated season today by winning the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division III championship with a 34-24 victory over Rowan of Glassboro, N.J., in the Amos Alonzo Stagg Bowl at Salem Stadium.
The Mount Union quarterback, Jim Ballard, passed for 387 yards and threw for 3 touchdowns and ran for another -- all in the second half -- overcoming snow flurries, a whipping wind and 30-degree temperatures.


Homeowners Fight City Hall and Win; As Property Values Fall, So Do Tax Bills (and Local Revenues)
Like many suburbanites around New York City, Mark Fischgrund was delighted when the value of his Nassau County house shot up in the 1980's, and not overly concerned as property taxes followed the same upward curve.
Not until, that is, the value began to fall.
Then, Mr.
Fischgrund and an unprecedented number of homeowners in the region realized that the property tax is the one form of taxation that can be fought.
And fighting they are.
As a result, municipalities whose budgets grew fat on soaring home values in the 1980's are now being swamped by homeowners and businesses who are successfully challenging their property taxes on grounds that they are based on unrealistically high values.


Seeing Bermuda
To the Editor: My husband and I spent our honeymoon in Bermuda in December 1960 when winter was considered the season to be there.
We were fortunate enough to return two years ago and enjoyed it so much that it is becoming an annual event.
We went back last year and have reservations for this year.


Teaching Is More Than Technology
The Nov. 14 article on class computers, "Class Computers Largely Absent," focuses on some large districts with enormous resources, including district experts to purchase and use technology.
The Governor's Grant for Excellence in Science and Mathematics, awarded in January 1992 to 33 individual New Jersey schools, Fredon township School being one of them, has provided funds ($47,000 to $50,000 a year) to purchase technology and improve instruction over a three-year period.


How a Staid Electric Company Becomes a Renegade
ON paper, the LG&amp;E Energy Corporation of Louisville, Ky., seems the model of the traditional regulated electric utility -- a money-machine monopoly that has annually increased its shareholders' dividend for 39 years running.
So why is LG&amp;E, whose profits are up 26 percent this year, intent on overhauling itself?
Simple, explains Roger W. Hale, the company's 50-year-old president and chief executive: sooner or later, the clubby utility industry will be a brawling marketplace.


U.S. Sets Stricter Rules on Towboats and Rails
Acting even before the start of Federal hearings on the worst train wreck in Amtrak's history, Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena has announced plans to tighten licensing rules for towboat operators, improve inspections of railroad bridges and require more navigation equipment on towboats.
The Amtrak accident, in which 47 people were killed, occurred early on the morning of Sept. 22, about five minutes after a towboat pilot, lost in a predawn fog in an Alabama bayou, rammed a railroad bridge.
Preliminary reports indicate that the crash pushed the tracks out of alignment, and when Amtrak's Sunset Limited reached the damaged span, it plunged off the bridge and into Big Bayou Canot near Mobile.


No Cease-Fire In the Battle Of the Sexes
From the battle between the sexes, these bulletins just in: Breaking up is hard to do; so is staying together when coupledom becomes a quiet war of attrition.
Passion exalts the spirit and clouds the judgment, promising pleasure and bringing danger.
Betrayal is universal, yet each deception is a fresh wound.
It has been a long time since rock songs accepted love as the beginning of happily-ever-after.
But skepticism continues to spread, as more songwriters -- especially female songwriters -- devote themselves to getting the particulars right.
New albums by Curve (who perform at Irving Plaza in Manhattan on Wednesday), Scrawl and the Golden Palominos explore what Lydia Kavanagh of the Golden Palominos calls "the dance of exposure and camouflage."


Holiday Meals That Come With Merriment
Not all holiday galas are pegged to hearth and home.
Dining out can be just as celebratory, particularly if the restaurant makes a special festive effort, as those included here do.
Their Christmas dinner programs are popular, so you would be well advised to reserve early.
It doesn't get much more convivial than the Elizabethan holiday evening at the Golden Lamb Buttery in Brooklyn in the northeastern corner of the state.
First there is a hayride in the crisp December air, which may sound hokey, but it turns out to be fun.
A personable guitarist, Susan Lamb, sings holiday songs on the ride.
Bob Booth, the host, drives the tractor that pulls the hay wagon and sweeps a high-powered light over the fields in search of wildlife.
During our 10-minute ride we saw five deer gamboling beside a stone wall.
Our other sighting was more domestic: a herd of sheep grazing in the moonlight.


Dec. 5-11: South African Phoenix; Winnie Mandela's Victory Delights and Confounds
Little more than two years ago, Winnie Mandela seemed finished.
Her political obituaries were being written.
She had been convicted in May 1991 of kidnappings carried out by her retinue of young, thuggish bodyguards and was facing a long jail term.
And following dark hints of an affair with a younger man and possible financial improprieties, she was forced to give up her senior posts in the African National Congress.
Among South Africa's comfortable black political mainstream, she was shunned as the estranged and embittered wife of their revered leader, Nelson Mandela.


Target: Garbage And Graffiti
Responding to increasing complaints about the quality of life, Community Board 7 is organizing teams to clean up graffiti and garbage in vacant lots, parks and the Broadway malls on the Upper West Side.
The teams are made up of volunteers and people sentenced to community service for fare-beating.
The city is donating equipment, and the local police precincts are providing supervisors, said Penny Ryan, the area's district manager.


E. M. Belshaw And Peter Ham
Elizabeth Mellick Belshaw, the daughter of Bishop and Mrs.
G.
P.
Mellick Belshaw of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Peter Morrison Ham, a son of Barbara A. Morley of St.-Jacques-de-Grasse, France, and Donald M. Ham of Glenbrook, Nev.
The Rev.
Leslie C. Smith performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church.
Mrs.
Ham, a graduate of Connecticut College, teaches the third grade at the Spence School in New York.
Her father is the Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of New Jersey in Trenton.


Editors' Note
An article on page 36 of the Arts and Leisure section today describes a hidden 13th song on a recent album by the group Guns n' Roses and says royalties will go to Charles Manson, who wrote it.
He is in a California prison for his role in seven murders in 1969.
After the section went to press, Geffen Records, which distributes the album, said that any royalties due Mr.
Manson would have to go to satisfy a 1971 judgment on behalf of Bartek Frykowski, the son of one murder victim.
Mr.
Manson would be owed about $60,000 in royalties for every million albums sold.
The $500,000 judgment entered in 1971 has been renewed and now exceeds $1.2 million.


Folk Music Checks Into the Hilton
It used to be an industry showcase.
Now it's the The Traditional Arts Festival, and it's open to the public for the first time.
Five major folk ensembles are scheduled to appear at the festival at the New York Hilton.
"Boys of the Lough," a Celtic ensemble, will perform songs in the Irish folk tradition for the holidays.
Samite, a singer and storyteller from Uganda, and his trio will present Ugandan and Kenyan folk melodies and songs.
He plays a variety of wind and melodic percussion instruments.
And three members of the Seeger musical dynasty will perform and reminisce about the protest songs of the 60's and the current folk-music revival.
The three are Mike and Peggy Seeger, Pete Seeger's brother and sister, and Ruth Crawford Seeger, a classical composer who is the mother of Mike and Peggy Seeger.
Obo Addy and Okropong, drummers and dancers from Ghana, will reflect the diversity of the Ghanaian musical tradition, and the Sophia Bilides Greek Ensemble is to play Greek cabaret music with a Middle Eastern flavor.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Brighton Beach -- UPDATE; Baths in Balance as a Ruling Nears
A bitter seven-year dispute over a developer's plan to replace the historic Brighton Beach Baths with a housing development may be nearing an end.
State Supreme Court Justice Lewis Friedman is expected to rule this month on a lawsuit filed by a community group that is trying to block the project, saying it poses environmental and other dangers.
The developer, Stephen Muss, says the 1,400-unit development, Brighton by the Sea, is vital to the neglected community.


MAIL-ORDER AMERICA
With no trouble, I could duplicate the cover of your Nov. 21 magazine and still have two bulging pages of catalogues left over.
My theory is that it takes only one order from any catalogue, or one contribution to any national charitable cause or a subscription to a daily national newspaper to get on lists.
ANNE WARD Alliance, Ohio


Sports of The Times; See Johnny Run
WHENEVER Johnny Johnson trotted to the sideline, Bruce Coslet would ask, "You all right?"
With his damaged ribs protected by a plastic guard taped tightly to his black sweatshirt under his green jersey, Johnson would nod.
And when the Jets had the ball again, he would run with it.
Again and again.
Eventually, after a 25-yard sweep around left end to the Jets' sideline in the third quarter, he got up holding his right pinky.


The Politics of Potato-Chip Bags on 16th St.
THE Litter Lady is out on the street, slipping among parked cars in her broken-field ballet.
Her darting fingers pluck out from under windshield wipers the fliers for an indoor garage, a new chicken takeout, a furniture mover.
She is a step ahead of the wind that is blowing the fliers onto East 16th Street, her street, to mingle with pizza plates, homework, menus, potato chip bags.
"Yes, of course, litter is symbolic of breakdown," said the Litter Lady, Carol Roberto, "but I'm also doing this for a specific practical reason. Whenever those fliers pile up in front of my house, an inspector from the Sanitation Department seems to show up to give me a summons."


Volgograd Seems to Want Slower Market Shift
Suffering from layoffs and wages that have not kept pace with inflation, the voters of this industrial and agricultural center in southern Russia appear to be favoring candidates in the parliamentary election on Sunday who advocate a much slower transformation to a market economy.
Most of the candidates have publicly distanced themselves from President Boris N. Yeltsin's policies, which have cut off or cut back credits to industry with the goal of forcing them to become more efficient or go out of business.
Even Mayor Yuri V. Chekov, who is running for Parliament, declares himself an independent, although he is endorsed by Russia's Choice, the party allied with Mr.
Yeltsin.


Charity Catalogue; Dear Santa
The Times Square Business Improvement District has published a catalogue of 34 social-service agencies in the area and the items they'd most like to be given this holiday season.
Some 15,000 copies have been distributed in a project that cost the organization $38,000.
Copies of "Times Square Wishes" may be obtained from the improvement district office at 1560 Broadway, Suite 800, New York, N.Y. 10036; (212) 768-1560.


Virginia Democrats Choose Primary to End Feud
Leaders of the Virginia Democratic Party decided today that next year's showdown between Senator Charles S. Robb and Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder, who are competing for the Democratic nomination for the Senate, will be resolved in a primary election.
A feud between the two men has given the state's politics a soap-opera subtext for the last decade, and now Virginia's three million registered voters will have a chance to choose between them.
Virginians do not register by party, so all voters will be eligible to vote in the Democratic primary, expected to be June 14.


24-Hour Call: Towers to Translators
IN "the city that never sleeps," there are, of course, many businesses and services that never sleep either.
Here are a few of them.
Key: B: Will go to Brooklyn.
Q: Will go to Queens.
Bx: Will go to the Bronx.
COURIERS AND MESSENGERS  Able (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 687-5515  Bullit (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 983-7400  DHL (international) . . . (800) 225-5345  Emery (international) . . . (800) 443-6379  Federal Express (international) . . . (212) 777-6500  Noonlite (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 473-2246  Perfect Courier (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 279-4300  DENTISTS
Dentist Referral (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 679-3966  All City Emergency Services (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 286-0716  Preventative Dental Associates . . . (212) 683-2568  ELECTRICIANS
Marty Allen (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 254-9600  Michael Altman (B,Q,BX) . . . (718) 681-2900  Irwin Electric (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 840-6288  Joseph Weinstein (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 877-4600  GARAGES/REPAIR AND TOWING
Apollo Towing (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 315-2518  Express (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 242-5811  JDS Towing (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 947-2749  Luna Towing (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 246-8895  Mobil . . . (212) 582-9269  LANGUAGE HELP AND TRANSLATIONS
All Language Service . . . (212) 986-1688  LOCKSMITHS
Abbey . . . (212) 535-2289  Ace . . . (212) 727-2222  Central Park West Locksmith (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 410-1607  Champion Locksmith (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 362-7000  Columbus Lock and Key (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 595-5210  Day and Night Lock (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 777-2555  Eagle Locksmiths . . . (212) 877-7787  Eagle Master Locksmith . . . (212) 532-1075  Murray Hill Security Center (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 532-1652  Rainbow Locksmith (Q) . . . (212) 860-2219  Speedy Locksmiths (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 475-6840  MOVERS
AVI (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 391-6727  Meyers (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 505-6640  Moishe's (B,Q,BX) . . . (212) 439-9191  PHARMACIES
Animal Medical Center, 510 East 62d Street . . . (212) 838-8100  Manhattan Veterinary (until 1 A.M.), 240 East 80th Street . . . (212) 988-1000  OPEN VERY LATE
Cleaners Midnight Express (will pick up and deliver until at least 11 P.M. anywhere in Manhattan) . . . (212) 921-0111  International TV Repair (will pick up in Manhattan until 11 P.M.) . . . (212) 243-2362  Larry Mathews Beauty Shop (until 10 P.M.) 536 Madison Ave., at 55th Street . . . (212) 355-1900  Rialto Florist (until midnight), 57th Street at Lexington Avenue . . . (212) 688-3234  Videotown Launderette (video store and laundry), 217 West 80th Street . . . (212) 721-1706


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
MAGIC LANTERN SHOW
Another of Terry Borton's Magic Lantern Shows sets up shop at the Ivoryton Playhouse for four performances, on Friday at 7:30, Saturday at 11 and 2:30 and Sunday at 2:30.
Using an antique brass and mahogany lantern and hand-painted antique glass plates, Mr.
Borton produces authentic Victorian magic lantern shows at Halloween, Christmas and Valentine's Day.
Illustrations projected from this week's slides will include " 'Twas the Night Before Christmas," "A Christmas Carol" and "The Little Match Girl." "O Holy Night" is sung by Nancy V. Stewart and Tricia Dehls to slides of the Civil War, commemorating the temporary truce called at Christmastime while soldiers sang carols across the battle lines.


INSIDE
A Potboiler of a Murder Trial Enters the Final Chapter
One jury is deliberating and a second jury is about to get the murder case against Lyle and Erik Menendez.
The brothers admit killing their parents but say they feared that their parents were about to kill them.
Page 26.
Get Me Rewrite
Hollywood filmmakers try to revise the GATT script, sparring with their European counterparts over efforts to maintain limits on American-made entertainment.
Page 24.
Seeking Holocaust Memorial
A dozen years after Mayor Edward I. Koch proposed a Holocaust memorial for New York City, home to the most survivors outside Israel, the vision remains unfulfilled.
Page 45.
Looking Back in Uncertainty
With apathy holding Russian voters in its listless grasp and the future of the draft constitution in doubt, today's election may be less of a milestone than was predicted.
Page 18.
Countdown in the Mideast
Israelis and Palestinians are mired in the politics of deadlines as they gather for a meeting that may determine the nature of the transition to Palestinian self-rule.
Page 20.


'Naked' Shows Off an Actor As an Enraged Drifter
David Thewlis likes the cheerfully raffish environment of the Pollo Bar in Soho, and so, for different reasons, might Johnny, the drifter Mr.
Thewlis plays in "Naked." For the 30-year-old actor, whose career-making performance dominates Mike Leigh's film, opening on Wednesday in New York, the bustling pasta bar is conveniently located minutes from his apartment; and as a regular customer, Mr.
Thewlis says he feels "very relaxed" there.
Johnny, on the other hand, would appreciate its buzz and no doubt contribute to it.
The Pollo Bar is the kind of hangout where one could lapse into werewolf howls of rage, as Johnny does early in "Naked," and virtually be ignored in the crush of other Londoners, wayward or otherwise, who -- for the moment anyway -- have found a home.
That desire for home permeates "Naked," a picaresque chronicle of spiritual homelessness whose cast also includes such rising British actresses as Lesley Sharp and Claire Skinner, playing two London roommates with whom Johnny seeks refuge.
At Cannes this year, the film, Mr.
Leigh's first feature since "Life Is Sweet" in 1990, won awards for best director and best actor and went on to acclaim in October at the New York Film Festival.


Hollywood On the Potomac
Midway through a recent showing of "The War Room," a new documentary about the Clinton Presidential campaign, a woman near the front row of the Georgetown Key theater let out an extravagant groan.
"Look at Paul Begala," she muttered, referring to one of Mr.
Clinton's senior campaign strategists.
"He looks awful. He looked much better when I saw him last week."
To those who live beyond the orbit of the capital, "The War Room" is a nimble, edifying primer on how Presidential campaigns are run and won.
But to many of those who live and work here, it is a home movie starring James Carville as a very peculiar dad.


In 3 Progressive Cities, Stern Homeless Policies
Clinging to its cherished reputation for liveability, this city recently made it a civil offense for a person to sit on the sidewalk in front of a business during the day.
In Portland, Ore., when a panhandler starts begging for change, two uniformed men, officially known as "guides," promptly show up and discourage donations.


Orioles Land Palmeiro For $30 Million, 5 Years
Three weeks ago yesterday, the Baltimore Orioles were on the verge of signing Will Clark to be their run-producing first baseman.
If they had completed the deal, Rafael Palmeiro very likely would have wound up returning to the Texas Rangers as their first baseman.
But the Orioles' negotiations with Clark collapsed, he wound up signing with the Rangers the next day, and last night Palmeiro became the Orioles' run-producing first baseman.


Self-Defining Governor Looks Ahead
TWO years ago, at a breakfast for potential contributors, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo coyly appeared to have finally opened to the door to a Presidential campaign.
Matilda Cuomo believed otherwise.
She left the power breakfast with the distinct impression that what her husband had said was that he intended to run for Governor again.
"Either she knows all about me, or I am an enigma," Mr.
Cuomo mused later.
"I hope I am an enigma."


To the Playoff-Bound Giants, 1990 No Longer Seems So Long Ago
If the Giants players have learned anything from their coach, Dan Reeves -- and they appear to have learned plenty -- it is that professionalism counts.
Coats and ties over flash and dash.
So it was no surprise that in the locker room after the Giants dominated Indianapolis today there was no celebrating when the team learned it had made the playoffs.
Just a calm group looking forward to the next opponent.
No champagne.
No hugs.


Giuliani Repeats His Call for National Gun Licensing
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani reiterated his call yesterday for a national system of gun licensing, and recommended marshaling local and Federal law-enforcement agencies to crack down on illegal gun trade.
Speaking on the CBS television show "Face The Nation," Mr.
Giuliani cautioned that gun licensing was not a cure-all.
But he said that tighter restrictions on guns could help prevent crimes like the mass shooting on the Long Island Rail Road last week that left 6 people dead and 17 others wounded. 'Try to Fight Back'
"The simple fact is we have to try to fight back," Mr.
Giuliani said.
"We just can't sit here and let this kind of carnage go on. Gun licensing would help. It would also help to have task forces of Federal, state and local police focus on guns and removing guns from some of the most dangerous criminals."


A Rookie Shoots, Scores; Shoots, Scores
The Devils were back in sync offensively with a complete renovation of their line combinations Saturday night and may have also discovered a new center in David Emma.
Coach Jacques Lemaire liked Emma so much in training camp that he almost kept him when the season opened.
Emma was sent down to the minors, then was promoted last Thursday following injuries to Bernie Nicholls and Bobby Holik.


Kings' Hurley Is Hurt in Crash
Bobby Hurley of the Sacramento Kings was critically injured last night when his car tumbled into a ditch about an hour after a game against the Los Angeles Clippers.
The driver of the vehicle that hit Hurley's car was also seriously injured.
Hurley was thrown from the vehicle and was found face down in a ditch, said Lieut.
Rick Brazil, a police spokesman.
Hurley was listed in critical condition at UC-Davis Medical Center in Sacramento with substantial internal injuries.


Ayatollah Golpaygani of Iran, A Senior Shiite Muslim Leader
Grand Ayatollah Mohammed Riza Golpaygani, an Iranian cleric who was a senior religious figure for Shiite Muslims, died Thursday in a hospital in Teheran.
He was in his late 90's and was prominent in Islamic learning for decades in Qum, the Shiite religious center 75 miles southwest of Teheran.
The cause of death was a heart attack, the Iranian press agency I.R.N.A. reported, and he had been suffering from a lung ailment.


'You Take the A Train, I'll Take the Sign'


Plan Weighed To Increase Rent Subsidy
Less than six weeks before Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo must propose next year's state budget, his administration is considering pressing the Legislature for the first increase in rent subsidies for welfare recipients since 1988.
Both Michael J. Dowling, the State Social Services Commissioner, and JoAnn M. Smith, the Governor's deputy secretary for human services, have been spearheading discussions about the fiscal and political impact of an increase, said aides to Mr.
Cuomo who insisted on anonymity.
Neither has formally recommended an increase to the Governor.


Essay; The Road to Bishkek
"We're calling an audible." The Vice President's voice was like thin ice breaking.
A half-hour before, Air Force Two aborted two passes at the short airstrip in befogged Almaty, Kazakhstan.
With not enough fuel left for a third try, the pilot had put down in nearby Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, which did not expect the American visitor until the next day.


Tokyo Journal; For the Rice Lobby, the Bowl of Plenty Dries Up
As Shigeo Mitsuyama watched 5,000 thousand fellow rice farmers march through the streets here last week to protest the pending opening of Japan's rice market, he realized how the political landscape had changed.
"I don't think the Government would have made this kind of decision 10 years ago," Mr.
Mitsuyama said.
"All the Parliament members would have been removed in one fell swoop, certainly in Ehime." He was speaking of his home prefecture in southern Japan.


Coslet Kicks Up Storm Over Punting and Place-Kicking
Watching a ball bounce off the noggin of your holder on a field goal, like the one that hit the helmet of the Jets' Louis Aguiar on Saturday, isn't the kind of sight that inspires confidence in the head coach of a National Football League team.
It is an embarrassment, really.
And with a vital three-game stretch run to the playoffs coming up, it is not the kind of thing the Jets want to see again.
Thus, a day after the Jets beat Washington, 3-0, in their second shutout of the season, Coach Bruce Coslet expressed displeasure with both the field-goal and punting units and vowed to correct the problem or else.


Dance in Review
Dalton-Hartel Dance  Hudson Guild Theater
Lisa Dalton and Austin Hartel, who dance together as Dalton-Hartel Dance, are good-looking dancers with handsome, oddly lyrical gymnasts' bodies.
There is little differentiation between the bodies as female and male, in the way of Pilobolus, with whom both once danced.
The six pieces on a program presented by Dalton-Hartel on Wednesday night seemed intended to express physical strength and control more than emotion.


Relying on the Irresistible Force of GATT's Appeal
With time running out, trade negotiators struck one important deal overnight but remained stuck on another.
Yet American and some European officials are optimistic that the 116-nation trade talks can be finished in the three days they have left.
That attitude may seem odd in light of the apparent obduracy of the unsettled issue, how to share the hundreds of millions of dollars that European governments pocket each year on fees on American movies.


2-Way Touchdown Drought
One is dubious and the other is something to be proud of, but it appears, based on a check of team records, that the Jets' current streaks of not scoring touchdowns, or giving them up, are breaking new ground as far as the Jets go.
The Jets, whose 3-0 victory over the Redskins Saturday improved their record to 8-5, have not scored a touchdown in 14 quarters and haven't given one up in 12.


Patrick Kelly, Dancer And Writer, Dies at 40
Patrick Kelly, a dancer and writer, died at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan on Friday.
He was 40 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Richard Dworkin.


An Unwise Policy Change on Mammography; False Sense of Security
To the Editor:
The recent decision by the Food and Drug Administration to control more strictly mammographic examinations through certification of mammographic centers is a welcome advance (news article, Dec. 2).
However, it does not plug the one weak link in the diagnosis of breast cancer.


Miscellany
*
Publishers Information Bureau, New York, said magazine advertising pages in November rose 1.5 percent, to 17,765, from November 1992.
For the first 11 months of 1993 total magazine pages increased 1.3 percent, to 153,013, from the corresponding period a year ago.


For the Navy, A Computer More Super
The Thinking Machines Corporation, the supercomputer maker based in Cambridge, Mass., will sign a three-year $16 million contract today with the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington to deliver an upgrade to the lab's existing CM-5 supercomputer system.
The Government research center will use the huge parallel-processing system to create more accurate weather forecasts, to research fluid dynamics in the building of aircraft and submarines, and to study ocean currents, said Danny Hillis, Thinking Machine's founding scientist.


Separate Accidents in India Kill 58, Mostly Children


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday, about the management shake-up at Borden Inc., referred incorrectly in some editions to the amount of Borden stock owned by David J. Greene &amp; Company, a New York investment firm.
It owns about 2.5 million shares, not $2 million worth of stock.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Retail Sales . . .
Nov.
Wednesday  Industrial Production . . .
Nov.
Business Inventories/Sales . . .
Oct.
Thursday  Merchandise Trade . . .
Oct.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday Housing Starts . . .
Nov.


Kind Words for Suspect After Hostage Taking
A day after being held at gunpoint for three hours, a Bronx family spoke yesterday mostly of the consideration of their captor, who they later learned had killed a store clerk shortly before hiding from the police in their apartment.
Ron Collins, who along with his wife and six children was held captive on Saturday by a gunman identified by the police as Julio Rivera, said yesterday that the family's initial fright evolved into sympathy for the armed intruder when it became apparent that he was going to let them go and turn the gun on himself.


Goal Off Skate Lets Bruins Tie Whalers
Whalers 2, Bruins 2
Steve Leach scored a power-play goal off his skate at 14 minutes 59 seconds of the third period to lift Boston into a 2-2 tie with the Hartford Whalers last night in Boston and end a Bruins losing streak at four games.


Promises to Keep
In his words and actions, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani has been busy telling New Yorkers recently what he will not do to solve the city's looming financial problems: he will not raise taxes or lay off thousands of municipal workers, and he will not rely on other tried-and-true methods used over nearly two decades by New York City's Democratic fiscal establishment.
Instead he has talked passionately about being innovative and optimistic.
But while closing off those critical options, he has given few clues of precisely how he intends to tackle the budget shortfalls that will surely preoccupy him when he takes office in three weeks.


A Little Shtick, a Little Spell Check
To the Editor:
Re "In Latin vs. Yiddish, the 'Oys' Have It" (Law page, Dec. 3): Either you got fablonget on the way to the dictionary, or you are a meshugenuh.
A shtick is not a "piece of misconduct," and kibitzing is not "joking."


Rabin and Arafat Fail to Remove Last Obstacles to Start of Self-Rule
A weary Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and a despondent Yasir Arafat conceded late tonight that the Monday deadline to begin self-rule in Jericho and the Gaza Strip would be have to be delayed at least 10 days.
The decision, a difficult one for the P.L.O. chairman, who stood slumped over the podium with his arms folded, was made after the two sides failed to negotiate the boundaries of Palestinian self-rule in the town of Jericho and failed to determine who would control border crossings.
They said that they had also been unable to agree on "security arrangements" for Jewish settlers living in the Gaza Strip.


Welfare Reform in the Making
One of every four children in America is poor; nearly one of every three is born to an unwed mother and 70 percent are raised on welfare.
The statistics are grim, which is why President Clinton put a vow to "end welfare as we know it" near the center of his domestic agenda.
The central idea is to make welfare a temporary stop on the way to a job.
And according to internal documents obtained by Jason DeParle of The Times, a working group appointed by the President will soon propose legislation to carry out the pledge.


MEDICAL INDUSTRY SHOWERS CONGRESS WITH LOBBY MONEY
As Congress prepares to debate drastic changes in the nation's health care system, its members are receiving vast campaign contributions from the medical industry, an amount apparently unprecedented for a nonelection year.
While it remains unclear who would benefit and who would suffer under whatever health plan is ultimately adopted, it is apparent that the early winners are members of Congress, especially many of its leaders and members of the five committees charged with considering the legislation.


Shuttle Returns
The crew of the space shuttle Endeavour wrapped up an 11-day flight to improve the fuzzy eyesight of the Hubble Space Telescope in the same manner they carried out their mission, on time and without a hitch.
The astronauts, who performed a record five space walks, made what was only the second nighttime landing in Florida by a shuttle.
Article, page A14.


Review/Music; Unmistakably Adams: Landscapes in Sound
John Adams electrified American music in the 1980's with a mightily distinctive and mesmerizing sound.
Based in Minimalism, it encompassed the most expressively winsome devices of late Romanticism and early modernism, wrapping them into a seamless whole.
The landmarks of this immediately influential "Adams sound" were the symphonic poem "Harmonielehre" and the opera "Nixon in China."
With a second opera, "The Death of Klinghoffer," Mr.
Adams suddenly threw everything into confusion, jettisoning his dependable Minimalist ground and fashioning an eclectic idiom from Britten, Stravinsky and other overworked models.
The opera's controversial libretto, laden with Jewish stereotypes, defeated its own pacific aims.
A principal talent in American music seemed to have stumbled.


First Impressions and Last Details; Giuliani, Like His Predecessors, Is Setting Tone From Day 1
Fiorello H. La Guardia went to bed early.
Edward I. Koch rode the bus to the ceremony at City Hall.
David N. Dinkins invited homeless people to join New York City's political elite, if only for a day.
Throughout the city's history, the inauguration of a new mayor has always been more significant for its symbolism than its substance, as it is an occasion to set the tone for a nascent administration.
And this year's inauguration will apparently be no different, with Mr.
Giuliani trying to emphasize his decidedly more austere, no-nonsense style.


Review/Pop; Moroccan's Funk and Rock
Hassan Hakmoun's show at the Wetlands on Wednesday night took off about halfway through, after a heated percussion battle.
Mr.
Hakmoun, originally from Morocco, has spent a good part of the last six years merging elements that are geographically disparate: funk and rock and his own Gnawan music.
At the show, he brought together a band that included two guitarists, a keyboardist, a bassist and a drummer, along with two percussionists and backup singers.
The result was the sort of music, part rural and part urban, that has flashes of popularity but has never quite taken off as a commercial medium.


11 Hours in 40-Foot Seas, but Sailors Are Safe
Adrift on a raft after their Bermuda-bound sailboat went down in a ferocious North Atlantic blow, two men from the New York area rode 40-foot seas amid howling, hurricane-force winds for 11 hours Saturday and somehow found strength to climb a cargo net to salvation in a midnight rendezvous with a Japanese freighter.
The rescue -- one of the more dramatic in recent years in the region -- called on Coast Guard planes, satellites and computer technology to find the lost men, but it also summoned up the sea's age-old tradition of all-out help from the nearest ship, regardless of flag or mission, for distressed mariners.


The Los Angeles Times Steps Back From a 'Sky's the Limit' Approach
The Los Angeles Times, one of the country's great newspapers, is in a period of what its managers call refocusing.
Others call it retreat.
Though its news coverage remains among the best in the country, the newspaper, by many measures, is shrinking.


Review/Music; Folk-Pop From Finland With International Touches
In Karelia in southeastern Finland, the nights are cold, the work is hard, the husbands are drunk and the music is downright jaunty.
Or so it seemed when Varttina, Finland's leading pop-folk group, performed on Wednesday night at the Bottom Line.
Four female singers backed by four men and a female accordionist, Varttina (which means spindle) combines traditional Finnish vocal music (usually a female domain) and instrumental music (once men's work) with international touches.
Among the modernizations were a bass fiddle, an acoustic guitar, key changes and the women's synchronized choreography, including something that looked like the Twist.
Sari Kaasinen, who founded the group, cheerfully complained about Finnish men, calling them "couch potatoes." For those in the audience who didn't speak Finnish (about half the club), she traced songs back to wedding celebrations and tales of supernatural spells.


A Celebration of Black Pride and Thanksgiving


Sports of The Times; The Giants' Home-Weather Advantage
WITH their 10-3 record, the Giants have an opportunity to hold the home-field advantage throughout the National Conference playoffs leading to Super Bowl XXVIII.
But for the Giants, it wouldn't be the home-field advantage so much as it would be the home-weather advantage.
Weather that is wildly windy and cold.


Remy D. Gill, Daniel A. Lehner
Remy D. Gill, a model in New York, was married yesterday to Daniel A. Lehner, the president of Inflight Newspapers Inc. in Valley Stream, L.I., a distributor of newspapers and magazines.
Gregory P. Peterson, the Presiding Supervisor of Hempstead, L.I., officiated at the Garden City (L.I.) Hotel.
Mrs.
Lehner, 37, is a daughter of John Rementeria of Stockton, N.J., and the late Jill Rementeria.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


Patents
SINCE the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the patent systems of many of the former Soviet states have been in chaos.
Russia essentially took over the old Soviet patent office while the other 14 states fashioned their own idiosyncratic patent offices.
Consequently, patent applicants, who under the old system would have sent one form to Moscow, now must file in 15 countries and pay 15 filing fees.


Hampton Gives Giants A Big Running Start
When Bill Parcells was coaching the Giants, he explained his love of the running game this way: "In December in the Northeast, when it's cold and the wind is blowing, you better be able to run the ball."
Parcells won two Super Bowls that way, with Joe Morris and Ottis Anderson as his runners.
The current Giants, coached by Dan Reeves, believe in running the ball, and their runner, Rodney Hampton, may be the best the Giants have had since Frank Gifford a generation ago.


Fontes's Switches Pay Off As Lions Cool Off Bears
Lions 21, Cardinals 14
Wayne Fontes's decision to elevate quarterback Erik Kramer from third string to first string was a success, but two defensive changes were equally important in Detroit's 21-14 victory over the Phoenix Cardinals yesterday in Tempe, Ariz.


Mineola Woman Is 6th to Die in Rail Shootings
Amy Federici, a 27-year-old corporate interior designer who was just widowed, today became the sixth person to die as a result of Tuesday's shooting on the Long Island Rail Road.
Mrs.
Federici, whose husband died of cancer just a year ago, only three months after they were married, died at 10:13 A.M. at Winthrop University Hospital here, a hospital spokesman said.
Doctors said a single bullet wound to the neck had severely damaged her brain.


The Talk of Hollywood; 'Schindler' At the Top In the First Film Prizes
With equal measures of seriousness and silliness, the Academy Award race was officially launched this weekend.
On the serious side, the 40-member Los Angeles Film Critics Association selected Steven Spielberg's "Schindler's List" as best picture of the year.


F.B.I. Chief, in Palermo, Vows to Root Out Mafia
In the first visit by an F.B.I.
Director to this stronghold of the Sicilian Mafia, Louis J. Freeh issued a direct threat today to the island's mafiosi, warning them that the American and Italian authorities would "root you out from every rock and from the dark places where you hide."
Mr.
Freeh's visit, ending a two-day trip to Italy, was clearly intended to bolster the Italian authorities in their advances against organized crime.
His day was mostly solemn, though, visiting the graves of two anti-Mafia judges who were slain last year and meeting with their families and priests who have denounced organized crime.


Abroad at Home; Signals to Haiti
Imagine that you are a Haitian factory manager, someone who has made it to the country's new middle class.
You are tired of military rule, with its corruption and brutality.
You know a good deal about the United States -- your son went to college there -- and you admire American democracy.
You look to America, too, to restore democracy in Haiti.
When the soldiers overthrew your first freely elected President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, in 1991, you were glad that the Bush Administration denounced the coup and said Aristide was the legitimate leader.
Bill Clinton's tough words on Haiti raised your hopes even higher.


Jozsef Antall, Who Led Hungary After Communists, Is Dead at 61
Jozsef Antall, the Hungarian Prime Minister, died today in Budapest.
He was the longest-ruling leader of post-Communist Eastern Europe and probably the most conservative.
Mr.
Antall, 61, was hospitalized in Budapest last month with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a form of cancer of the lymph glands.
He had been receiving chemotherapy and had also had been treated in Germany in October.


Dance in Review
'Fresh Tracks'  Bessie Schonberg Theater
Anyone studying dance trends in the mid-1990's would have been hard put to characterize them on the basis of this year's "Fresh Tracks" program, presented on Tuesday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.
This showcase for new work began with a sensuous encounter between two little girls and ended with a dance that looked as if it had been created for an Israeli Army women's drill team.


Trials and Tribulations of a Local Hero
More than a year ago, Graeme Obree decided that he was through with bicycle racing.
"I was totally fed up with cycling because I had nothing from it whatsoever," he said.
He wasn't talking about honors.
Obree had won a fair number of amateur races in a dozen years of competition in his native Scotland.
He meant money.
At the age of 27, Obree, a dropout from engineering and economics studies at Glasgow University and the bankrupt owner of a bicycle shop, was unemployed and broke.


Redmen Get Some Practice at Winning
It is a theme Coach Brian Mahoney has been voicing since his St.
John's team lost to Towson State in the opening round of the Preseason N.I.T. nearly a month ago.
"We need more games," Mahoney said yesterday.
"This tournament has given us a chance to play a lot of people, to use different combinations, to see how players react outside of practice."


Woman in '92 Subway Dispute With L.I.R.R. Suspect Says All the Signs Were There
There were just two unoccupied seats on the subway car, one on either side of a heavyset young man.
The woman took one, but the man's bulk intruded on her seat and she asked him to slide over.
He reacted, she said, with a searing rage far out of proportion to the circumstance, setting off a confrontation that escalated step by step until he was pinned on the ground by police officers, his wrists cuffed behind his back.
Nearly two years later, the man, Colin Ferguson, stands accused of turning a packed commuter train car into a bloodbath, killing six and wounding 17.
The February 1992 incident on the No. 1 train in midtown Manhattan, which was apparently his only prior arrest, may serve as a window into the hostility and emotional disintegration that appear to have characterized the last several years of his life.


Music Notes; Found: Unknown Music And Inkblots by Purcell
A notebook that includes working drafts of 21 keyboard pieces by Henry Purcell, about a third of them previously unknown, has been discovered by a dealer in antiquarian musical manuscripts in Devon, England.
The book is one of only six known Purcell manuscripts, and also includes music by Purcell's friend and colleague Giovanni Battista Draghi, who appears to have inherited it from him.
The dealer, Lisa Cox, acquired the notebook in September, as part of a large lot of manuscripts she bought at an auction in London.
On examining the book, she noted that it had leather covers and seemed to date from around 1680 or 1690, and that it included two distinct manuscript styles.
Robert Spencer, an English lutenist, identified the writing in the second part of the book as Draghi's.


Free Speech Woes at Sarah Lawrence
When a long-standing feud between former roommates boiled over into name calling, a college with a reputation for tolerating differing viewpoints became the latest one thrust into a nationwide debate over free speech on campus.
The firestorm at Sarah Lawrence College began when two students involved in the incident -- in which an anti-gay slur was used -- were ordered by the school's Judicial Review Board to watch a videotape on homophobia and write a paper on the issue.
One of the students, Jonathan Boesky, the son of the financier Ivan Boesky, accepted the punishment, while the other student, Marlon Lask, has said he may take the matter to court.


In Holiday Season, Rooms Are Scarce In New York Hotels
City sidewalks are crammed in New York.
Stores and Broadway shows are selling out.
And though the holiday season is traditionally the busiest time of the year for Manhattan hotels, a surge in pre-Christmas travelers is capping what travel watchers say is the strongest year in more than a decade for hotels in the city and across the nation.
In the last couple of weeks, Manhattan hotels from the Carlyle to the Best Western at Times Square have been booked solid.
Spurred by a gently improving economy, lower air fares and the perennial draw of New York's holiday glitter, hordes of conventioneers, European travelers and sightseers have descended on the city, determined to shop at Macy's, gaze at Fifth Avenue window displays or marvel at the Christmas tree in Rockefeller Center.


Donald G. Agger, Lawyer, 64
Donald G. Agger, a lawyer active on international aviation issues, died today at his home here.
He was 64.
The cause was cancer, said Arthur Mason, a family friend.


Review/Pop; Venturing Outside the Studio, Mariah Carey Proves Her Mettle
Mariah Carey had everything to prove when she performed on Friday night at Madison Square Garden.
Although she has sold millions of albums since her first one appeared in 1990, her public performances were scarce, confined mostly to television appearances.
Instead of working her way up the live circuit, she is starting at the top, touring arenas.
With her triumphant New York concert, she's going to make it much harder to convince fledgling singers that they need to pay dues.
If Ms.
Carey was nervous, it didn't show.
Smiling and strutting across the stage, moving easily to the music without obvious choreography, she combined the assurance of an arena-scale pop performer with the casualness of a suburban girl-next-door.
Chatting with an audience that was proud to claim her as a Long Island native, she announced that profits from her current single, "Hero," would be donated to the families of victims of last week's rampage on the Long Island Rail Road.


Whitman Says She May Back State Takeover of Newark Schools
Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey yesterday reaffirmed her intention to support a state takeover of the troubled Newark school system, if that is ultimately the decision of the Education Commissioner and the State Board of Education.
Mrs.
Whitman said yesterday that her position on the school investigation had not changed since the gubernatorial campaign earlier this year.
At that time, she contended that a takeover by the state should occur only as a last resort.
But, she added, if the commissioner and the state board had an "airtight" case that could resist court challenges, she would support the decision.


Philharmonic Concerts On Life Between Wars
The musical life of Europe between the two World Wars is the theme of concerts by the New York Philharmonic at Avery Fisher Hall this week.
Kurt Masur is to lead the orchestra in performances of Berg's "Lulu" Suite and Kurt Weill's "Seven Deadly Sins" on Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M., with the soprano Angelina Reaux and the Hudson Shad, a vocal sextet, as guest artists.
On Friday, Weill's String Quartet is to be played in a pre-concert offering at 7 P.M.


A Quiz Show That Disdains the Right Answer
For a year in the mid-1980's, Michael Feldman was an announcer at WGN, a commercial radio station in Chicago.
He was teamed with a female disk jockey, and they were supposed to do an evening show together, but it didn't quite work out.
"We had totally different ideas about what radio was about," he recalled.
"She thought radio was about her and I thought radio was about me."


CONSTITUTION IS APPROVED
Initial returns from Russia's parliamentary elections on Sunday indicated an unexpectedly strong showing by zealous nationalists and Communists against disunited reformers, even while President Boris N. Yeltsin won approval for his new Constitution.
The results stunned reform politicians who had gathered for a gala night in the Kremlin to celebrate the "Political New Year," and they lashed out at Mr.
Yeltsin and their own disunity for the unexpected success of what they called "fascists and revanchists."


How to Get Real on Global Warming
To the Editor:
Philip M. Boffey correctly notes that hard questions face the Clinton Administration as it continues to search for global warming policies that will deliver real results ("China and Global Warming," Editorial Notebook, Dec. 8).
Mr.
Boffey raises a very controversial topic: whether American companies should be allowed to meet emissions reduction goals through investments abroad.


Film Issue Snags Trade Talks; Anti-Dumping Pact Reached
After more than a week of steady if uneven progress, world trade talks have run into a roadblock amid pronounced differences between the United States and France over the movie and entertainment business.
Although trade officials reported progress on several issues in the negotiations among 116 nations, two meetings on Sunday between Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, and the European Community's chief trade official, Sir Leon Brittan, failed to resolve a deadlock over the export of American movies.
This left the fate of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade talks uncertain with three days remaining until an agreed-upon Wednesday deadline.


Dance in Review
Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater  City Center
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater offered a nicely varied program on Thursday night.
But the performing was generally low in energy, an unusual condition for this troupe caused, perhaps, by second-night exhaustion after the company's spirited opening gala and party.


Clinton Seeks to Narrow a Growing Wage Gap
Seeking to please liberals as well as blue-collar Reagan Democrats, the Clinton Administration is cobbling together a multibillion-dollar strategy that aims to narrow the growing wage gap between Americans who have gone to college and those who have not.
Administration officials admit that their efforts, hamstrung by tight budgets, will make only a modest dent in the wage gap, which has grown steadily as the American economy has shifted away from its low-skilled manufacturing base toward areas requiring higher skills.
But these officials say it is important that the White House is making a broad effort to reverse a trend that has fueled anxiety among tens of millions of blue-collar Americans.


Why Weaken the ABM Treaty?
The 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile treaty, a capstone of efforts to slow the arms race, prohibits the U.S. and Russia from testing and deploying nationwide defenses against ballistic missile attacks.
The treaty barely survived the Reagan and Bush Administrations, which wanted to test and deploy such defenses even though they could not perform as advertised.
Now the Clinton Administration wants to poke a hole in the treaty to allow tests of a new interceptor designed to protect American troops overseas from missiles like the Scud.


Drug Works, but Questions Remain
It was not so very long ago that people who were on antidepressant medication wanted above all else to get off it.
The original drugs had many unpleasant side effects, from dizziness and painful dry mouth to weight gain and sluggishness.
Doctors, too, were uneasy about the potency of the pills, and thus prescribed the medications for short courses, up to nine months maximum.
Many doctors say they are comfortable keeping their patients on the newer antidepressants for long stretches.
They say the drugs are safer than the older generation of pills, are almost impossible to overdose on, have fewer side effects and work wonderfully for patients who were difficult to treat before, including those who suffer from panic disorders, anxiety attacks, bulimia, anorexia, or obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Yet the medical portrait of Prozac and related compounds emerging from years of use among millions of patients is not a simple sunburst of unfettered success.
The drugs bear their own disturbing consequences and question marks, particularly in their long-term risks.
Some doctors worry that, with all the pep talk surrounding the novel antidepressants, the trouble spots are being ignored and the pills being presented as the pharmacological equivalent of a Snackwell fat-free cookie: a chance at bliss without paying the price. 'Deceptively Easy'
"Drugs like Prozac are so deceptively easy to take and tolerate that they can excuse a physician from respecting the complexity of depression," said Dr.
Frederick K. Goodwin, director of the National Institute of Mental Health.
But that has not stopped some patients.
Rebecca L. Morgan of Monaca, Pa., has been on Prozac for three years, since she was 27, and she has no intention of quitting, ever.
The drug is the flagship member of a new fleet of antidepressants, and it has transformed her life.
Before Prozac, she could not keep a job for more than a few months at a time.
For the past year and a half, she has been a counselor for the mental health association in Beaver County.
Before Prozac, she suffered five episodes of major depression, during which she could hardly drag herself off her couch or feel enough to realize she was miserable.
Now, she still has emotional peaks and troughs, but when she is faced with an adverse event, she does not slide into a depression as she says she would have in the past.
"I don't know what the long-term effects of the drug are," she said, "but if 20 years from now they say it affects the kidneys or the lungs or whatever, I'm willing to pay the price. Prozac helps me now."
Ms.
Morgan is not alone in embracing Prozac as a permanent therapy for the chronic problem that is her melancholic nature.
Since Prozac was introduced five years ago, its popularity has soared to tropospheric heights.
More than 10 million people have taken the drug worldwide, earning for its maker, Eli Lilly &amp; Company, about $1 billion a year.
Many other people are using even newer, chemically related drugs called by the trade names Paxil and Zoloft.
And while most remain on the medications for less than a year, a sizable minority are staying on the drugs for two years or longer.
Drugs Are Specific
Much of the relative safety of the new class of drugs, called serotonin re-uptake inhibitors, lies in their biochemical specificity.
The original antidepressants, introduced in the 1950's and known as the tricyclics and the monoamine oxidase inhibitors, jiggle multiple biochemical pathways in the brain and reconfigure the balance of several different types of signaling molecules, or neurotransmitters.
By comparison, Prozac and its cousins zero in on one neurotransmitter, serotonin, brightening mood and lessening anxiety by keeping pools of the chemical available in the brain for nerve cells to use and reuse.
Greater specificity in the nervous system means fewer side effects throughout the body.
Nevertheless, some researchers warned that serotonin is a muscular chemical and that manipulating it even with exquisite specificity is bound to reverberate in unexpected ways.
Although early fears that Prozac may occasionally initiate violent or suicidal behavior have not been supported by extensive clinical studies, new studies show that serotonin re-uptake inhibitors have a more severe impact on sexuality than at first estimated, causing symptoms like impotence, an inability to ejaculate, an inability to reach orgasm, a loss of sensation in the vagina, and an all-round loss of interest in one's erotic affairs.
"The early studies on this suggested an incidence of about 2 percent, but that was based on self-reporting, from the patients," said Dr.
Peter Kramer, author of the best seller "Listening to Prozac." "When researchers went out and vigorously interviewed people, they found 40 percent had some sexual dysfunction."
Another common side effect of the new antidepressants that had been underemphasized until recently, said Dr.
Brian Doyle, director of the Georgetown Anxiety Disorders program, is sleep disturbances.
Perhaps a third of Prozac users suffer severe insomnia, and some who manage to fall sleep report excessively vivid dreams that can verge on nightmares.
For those Prozac users in whom insomnia becomes unbearable, some doctors prescribe small doses of, oddly enough, the older tricyclic antidepressants, which can be sedating.
But physicians never mix the serotonin re-uptake inhibitors with the monoamine oxidase inhibitors; that combination can be extremely dangerous, causing rigidity, rapid fluctuations in vital signs, extreme agitation progressing to delirium, coma and even death.
Drugs Fail for Some
Researchers also warned that the serotonin compounds do not work for 20 percent to 40 percent of depressed or anxious people who try them, the same failure rate seen with the older antidepressants.
Some patients say they find drugs like Prozac disorienting or too amphetamine-like in their properties, causing problems in concentration and memory.
Apart from known side effects, the risks of taking any antidepressant drug for years is not yet clear, for the simple reason so far no one has taken the drug for very long.
In studies with mice and pigs, Canadian investigators have found that antidepressants can act as tumor promoters, hastening the growth of nascent malignancies.
These preliminary results have yet to be confirmed by others, and there is no evidence to suggest that antidepressants contribute to cancer in humans, but some researchers admit that the long-term risks remain to be gauged.
Because women suffer a disproportionate rate of depression and thus are more likely to be takers of Prozac, a few studies have looked at the effect of the antidepressants on pregnant women.
So far, researchers have seen no increase in birth defects from the drugs, but women who take any sort of antidepressant drug, including Prozac, have about twice the rate of miscarriages during the first trimester of pregnancy as do women not on the medications.
Nor can researchers be sure that exposing a fetus to a drug capable of altering the balance of neuronal signaling molecules does not have a subtle impact on the brain that only shows up years later, say, as a learning disorder.
In addition, a nursing mother on Prozac may transmit traces of the medication to her infant, again with unknown effects.
Long-Term Treatment
The trend toward treating recurrent depression as a chronic disease, deserving of long-term, if not lifetime treatment with antidepressants, is likely to accelerate, doctors said.
"Eighty to 90 percent of people who had one episode of depression will have another," said Dr.
David Kupfer, a professor and chairman of psychiatry at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.
"That realization makes me much more aggressive. People need long-term treatment, and we need to figure out the best strategy."
But some researchers observe with concern that the drift toward extended drug regimens is occurring in parallel with another trend: prescribing antidepressants for people who are not really depressed.
Prozac is now being given with some regularity to patients diagnosed as "dysthymic," jargon for perpetually crabby, under the weather, insecure, malcontent.
"Dysthymia has less of a biological feel to it" than does full-blown depression, said Dr.
Doyle of the Georgetown Anxiety Disorders program.
"There's not as much of the sleep disturbances or the appetite problems. These are people who realize they're more unhappy than the situation calls for, and that meditation, exercise, talking to friends just doesn't do the trick."
As it turns out, Dr.
Doyle said, many dysthymics do very well on Prozac and its chemical siblings, finding in the drugs a brightening of mood that therapy sessions alone may have failed to bring.
But whether the syndrome is a true disease is a matter of considerable debate among doctors.
And to some critics, the idea of people who are not really sick taking potent psychiatric drugs for months or years is a sobering prospect indeed.


Corrections
The Executive Life column in the Business section yesterday misspelled the given name of the chairman of I.B.M.
He is Louis V. Gerstner Jr.


Cable Appeal By BellSouth
The BellSouth Corporation is planning to go to court this month to challenge the Federal law that prohibits it from owning cable television systems within its service area.
BellSouth, the regional telephone company that provides local services in nine Southeastern states, has applied for the cable television franchise in Brentwood, Tenn., a suburb of Nashville, and has asked city officials to join in its appeal of the Federal Cable Television Act of 1984.


Investors' Power Test At Borden
When representatives of a dissident shareholder visited Edward A. Brennan, the chief executive of Sears, Roebuck in 1992 to lodge complaints, Mr.
Brennan's instincts were to ask for time so he could do what shareholders were asking.
When representatives of the same shareholder, Lens Inc., visited another chief executive, Anthony S. D'Amato, at Borden Inc.'s Park Avenue headquarters in September, also to complain, Mr.
D'Amato simply told the unwelcome guests to shoo.
If they really wanted to help, he said, they would go away, adding that they were "a distraction," according to two people who were present.
Different Outcomes
Today, Mr.
Brennan still has his job and Mr.
D'Amato is in need of a new one.
On Thursday, Borden's directors removed Mr.
D'Amato, replacing him with Ervin R. Shames, who had been named president and chief operating officer in June.


An Unwise Policy Change on Mammography; Our Own Decision
To the Editor:
I think that the only people to decide whether women under 50 should have mammograms are the women themselves.
If "just" 15 women out of 150 will turn out to have cancer, according to statistics quoted by Dr.
Suzanne Fletcher of the Annals of Internal Medicine (news article, Dec. 5), does that devalue mammograms?
I was "just" one of those women.
MARILYN WATERBURY  Danbury, Conn., Dec. 6, 1993


Accounts
*
Beiersdorf UK, London, to TBWA London, to handle its Nivea skin care products account in Britain, previously at Abbott Mead Vickers BBDO, London.
Billings were estimated at $7 million.
The assignment consolidates those products at TBWA, which already handles them in the United States and Eastern and Western Europe. *
Boston Cable Co-op has narrowed the review on its estimated $3.5 million account to four finalists: the incumbent, Cuneo Sullivan Dolabany; Houston, Effler &amp; Partners; Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson, and Rossin Greenberg Seronick, all of Boston.
A decision is expected later this month.


Market Place; A building revival rekindles interest in construction stocks.
AS an economic recovery appears to take hold in the United States, some analysts suggest that engineering and construction stocks are likely to appreciate in the next year as the swinging of I-beams and the pounding of jackhammers begins in earnest.
But the market has failed to see that a boom within this sector is well under way, analysts say, creating opportunities for investors.


Streamlining Plan by AEG
AEG A. G., a prominent German industrial concern, said last week that it would sell its household goods unit to A. B. Electrolux of Sweden.
AEG also said that it would put its low-voltage electricity business into a joint venture with the General Electric Company and that it planned to sell its industrial lighting and electrical meters businesses.


U.S. Malls Luring Foreign Shoppers
Iris Collicutt would never have thought to travel from her home in Switzerland to do her Christmas shopping at Gurnee Mills, a huge discount complex halfway between Chicago and Milwaukee, if she hadn't seen a Swiss travel company's newspaper ad.
Yet here she was today, along with her sister, Brigitte Muller, and her mother, Annemarie Muller, talking about how it all made great sense.
"It's not just that it's a lot cheaper, but the salespeople are much friendlier and it's all indoors," said Mrs.
Collicut, pausing outside the Camelot Music Outlet, where they had bought compact disks and tapes ranging from Beethoven to reggae.


Review/Television; Shattering the Legends Of West's Pistol Packers
Anyone who believes that Jesse James resembled Tyrone Power or that Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid lived up to their reincarnations by Paul Newman and Robert Redford will be stunned to learn tonight that it wasn't like that at all.


Parking Rules
Alternate-side street cleaning regulations are suspended in New York City today because of the weather.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Review/Music; Pianist Who Does Not Fit The Preconceived Notions
The more I hear Yevgeny Kissin play -- he performed Prokofiev's Third Piano Concerto with the New York Philharmonic on Thursday night -- the less he seems like either a pianist of the Russian school or a pianist of the traditional Romantic virtuoso variety.
Yes, as he showed in his expert execution of this tart, overwritten, brittle and skittish showpiece, he has a sweet tone with the texture of polished wood.
Yes, there are no difficulties known to modern pianistic science that he seems incapable of making elementary.
Yes, he has a sense of broad gesture combined with an ear for minute detail.
But in his playing there is none of the bearish grandeur or imposing personality of the Russian school and little of the egocentric temperament we associate with the virtuoso from Liszt to Horowitz.
Temperament seems to have less to do with his playing than a concentrated seriousness; display is less a goal than understanding.


Illness as niches market: 'Living With Diabetes' returns as a weekly cable news magazine.
MANY diseases have their own telethons.
Diabetes might be the only one with its own television series.
"Living With Diabetes" ran on Lifetime for two years before being canceled late last year as part of a format change at the cable network.
Sponsors of the program, which used a news magazine approach to explore and explain issues related to the disease, included Johnson &amp; Johnson, Kellogg, Kraft General Foods and Upjohn.


Admission of Children Would Alter Nature of Frick Collection
To the Editor:
In "Let the Kids In" (editorial, Dec. 8) you say that unlike the Frick, the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum in Boston "retains most of its original furnishings, including fragile antique furniture, wall hangings and personal objects."


Morocco and Israel Plan Ties
Morocco said it has reached agreements with Israel to expand their economic relations, including airline, mail and telephone links.
Page A7.


U.S. Experiments Irradiated Thousands
To the Editor:
Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary is properly sickened by revelations of Government experiments that exposed hundreds of people to plutonium without their consent (news article, Dec. 8).
Sadly, those subjects of unethical medical research were not the only innocents endangered by the nuclear weapons factories.
The Government has yet to fully acknowledge that thousands of neighbors of various facilities were irradiated during the cold war.


No Headline
We did not sufficiently appreciate the sweetness of simple promises to a tired country, to people who no longer want to hear the tired truth and are ready to believe sweet pretty lies. -- YEGOR T. GAIDAR, the Yeltsin backer whose partisans were disappointed in the Russian elections.  [ A10:2. ]


People
*
Richard Levenson, the chief creative officer and joint managing director of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, is leaving the post after 10 years, the agency said.
A successor is expected to be named shortly. *
Jacques L. Duval, the chairman and chief executive of Marketel/McCann-Erickson, Montreal, was named to the additional new positions of area manager and executive vice president at McCann-Erickson North America.


The New Yorker Splits With Agency
Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein in San Francisco has resigned the account of The New Yorker after three years.
"It was a bittersweet thing to do," Jeff Goodby, the co-chairman of the agency, said on Friday, attributing the decision to difficulties in serving the account of the weekly magazine, which is based in New York, from the West Coast.


3 Executives Named To Hall of Fame
Three deceased executives of agencies have been elected to the Advertising Hall of Fame of the American Advertising Federation.


A Newspaper With Zing Makes Romania Smile
After the Communist regime was overthrown here, people joked that there was little food but a refreshing overload of newspapers.
Four years later, the diet remains abysmal, but, in a country where for decades there were not even underground pamphlets, newspapers still flourish.
The star publication is Academia Catavencu, roughly translated as Dubious Academy.
Other papers reflect the varied political opinions of their owners, but Academia, a witty, scathing weekly tabloid, takes on everyone.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
ABC Rail Products, Chicago, an initial public offering of three million shares.
Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the estimated fourth-quarter earnings of The New York Times Company misstated the expected total net income that would be derived from earnings of 22 cents to 32 cents a share.
The Times Company expects to earn $19 million to $27 million in the fourth quarter, not $22 million to $32 million.


MOROCCO TO WIDEN LINKS WITH ISRAEL
King Hassan of Morocco has decided to broaden his country's economic cooperation with Israel in a major step toward the eventual normalization of relations, senior Clinton Administration officials say.
The King told Secretary of State Warren Christopher in a meeting in Rabat on Friday night about a package of agreements he has reached with Israel that would begin in the "immediate" future, the officials said.
An announcement of at least some of the measures is expected on Monday.


A NUCLEAR WEAPON FOR NORTH KOREA?
Defense Secretary Les Aspin today raised the possibility that North Korea might have succeeded in making a crude nuclear device.
The Central Intelligence Agency has said that North Korea may have produced enough plutonium for one or two bombs.
But the Defense Secretary's comments, on the NBC News program "Meet the Press," went further by suggesting that North Korea may have completed the technical work to fashion the plutonium into a form in which it can be exploded.


Blacks Fighting Blacks On Plan for Dump Site
On the face of it, Noxubee County seems an almost perfect place for the Clinton Administration to investigate whether poor and minority communities have been targeted as dumping grounds for toxic waste.
In the last three years, two of the nation's largest waste-management companies have sought to build immense toxic-waste disposal plants in this eastern Mississippi county, where 70 percent of the residents are black, family incomes are low and unemployment is high.


Jessica R. Frank, F. D. Sanders Jr.
Jessica Rachelle Frank, the daughter of Monika F. McAteer of Orchard Lake, Mich., and Charles A. Frank of West Windsor, N.J., was married yesterday to Franklin Dulaney Sanders Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sanders of Bernardsville, N.J.
Rabbi Bernard Perelmuter and the Rev.
Alfred M. Niese, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Bernards Inn in Bernardsville.
Mrs.
Sanders is the director of publicity for Bantam Doubleday Dell Books for Young Readers in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.


Aqueduct Off After 3 Races
Because of changing track conditions, racing was canceled at Aqueduct yesterday after the third race.
Aqueduct officials said that the main track had gone from good to muddy and that the surface was deemed too dangerous for further racing.
As a result, the entire Pick Six pool was paid to bettors who chose the winner of yesterday's third race, My Only Hope.
The $100,000 Tempted Stakes for 2-year-old fillies was rescheduled for Saturday.
Simulcast wagering on the Bay Meadows Derby was also canceled.


Rise Is Found in Hate Crimes Committed by Blacks
A group formed 13 years ago to monitor hate crimes by the Ku Klux Klan and other racist and hate groups says an increasing number of race-related crimes are being committed by blacks rather than against them.
In the aftermath of last week's rampage on the Long Island Rail Road in which a Jamaican immigrant is charged with shooting 23 commuters, killing six of them, the Klanwatch project of the Southern Poverty Law Center says that racially motivated crimes by blacks have soared in the last few years.


Canada's Morals Police: Serious Books at Risk?
Canadians have been reading Marguerite Duras's stories of love, obsession and heartbreak for years.
But when an American publisher, Blue Moon Books of Manhattan, tried to ship 30 copies of her novella, "The Man Sitting in the Corridor" to Trent University this fall, the books were seized at the border.
According to a form filled out by a customs official named Corinne M. Honey, several scenes in the book, in which a woman is beaten and eventually dies after passionate sex, put it in a vast category of material that is barred from entering the country because it is considered obscene or exploitive.
Ms.
Honey, making a judgment on the spot, checked off the box on a form next to "sex with violence," and the customs agency shipped the books back to the United States.


Celia I. Farber, Robert Bannister
Celia Ingrid Farber, a daughter of Barry Farber, the radio talk-show host, and Ulla Farber of Askersund, Sweden, was married yesterday to Robert Stanley Bannister, a son of Robert and Joan Bannister of Swarthmore, Pa.
Rabbi Helene Ferris officiated at Mr.
Farber's apartment in New York.
Mrs.
Farber-Bannister, 28, graduated from New York University.
She is a freelance magazine writer in New York.
Her father is the host of "The Barry Farber Show" on WMCA-AM in New York and of the nationally syndicated show of the same name.
Her mother is a nurse at Askersund Hospital.


World Economies


Russian Nationalist Wants To Rebuild Czars' Empire
The seal of Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky's Liberal Democratic Party displays an eagle hovering over the old Russian empire -- including Finland and Alaska.
Mr.
Zhirinovsky, a 47-year-old lawyer whose party is likely to be a major force in the new Parliament elected Sunday, calls himself "a moderate in all things," except for Russian statehood.


Dance in Review
Margarita Guergue  'Constanza' The Kitchen
When the lights came up on Margarita Guergue's "Constanza" on Friday night, there was nothing to see but empty space.
The lights dimmed, and brightened again.
And again there was nothing but emptiness -- an emptiness which, thanks to Cora, the lighting designer, recalled the grayness of a foggy dawn.


Corrections
A picture caption on Friday about President Boris N. Yeltsin's visit to a paratroop unit in the Russian city of Tula misstated the date.
The visit was Nov. 17, not last Thursday.


After Train Killings, Worry About Backlash
When Doris Perkins heard the news that a gunman had shot passengers on a Long Island Rail Road commuter train Tuesday evening, her first reaction was one of personal concern: "Please don't let him be black."
"I figured if he was black, there was going to be hell to pay," said Mrs.
Perkins, a black nurse from Jamaica, Queens.
"I told my two teen-age sons to stay in the house and off the streets until this thing blows over."


Rent Control
The first relaxation of state rent-stabilization laws in 20 years went into effect on Oct. 1, but its impact will be slight in New York City.
Fewer than two percent of rent-regulated apartments are affected by the "luxury decontrol" provisions that allow owners of apartments renting for more than $2,000 a month to raise rents to market level when they are vacated.
Most tenants in rent-controlled and rent-stabilized apartments make less than $35,000 a year and pay less than $500 monthly rent, according to the city's most recent Housing and Vacancy report.
Also, protections on apartments renting for $2,000 or more and leased by tenants who earn more than $250,000 a year will expire with the leases.
Nevertheless, tenant groups say the changes set the stage for further attacks on the rent laws.


Federal Jury Indicts Woman In a CD-ROM Piracy Case
The Federal Government has indicted a San Jose, Calif., businesswoman in what it says is the first case of piracy involving software stored on CD-ROM's.
The Federal grand jury indictment, which was announced on Friday, charges Clare Waioi Sham, 29, with software piracy under felony trademark and import laws.


Expectations High, but Moe Already Lives Up to Them
He is considered the next great American skier, and today, with the sun finally shining brightly over the French Alps, Tommy Moe took another small step toward meeting those large expectations.
Moe's third-place finish in the World Cup season's first Super G was the best performance in history for an American man in that event.


Bridge
It is rare for a player to gain an advantage because his opponent is a world-class player.
And it is also rare for a player to make a slightly irregular bid for one reason, and to find it has gained heavily for a quite different reason.
On the diagramed deal both these rarities benefited Zia Mahmood, a colorful Pakistani star who lives in Manhattan when not following the tournament trail around the world.
It was played at the Regency Whist Club, 15 East 67th Street, in what may be the world's highest-stake game.


Oilers Put a Foot Into Their Run
Oilers 19, Browns 17
Just when Houston's seven-game winning streak seemed to be slipping away against the visiting Cleveland Browns yesterday, the Oilers' defense and kicker Al Del Greco made it eight in a row.
Del Greco's fourth field goal of the game, a 25-yarder with 10 minutes 39 seconds to play, rallied the Oilers to a 19-17 victory.
The Oilers' defense helped get them there with three takeaways, two of which led to points for Houston.


Dividend Meetings


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; From radio to pay-per-view, Howard Stern climbs his mountain. Is late-night TV at the summit?
HOWARD STERN has spent most of his career confronting value judgments made about him.
Now he's eager to supply a stack of green-backed evidence to anyone interested in judging his current value.
"I find myself in a position to say to the powers that be that not only is my radio show a force to be reckoned with," Mr.
Stern said, "but it also has serious economic clout."


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about Prof.
Willem C. Vis of Pace University's School of Law misstated the location of the Institute of International Commercial Law.
It is on the law school's campus in White Plains, not in London.
The obituary also omitted a survivor.
He is Professor Vis's son, David, of Manhattan.


Right Routed as Chile Elects Former Leader's Son
Confirming Chile's desire to leave behind the days of military governments and far-rightist politics, voters have given Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle and his center-left coalition the most convincing presidential election victory here in more than 60 years.
With 99 percent of the vote counted in Saturday's election, Mr.
Frei had received 58 percent compared with 24 percent for Arturo Alessandri, the rightist candidate and the closest challenger.


Russia Parties Subdued By Early Vote Returns
There should have been a party on Sunday night at Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky's headquarters on the top floor of a run-down pre-revolutionary building set deep in old Moscow.
The maverick nationalist was surging ahead in the early election returns, pressing hard on the heels of Russia's Choice, the heavily favored party of the Government's economic reform team.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.04 percent, and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.23 percent.


2 Familiar Brands Select New Agencies
Two familiar brand names have ended long relationships with their agencies.
Van Cleef &amp; Arpels in New York has selected Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York to handle its account, which had been at Adler Boschetto Peebles &amp; Partners in New York for more than 40 years.
The jewelry retailer is expected to increase billings to an estimated $2 million to $4 million.


METRO DIGEST
BUSY HOLIDAY CAPS STRONG HOTEL YEAR City sidewalks are crammed.
Stores and Broadway shows are selling out.
And though the holiday season is traditionally the busiest time of year for Manhattan hotels, a surge in pre-Christmas travelers is capping what travel watchers say is the strongest year in more than a decade for hotels in New York and across the nation.
A1.


An Unwise Policy Change on Mammography
To the Editor:
The National Cancer Institute's decision to drop its recommendation that women under 50 have regular mammograms is misguided public health policy (news article, Dec. 5).


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10 REFORMERS STUNG IN RUSSIA VOTE
The first returns in Russia's election showed President Boris Yeltsin's constitution winning approval; but nationalists, followed closely by Communists, were mounting a strong challenge to reformers.
A1


Editorial Notebook; High Noon at Uruguay Gulch
Predictably, France has been cast as the foot-dragging heavy as the complex trade negotiations known as the Uruguay Round stumble to a finale.
But I was surprised to learn that one of France's main gripes is not about cheese or soybeans.
It is about movies.
And surprisingly, despite Washington's incantations about free expression and open markets, I found myself rooting for France.


A. A. Owes Existence to Sharing Fellowship
To the Editor:
Bob P.'s letter (Dec. 3) describing Carl Jung's insight concerning the basis of Alcoholics Anonymous is to me oddly incomplete, if not inaccurate.
I too am a member of the fellowship approaching my ninth year of sobriety.
We all revel and cherish the story of our beginning.


INSIDE
6th Death in L.I. Rampage
A 27-year-old corporate interior designer became the sixth person to die as a result of tuesday's shootings on the Long Island Railr Road.
Page B1.
AIDS Infection Rate Rising
Close to two million people have been infected with the virus that causes AIDS in the past year, the World Health Organization said.
Page B8.


With Millions Taking Prozac, A Legal Drug Culture Arises
Six friends, all highly successful professionals in their mid-30's, met recently for dinner at a restaurant in Washington.
The conversation moved quickly from politics to Prozac: it turned out that four people at the table were on the antidepressant.
"We all agreed we weren't seriously depressed anymore," said one, a 34-year-old writer.
Prozac users have their own computer bulletin board on which they compare experiences.
One woman complained recently of a side effect: "No sex drive whatsoever." Another woman responded: "Keep trying Prozac -- when it works, it's WONDERFUL!"


Paramount Board Faces Difficult Task in Auction
When the board of Paramount Communications Inc. meets today to write the rules that will govern an auction of the company to the highest bidder, the directors will very likely be aware that no matter what guidelines are laid down, suitors do not always play by them.
Nor, for that matter, do corporate boards.
"In knife fights, there are no rules," one person involved in the messy takeover battle for Paramount said.


Samuel M. Stayman, 84, Inventor Of Bidding Conventions in Bridge
Samuel M. Stayman, whose name is known to millions of bridge players throughout the world because of the Stayman Convention, a form of inquiry in bidding, died on Saturday at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 84.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Josephine.


Review/Dance; The Ailey's 'Jukebox' Is Packed With Ideas In Memory of Alvin
Desmond Richardson is everybody's dream of a dancer, perfect in form and technique with an individual presence that makes him an immediate standout in the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.
Garth Fagan, a Rochester-based choreographer whose own company, Garth Fagan Dance, has acquired a fervent following in New York, has used Mr.
Richardson's super-dimensional dancing to the fullest in "Jukebox for Alvin." The new work, presented on Friday night at City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan), is the second premiere in the Ailey company's current season.


After Two Killings in Florida, Hunters Are Feeling Hunted
Although the piney woods surrounding Alvin Warren's house are teeming with deer these days, he and many other hunters in this remote region near the Georgia border are staying away.
Two hunters were found shot to death in the area last month, and the police believe that the same person is responsible for both killings.
"I'm not as eager to go as I was," said Mr.
Warren, a retired civil servant who lives in the forest.
"In the past I've gotten in my Bronco, taken my tree stand and my gun and hunted till I felt I was through. Now I take another person with me. We go together in the woods and we sit in sight of one another."


Books of The Times; Window Into the Mind of a 10-Year-Old Irish Boy
Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha  By Roddy Doyle  282 pages. Viking Penguin. $20.95.
"We were coming down our road.  Kevin stopped at a gate and bashed it with his stick. It was Missis Quigley's gate; she was always looking out the window but she never did anything." So begins "Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha," the fourth novel by the Irish writer Roddy Doyle, whose previous books include "The Commitments," "The Snapper" and "The Van," together known as Mr.
Doyle's Barrytown Trilogy.


Low Blows Worry Hampton
Despite rushing for 173 yards for the best game in his pro career, Rodney Hampton had one concern after today's 20-6 Giant victory over the Colts.
Hampton, who missed three games earlier this season because of arthroscopic surgery on his left knee, said of Colts defenders: "I saw how they were trying to go for my knees. I don't know if they were doing it on purpose. If they would have connected on those hits it could have hurt my career."


At Rockefeller Plaza, a Thunderous Holiday Concert


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Hobday Lights It Up  Simon Hobday, chain-smoking to quiet his quivering nerves, took advantage of mistakes by his opponents for a two-shot victory yesterday in the Senior Tour Championship in Dorado Beach, P.R.
While Dave Stockton and Larry Gilbert got themselves in trouble, Hobday won with a bogey-free closing round of five-under-par 67 and scored the second victory of the season with a 199 total, 17-under par on the Dorado Beach Resort course. (AP) TENNIS  Kool Cash for Korda  Petr Korda hit the jackpot yesterday with his first victory in any tournament this year.
One day after upsetting top-ranked Pete Sampras in five sets, Korda outlasted No. 2 Michael Stich, 2-6, 6-4, 7-6 (7-5), 2-6, 11-9, to win the Grand Slam Cup in Munich, Germany, and take home $1,625,000. (AP) N.B.A.
It's Not Just O'Neal  Scott Skiles scored 12 points in the decisive third quarter and the Orlando Magic opened a five-game road trip in the West last night with a 103-88 victory over the misfiring Portland Trail Blazers.
With Shaquille O'Neal on the bench with four fouls, Orlando outscored the Blazers by 20-5 late in the third period and early in the fourth. (AP) ALPINE SKIING  Wiberg Wins First  Pernilla Wiberg of Sweden recorded her first World Cup slalom victory of the season yesterday with a powerful second run in Veysonnaz, Switzerland.
Wiberg is reaching her stride less than two months before the Olympics, where she will be the defending giant slalom champion.
She came out of ninth place and held off first-run leader Morena Gallizio of Italy. (AP) FIGURE SKATING  Candeloro Takes a Spin  Philippe Candeloro came from behind with an original spin in the men's competition yesterday, giving France its second straight sweep of both singles titles in the NHK Trophy International in Chiba, Japan.
Skating to the theme music from "The Godfather," Candeloro got marks of 5.8 from eight out of nine judges for 2.5 factored placement points.
A 6.0 is a perfect score. (AP) SOCCER  Sao Paulo Beats Milan  Muller scored with four minutes remaining as Sao Paulo of Brazil beat AC Milan of Italy, 3-2, yesterday in Tokyo in the Intercontinental Cup.
It was Sao Paulo's second straight world club championship. (AP) HORSE RACING  Fraise Squishes Home  With pre-race favorite Bien Bien scratched because of a soft turf course, Fraise romped to a six-length victory yesterday in the $500,000 Hollywood Turf Cup in Inglewood, Calif.
Fraise covered 1 1/2 miles in 2:321/5 on the course that was soaked by rain on Saturday. (AP)


Moving Out of Shelters To a Permanent Home
There were times when the odds of keeping their young family together seemed decidedly against Jerome Crawford and Melonie Owens.
"I had days when I thought, 'Maybe we just weren't meant to be,' " Ms.
Owens said one morning recently as Mr.
Crawford, in a crisp white shirt and suspenders, readied himself for work.


Gift-Wrap Index Predicts Happy Holiday for Retailers
Although holiday sales have proved somewhat disappointing, what with cold weather and consumers' resolute resistance to anything but bargain-basement prices, disconsolate retailers can take heart.
The Appert Gift Wrap Indicator predicts that sales of nondurable goods will rise 4.9 percent in the fourth quarter, not as much as last year's jump, but stronger than recent sales would suggest.


Brooklyn Youth Kills Father and Himself
After wounding his father on Saturday afternoon with a shotgun, a Brooklyn teen-ager used the older man's revolver to finish him off, then killed himself, the police said.
At 5:26 P.M., in front of the apartment building at 463 Shepherd Avenue in East New York, where the family lived, Henry A. Frazier, 17, fired a shotgun blast at his father, Leroy Frazier, 59, a retired deputy warden with the New York City Department of Correction, the police said.
The teen-ager reportedly then took his father's licensed .38-caliber revolver and shot him again.


CHRONICLE
The 400 or so Luxembourgers in New York -- who don't usually get much attention as a group -- have all been invited to a Christmas party tomorrow in the grand duchy's new consulate.
That alone is cause enough to celebrate, but the building, a five-story town house at 17 Beekman Place, has a connection to Luxembourg that precedes its transformation from a private residence.
It was the home of Irving Berlin from 1948 until his death in 1989.
He wrote the score for the 1950 musical "Call Me Madam," based on the adventures of Perle Mesta, the Washington hostess chosen by President Harry S. Truman to be United States Ambassador to Luxembourg.


Israelis Become Nervous About Pact
Back in September, when the world was swept away by visions of peace and marveling over handshakes on the White House lawn, Moshe Melayev counted himself in the front ranks of believers in Israel's agreement with Yasir Arafat on Palestinian self-rule.
No longer.


CHRONICLE
The American Philosophical Society has announced the creation of the JACQUES BARZUN Prize in Cultural History, named for Columbia University's professor emeritus.
Th prize, $2,000 in cash, is for books about cultural history.
The first winner is to be announced at the society's general meeting next November.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 9 about Winnie Mandela's election as president of the Women's League of the African National Congress misstated her previous connection with the league.
She had headed a regional branch but was not the league's national president.


Congress Cracks Down As Fish Stocks Decline
It has been 17 years since Congress passed the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act, regulations intended to reverse the steep decline in the catches of the nation's fishing industry.
But the slide continues.
Although the law imposed strict catch limits and shortened fishing seasons and all but banished foreign trawlers from American waters, fish stocks off every coast are under more pressure than ever from bigger and more efficient boats and nets.


Cynthia D. Mann, Matthew S. Haiken
Cynthia D. Mann and Matthew S. Haiken, lawyers in New York, were married there yesterday.
Rabbi Harvey Tattelbaum performed the ceremony at the Plaza.
Mrs.
Haiken, 28, is the daughter of Robert and Karen Mann of New York.
She and her husband graduated from Yale University and Harvard Law School.
She is an associcate at Sidley &amp; Austin.


Campbell Wants to Play, Not Stay
Pat Riley went to Tony Campbell at a morning practice the day the Knicks played the Lakers in Los Angeles last week.
He told Campbell that he would be the team's new starting forward, taking the place of the injured Charles Smith.
If Riley thought the news would make his unhappiest player a little more cheerful, he was mistaken.
Campbell is still cranky about his playing time, and he still wants out.


Rebounding to Fill Abrams's Post
Fourteen years ago, Assemblyman G. Oliver Koppell suffered a bitter loss that almost ended his political career.
But he learned a lesson in Realpolitik that seems remarkably, almost eerily, applicable to what is about to become the biggest campaign of his life.
This week, the State Legislature is to name Mr.
Koppell to complete the term of State Attorney General Robert Abrams, who is resigning on Jan. 1 to work in a Manhattan law firm.


(Mile) High Noon: Elway Triumphs in Duel With Montana
The first time Kansas City met Denver this season, back in Week 3 in Arrowhead Stadium, the first time Joe Montana in a Chiefs uniform dueled with John Elway, the Chiefs won by 15-7 in a ho-hum game of five Kansas City field goals.
The second time around was much sweeter.


OLYMPICS: Vegard Ulvang's Lonely Quest; Norway's Olympic Hero Seeks Gold, and Something Far More Precious
Vegard Ulvang has won three Olympic gold medals.
He has ridden on horseback into the mountains of Mongolia, traversed Greenland with only his beloved cross-country skis to carry him, helped cut the ribbon at a hospital in Sarajevo and stood atop the highest peaks on three continents.
But for all his energy and self-assurance, this rugged Norwegian in the prime of his peripatetic life could not do what mattered most to him.
He could not find his older brother.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
World trade talks ran into a roadblock after more than a week of steady if uneven progress, as differences between the U.S. and France over the film and entertainment business proved insurmountable for the moment.
The failure of two meetings between the top American and European trade officials left the fate of GATT negotiations hanging in the balance with three days to a deadline.  [ Page A1. ]


U.S. Survey Estimates Infections With H.I.V. Outside Risk Groups
The first national survey of H.I.V. infection based on blood tests has generally confirmed previous Government estimates of the number of people infected with the virus that causes AIDS, researchers said today at a scientific meeting here.
The randomized survey, conducted among 7,792 people in households, indicated that excluding many people from high-risk groups, 550,000 people in the United States were infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, said the scientists from the National Center for Health Statistics who conducted the survey.


Israel Sees New Delays to Palestinian Self-Rule
As a closely watched target date came and went with no change in the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin suggested today that there could be still further delays in withdrawing Israel's soldiers and introducing Palestinian self-rule.
"No dates are sacred," he said.


Reports of the Jacket's Demise Were Exaggerated
Calvin Klein insists his jackets should be constructed as simply as sweaters.
Richard Tyler makes sure his are as clean on the inside as they are on the outside.
Geoffrey Beene cuts some so short they just curve over the bosom and stop, while Donna Karan, Isaac Mizrahi and many others extend them long enough to cover the hips.
These fingertip-length styles make it impossible to know what is worn underneath -- shorts, a miniskirt or nothing.
There has been talk for many seasons that the jacket has been superannuated.
The deconstructionists have poked holes in it or turned it inside out so the construction details show.
Still, they have not been able to come up with an appropriate substitute.
So the jacket will have a significant place in the spring clothes that will start appearing in stores next month.


Joseph Fowler, 99, Builder of Warships And Disney's Parks
Rear Adm.
Joseph W. Fowler, a master builder of warships and Disney theme parks, died on Dec. 3 at his home in Orlando, Fla.
He was 99 and also had a home in Brooksville, Me.
Admiral Fowler was the oldest living graduate of the United States Naval Academy and the oldest living retiree of the Walt Disney Company.


Napco Security Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Business Digest
International
The European Community rejected a U.S. offer aimed at securing better treatment for American movies in Europe, virtually insuring that the final content of a world trade accord will remain in doubt until shortly before the deadline.  [ Page A1. ]  Germany is playing a subtle yet powerful role as an intermediary in crucial disputes involving France and the United States.  [ D7. ]
Japan's Socialist Party dropped its resistance to opening the country's rice market to imports, pushing global trade talks closer to a successful conclusion and preserving the fragile coalition Government of Prime Minister Hosokawa.  [ A6. ]
Britain's coal-mining industry has shrunk by half in only the last year, along with a falling demand for coal.
These most recent mine closings and layoffs have had a profound effect on thousands of people, for whom the mines and mining have been a way of life for generations.  [ A4. ]  Companies
Shawmut National will pay at least $960,000 to black and Hispanic customers who were denied loans, and it promised to end discriminatory lending practices in a settlement of a Justice Department case.
The settlement could clear the way for Shawmut to continue its buying binge in New England.  [ D1. ]
Loral will buy I.B.M.'s Federal Systems military software unit for $1.58 billion, effectively taking I.B.M. out of the weapons business.
Loral is growing by specializing in modernizing older equipment while many military contractors are shrinking.  [ D1. ]
The board of Paramount Communications decided not to set up an independent panel to evaluate rival bids from QVC Network and Viacom, an executive close to the Paramount board said.  [ D1. ]
Banks are looking for mutual fund companies to buy in the wake of Mellon's purchase of Dreyfus, but few are for sale and prices are high for those that are available.  [ D1. ]
Southwest Airlines will buy Morris Air, a carrier roughly an eighth its size, in a $129 million stock swap.
Analysts see a good fit because Morris Air, based in Salt Lake City, uses Southwest's strategy of no-frills service and low fares.  [ D2. ]
V.
F. pushed further into the licensed sports apparel business by agreeing to buy Nutmeg for $325.5 million in cash.  [ D5. ]
General Motors will invest $25 million to assemble 10,000 Opel Astra cars at the plant of a Polish state-owned auto maker.  [ D5. ]
Computer and telecommunications companies plan to work on standardizing how computers can talk to each other.  [ D5. ]
National Medical will pay $89.9 million to 13 insurers to resolve the last disputes over billing at its hospitals.  [ D5. ]
Phoenix Home Life sold $500 million of commercial mortgage loans, partly because of new capital rules going into effect.  [ D5. ]  The Economy
The Supreme Court ruled that Federal rather than state law governs an insurance company's handling of certain pension fund assets.
The decision could change the way the insurance industry keeps track of billions of dollars in pension funds.  [ D2. ]  Markets
Stocks were mixed with blue-chip issues posting modest gains and the broader market slipping in subdued trading.
The Dow industrials set another high, rising 23.76 points, to 3,764.43.  [ D8. ]
Treasury prices fell and yields rose ahead of important fourth-quarter economic data and a Treasury auction.  [ D16. ]
Oil prices fell to a five-year low and gasoline to a seven-year low on signs of weak demand.  [ D18. ]  The dollar rose.  [ D18. ]
Today's Columns
Volvo shareholders are enduring a hair-raising ride with the company facing a broad revamping.
Market Place.  [ D1. ]
A survey shows most parents think advertising is making their children "too materialistic." Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D20. ]


Mental Health Management Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


METROPOLITAN COLLEGE REPORT
Long Island University As if the Blackbirds haven't suffered enough, another player was lost for the season over the weekend.
Senior forward David Adebanjo tore a posterior cruciate knee ligament Friday in the 76-60 loss at 24-ranked George Washington.
His 25.3-point average will be sorely missed, especially since he is the fourth player to have his season ended prematurely.
Senior forward Joe Griffin went out in November with a torn anterior cruciate ligament and torn cartilage in his left knee, freshman guard Jason Feeley went out with torn ligaments in his ankle and junior guard Vaughn Richmond wasn't able to return after being injured in a car accident a year ago.


The Remaining GATT Sticking Points
As 116 nations scramble to complete by tomorrow a broad agreement to lower tariffs and broaden free trade rules of the 45-year-old General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, here are the remaining disputes:
MOVIES, TELEVISION, MUSIC: The European Community allows countries to tax blank videocassettes and tapes, and uses the $250 million raised annually to help local film companies, recording studios and artists.
The United States wants some proceeds for American companies and artists, arguing that Europeans sometimes copy American work and escape royalty payments.
A compromise backed by the United States would give part of the money to American companies and force them to spend on movies and television programs in Europe.
The community has refected this.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Traded Randy Milligan, first baseman, to the Montreal Expos for a player to be named later.
Named Mike Young manager, Fred Gladding pitching coach and Dan Williams coach of Columbus of the South Atlantic League.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a dispute over free speech at Sarah Lawrence College misstated the name of a lesbian and gay community services group in White Plains and misspelled the given names of two students.
The group is the Loft, not the Lost.
The students are Johnathan Boesky and Marlin Lask.


Review/Television; Crime and Punishment: A Look at Two Aspects
Considering that "Behind the Badge" begins and ends with an account of police corruption in New York City, tonight's "Frontline" offering turns out to be surprisingly sympathetic to police officers.
Jack Newfield, reporting and narrating, saves most of his fire for higher-ups (like Raymond W. Kelly, the Police Commissioner until Jan. 1), politicians (notably Mayor David N. Dinkins) and local tabloid newspapers and television news programs.
One of the hour's victimized heroes is Michael O'Keefe, an experienced officer who killed a young man in Washington Heights on a hot summer night in 1992.
Neighborhood riots ensued.


I.B.M. to Sell Its Military Unit to Loral
The Loral Corporation, a weapons contractor that has prospered even as the Government has cut military spending, said yesterday that it would pay $1.58 billion for I.B.M.'s Federal Systems Company, whose products include software for radar-warning systems, antisubmarine warfare, satellites and air-traffic control.
The deal, to close on Jan. 1, effectively takes the International Business Machines Corporation out of the weapons business, although it will continue to sell other computer software and hardware to Government agencies.


Hero Label Is No Comfort To Helper of Train Victims
A week has passed since Kathleen Giblin, a New York City probation officer, came upon the devastation in Car No. 3 of the 5:33 to Hicksville, but it seems to her as if time has stood still.
She was riding the train a car or two behind the one where 23 people were shot, and when the train came to a halt at the Merillon Avenue station in Garden City, L.I., Mrs.
Giblin, who trained as an emergency medical technician, ran up to a police officer and asked if there was anything she could do.


Software Etc. Stores Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Cannock Journal; Coal Has a Great Fall, Dragging Miners With It
The marchers pushed up the long hill from the Littleton coal mine, moving in an uneven line past the rows of squat two-story apartment blocks and storefronts dressed with Christmas tinsel.
Along the way, holiday shoppers stopped and stood motionless, almost as if they had come to attention; in the windows of houses overlooking the road, sad faces watched from behind lace curtains.


Clinton Deals With His Budget. New York Deals With Gridlock.


Gun Control Today Has Proved a False Prophet; A Male Obsession
To the Editor:
Whenever another man decides to go on a rampage and empties his rapid-firing gun into a group of uninvolved civilians, his maleness is not considered a motive.
It is an obvious fact that every single gun-wielding mass murderer in history was a man.
Of course one could argue that men are susceptible to a certain kind of madness, marked by paranoia and violent acts.
But such an assessment would be missing the point.
Violent rage is an essential feature of the weak male ego.
Guns have become a fabulously effective method to combat lingering spinelessness and a pathetic lack of conscience.
As common as this constellation is, probably a feature of most "well-adjusted" men, as little is done to address it.


Two Overtimes Enough for Nets
It was an anniversary of sorts for Chuck Daly, and the Nets gave their coach a present tonight: a 110-105 double overtime victory over the Miami Heat that lasted 2 hours 52 minutes at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"This was the anniversary of the highest scoring game in the N.B.A.," said Daly, referring to the Pistons' 186-184 triple overtime victory over the Nuggets 10 years ago.
"I only needed two overtimes to win this one."


Sadness and Hope for Family of Victims of Train Shooting
For the family of Dennis and Kevin McCarthy, the father and son who were among the 23 people shot last Tuesday on the Long Island Rail Road, today was a bittersweet mixture of sadness and hope.
Around the time that several hundred people were gathering for the funeral for Dennis McCarthy, a 52-year-old office manager with Prudential Securities, his 26-year-old son was speaking his first words since being admitted to a hospital intensive-care unit almost a week ago in a coma, the victim of a gunshot wound to his head.
The neurosurgeon had predicted that he had, at best, a 20 percent chance of surviving.


THE RUSSIAN VOTE: Man in the News -- Vladimir Volfovich Zhirinovsky; Muscovite With Bravado
If his party had not won almost a quarter of the vote in parliamentary elections on Sunday, Vladimir Volfovich Zhirinovsky could well be dismissed as a crude parody of a primitive right-winger, fired by self-pity and primitive nationalism, quick to blame foreigners, intellectuals or unappreciative betters for all his failures, certain of his cause.
His posters show the 47-year-old lawyer wearing a badly knotted tie and a puffy scowl over slogans like, "I'll raise Russia from her knees," or "I'll not allow anyone to offend Russians."


Steelers Blitz Dolphins' Comeback
The Miami Dolphins performed valiantly in a fourth-quarter comeback tonight, but in the end their hold on first place in the American Conference East became a little looser.
The suddenly sweaty-palmed Dolphins lost their second straight home game, this one to the Pittsburgh Steelers, 21-20, at Joe Robbie Stadium.
The loss dropped Miami (9-4) into a first-place tie in the A.F.C.
East with Buffalo, Sunday's opponent in Miami.


NASA's Russian Roulette
There's a kind of self-deception familiar to gamblers everywhere.
You make a rule for yourself ("I'm going to leave the roulette table when I'm down $200") and when the crucial moment comes, you find a reason to break it ("I just remembered that red is my lucky color").
The late physicist Richard Feynman caught the space agency at precisely this game in 1986, when he served on the Presidential commission investigating the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger.
He found that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration was setting safety standards and then bending them at the last minute as needed.


Executive Changes
GREAT ATLANTIC AND PACIFIC TEA CO., Montvale, N.J., named Christian W. E. Haub president and chief operating officer.


Topics of The Times; Block That Acronym
Nimby, the shopworn acronym for "not in my backyard," has been around so long that it has worked its way into the dictionaries.
It refers to the common tendency of neighborhood groups, and whole communities, to fight public projects that might spoil their landscape, create a nuisance or an actual hazard, or depress property values.
Neighborhoods that would be harmed irreparably, as when a highway cuts through the middle, have every right to protest.
Similarly, they have a right to join the political argument over the siting of necessary but not necessarily pleasant facilities such as incinerators or garbage dumps.
Unfortunately, the protective impulse sometimes gets turned into a reflexive opposition to every kind of public facility, even youth rehabilitation centers and small homeless shelters.


Hope for Volvo in Rubble of Deal
Volvo may have built its reputation on solid reliability and a concern for safety, but its shareholders are enduring an uncharacteristically hair-raising ride.
The messy collapse earlier this month of the Swedish company's plan to merge car- and truck-building operations with those of Renault, which is owned by the French Government, has left Volvo without a chairman or a functioning board, and without a strategy or enough long-term financing for the next few crucial years.


Bench Pays a Penalty
Accused of inflating the value of his own autograph while hawking sports collectibles on the Home Shopping Network in August, JOHNNY BENCH has agreed to pay $5,000 to settle the case, the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs announced yesterday.
In addition to the payment, the equivalent of the maximum fine, Bench, who admitted no wrongdoing, also promised to be more careful about making price claims in any future venture.
Specifically, he promised that when offering consumers a "great deal," he would limit price comparisons either to documented retail prices at stores, shows or catalogues or to the average price listed in several recognized price guides.


Insurgent Italian Party Stands Behind Leader
Buffeted by election setbacks and touched by Italy's vast corruption scandal, the insurgent Northern League has publicly closed ranks behind its leader and his call for Italy to be divided into three federal states.
Before a two-day league congress in Milan, which ended on Sunday, Italian analysts spoke of rifts in the organization and possible challenges to to the leadership of Umberto Bossi after two years of gains that have propelled the league from fringe movement to political heavyweight.


Zeier Will Stay Put
Georgia quarterback ERIC ZEIER said yesterday he will not turn pro next year and will remain with the Bulldogs for another season.
"The only way I would have considered going pro would be if I were convinced I would be a first- or second-round draft choice," Zeier said at a news conference in Marietta, Ga.
"The consensus of opinion was that I would have gone in the third or fourth round." As a junior this year, Zeier set Southeastern Conference season records for passing yards (3,525) and total offense (3,482). (AP)


Game, Set, Match to Dinkins on Tennis Center
Despite objections from Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani, Mayor David N. Dinkins has completed final negotiations on the expansion of the National Tennis Center in Queens and will sign a long-term lease today, city officials and tennis association representatives said yesterday.
The signing of a contract with the United States Tennis Association for the expansion of the center in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park will complete more than two years of negotiations and government approvals.
It also caps a political dispute between Mr.
Dinkins and Mr.
Giuliani, who had criticized parts of the agreement and had urged the Mayor last month not to complete the contract talks before leaving office.
The Mayor-elect said Mr.
Dinkins should not bind him with agreements that would tie his hands, as well as those of his successors.


Campbell Resigns as Tory Leader in Canada
After one of the most spectacular rises and falls in Canadian political history, former Prime Minister Kim Campbell stepped down as leader of the Conservative Party today.
She says she still hopes to be involved in politics for a long time, and may take a position as a guest lecturer in government at a Canadian university, write a book and comment on public affairs for news organizations.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Honors
*
Reginald K. Brack Jr., chairman and chief executive at Time Inc., New York, was named by the Magazine Publishers of America as the recipient of the 1993 Henry Johnson Fisher Award.
He will be honored at a dinner in New York on Jan. 26.


Study Raises Concern Over Plan to Protect Northern Spotted Owl
FOR years ecologists have understood that small isolated populations of plants and animals are at risk of extinction.
Now a new analysis of data on European bird colonies suggests such a fate may await many of the smaller clusters of endangered northern spotted owls in the Pacific Northwest.
A plan being developed to protect the owls provides for islands of preserved forest.


Brown Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Breast Cancer Screening Under 50: Experts Disagree if Benefit Exists
DR.
ELLEN B. MENDELSON, a 52-year-old radiologist, had her first mammogram when she was 35.
She had another one when she was 38.
Since age 40, she has had routine screening mammograms every year, and she passionately urges women in their 40's to do the same.
Dr.
Mendelson, who directs the Breast Diagnostic Imaging Center of the Western Pennsylvania Hospital in Pittsburgh, said she knows four radiologists who had breast cancer that was found after routine mammograms when they were in their late 30's or 40's.
Mammography saved them, she said.
"It seems really immoral to me to remove this potentially lifesaving benefit from women who are right at the height of their careers and family lives," she said.


National Medical Resolves Last of Insurance Disputes
Resolving the last of $1.29 billion in legal disputes with health insurers over billing at its psychiatric hospitals, National Medical Enterprises said yesterday that it had agreed in principle to pay $89.9 million to settle fraud and abuse claims filed by 13 large insurance companies.
Investors were pleased, sending National Medical's stock to a 12-month high.
The shares closed at $13.625, up 50 cents, in active trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; People
*
Timothy Joyce was named to the new position of vice chairman at Starch Advertising and Media Research, Mamaroneck, N.Y.
He was previously an executive consultant to Nielsen Household Services, New York.


As Yankees Watch, East Rivals Load Up
The Baltimore Orioles have made Rafael Palmeiro their slugging first baseman and added Sid Fernandez to their starting pitching rotation.
The Boston Red Sox have put Otis Nixon in center field.
The Cleveland Indians have acquired a pair of veterans, Dennis Martinez for their rotation and Eddie Murray to drive in runs as their designated hitter.
The Toronto Blue Jays, on the other hand, have let left fielder Rickey Henderson and shortstop Tony Fernandez walk away and dropped pitcher Jack Morris.
Yet the architect of the Blue Jays' two successive World Series championships is undaunted.


Clinton Says He's Wary Of Cutting Entitlements
President Clinton came to this predominantly Republican suburb today to warn that if there were more cuts in Federal benefit programs the middle class would be squeezed.
He said the best way to cut the deficit and to slow the rise in benefits spending would be to pass his plan to control health care costs.
Mr.
Clinton spoke at a daylong conference on cutting the Federal deficit by curbing automatic benefit programs like Medicare and Social Security.
His attendance was part of an unusual political payback he negotiated with a freshman Democrat in Congress, Representative Marjorie Margolies-Mezvinsky, to win her vote for the Clinton budget last August.


So Long, Flint, Hello, Toronto: A Director Goes Hollywood (North)
During the War of 1812, Americans burned York, the forebear of Toronto, provoking the retaliatory burning of Washington by the British fleet.
In the 1840's, some Americans tried to start wars of national liberation to make Canada part of the United States.
During the Civil War, the Confederates used Canada as a sanctuary for raids in Vermont.
Since then, the border has been pretty quiet.
But now, in this year of the North American Free Trade Agreement, comes Michael Moore, who is shooting his first commercial feature film here, a satire called "Canadian Bacon" that portrays Canada as America's post-cold war enemy.


Southwest Airlines to Buy Morris Air
Southwest Airlines agreed yesterday to buy Morris Air, a Salt Lake City-based carrier roughly an eighth the size of Southwest, in a stock swap worth about $129 million.
The move amounted to a returned compliment by Southwest to June M. Morris, a former travel agent who modeled her airline after Southwest, using Boeing 737 jets, frill-free service and a low-fare strategy.


Review/Art; De Kooning's 90th Birthday Nears, And Hirshhorn Leads the Tribute
Willem de Kooning has had one of the longest, greatest runs in 20th-century painting.
Until his career was effectively ended by Alzheimer's disease in the mid-1980's, the Dutch-born painter, who immigrated to the United States in 1926, enjoyed more than five decades of creative activity, most of it in a forward direction.
His place in history is guaranteed by his seminal role in the development of Abstract Expressionism, especially in the decade after his first one-man show in New York in 1948.
But equally great in many ways are his lush abstractions from the 1970's, works in which shimmering intimations of land, water and the human figure are conveyed with an astounding combination of complexity and ease.


A Warning To Yeltsin
The stunning success of an ultranationalist populist, Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, in Russia's first multiparty elections does not mean he will dominate the new Parliament.
But it will give him a credible platform to seek support for himself and his political party in preparation for the next presidential election, which is scheduled for June 1996.
The Liberal Democratic Party, which Mr.
Zhirinovsky leads, appears to have won the most votes, up to 25 percent of the total.
But only half of the 450 seats in the Duma, the lower house, are to be filled according to expressions of party preference.
The other half, and the entire Federation Council, or upper house, is to be filled by candidates running in individual districts, and there are many fewer Zhirinovsky supporters among them.


Gun Control Today Has Proved a False Prophet; Ban the Automatics
To the Editor:
In any society there exist a number of people who manifest aberrant behavior.
To suggest that the incidence of violence can be considerably decreased by para-vigilante behavior and by people carrying arms to protect themselves and reverting back to a "wild west" mentality is ridiculous.
The Brady law has no real teeth in it.
It's certainly not anywhere enough to reduce the availability of firearms substantially.
The Long Island Rail Road shooter also had to wait 15 days under California law, and was easily able to purchase a 9-millimeter automatic weapon and to wreak murderous havoc in just a few seconds.


Review/Television; The People Who Made News in '93, Or History
They are, according to the print advertisements for this show, the people who made history in 1993.
According to the program's host, Cindy Crawford, they are also the most influential people of the year.
So, it must be Bill Clinton?
Hillary Rodham Clinton?
Rabin and Arafat?
Hardly.
Try Winona Ryder, Janet Jackson, K. D. Lang, Dr.
Dre and Snoop Doggy Dogg.
This is history as culled through the pop prism of Rolling Stone.
It's the magazine's "Year in Review," a collection of MTV-like quick edits that can be seen tonight at 9 on Fox.
Aging baby boomers might take heart in noting that several of the "most significant artists" on the Rolling Stone list are over 35: Jerry Seinfeld, Steven Spielberg, Pete Townshend and Howard Stern.
No matter the age, each artiste is adept at self-promotion.
Calling 1993 "the best year of my life," Ms.
Ryder speaks of her performance in the film "The Age of Innocence" as "the first time I ever felt proud of myself as an actor." Bono, of the Irish rock group U2, gushes about Frank Sinatra ("as well as being great, he's also pretty cool") while an excerpt is heard from their duet together on "I've Got You Under My Skin."


Gun Control Today Has Proved a False Prophet; Congress to Act
To the Editor:
At last Federal officials seem to be taking the concept of gun control seriously.
Moving beyond the five-day waiting period of the Brady law, New York's Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan has proposed the imposition of differential taxes on ammunition, and President Clinton has pronounced "intriguing" the notion of an automobile-style registration and training of gun owners (news article, Dec. 6).
If the United States is to stop the proliferation of gun violence, Congress should consider imposing in addition the following restrictions on gun sales and ownership:


Review/Television; The Vigilantes of Video And Life as Sound Bites
The specter of Big Brother is repeatedly invoked in "Shock Video," but the focus of this HBO documentary is on all the little brothers who have transformed themselves into "video vigilantes." No doubt most of the 14 million camcorders now in the hands of Americans are being put to innocent use for home movies, but, says the narrator, others are leading the country into "a surveillance society."
Despite a weakness for alliterative hyperbole, the documentary packs plenty of camcordermania into its hour: cameras being used by the authorities against drug dealers and drunken drivers, cameras being used by ordinary citizens to reveal misdoings by the authorities (the Rodney G. King tapes), and cameras being used to capture drama on the streets (the Reginald Denny tapes) or just to snoop on the neighbors.
William Kunstler and Alvin Toffler are among those warning against the perils to privacy.


Jury Finds Town Violated Rights of Orthodox Jews
A Federal jury found today that a Rockland County village had violated the Constitutional and fair housing rights of a group of Orthodox Jews by opposing the group's efforts to build a small synagogue within a private home.
The verdict came in a civil suit that four Orthodox Jews and their neighborhood synagogue had filed against the village of Airmont, a municipality of about 8,000 that was incorporated within the town of Ramapo two and a half years ago.


Scotts Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giuliani Fills 2 Top Posts As Transition Presses On
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani turned yesterday to a Democratic insider from the Koch administration to be the city's Corporation Counsel, and he named his campaign manager, Peter J. Powers, as Deputy Mayor for Operations, who will be designated to run City Hall when the Mayor is out of town.
At a news conference at his Madison Avenue transition office, Mr.
Giuliani called the appointments of Paul A. Crotty, a former finance and housing commissioner, and of his lifelong friend, Mr.
Powers, a demonstration of "what we're trying to accomplish."


President's Shopping Trip Rings Up Gripes and Glee in Midtown
President Clinton came to New York yesterday to attend a fund-raising dinner for Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, but even before he checked into his room at the Waldorf or polished off his dancing shoes, he did what all good tourists are doing in Manhattan these days -- he went shopping.
The impromptu shopping sojourn stopped traffic, flustered shopkeepers and ruffled the feathers of not a few New Yorkers who complained that the presidential fuss was making them late.
After all, they had work to do, errands to run, trains to hop -- sales to catch.


Synetic Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Races Canceled At Aqueduct
Racing was canceled at Aqueduct yesterday after the first two races because of poor track conditions.
It was the second straight day that most of the racing card was canceled.
On Sunday, racing was called off after three of the nine races.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 15 about the retirement of nuclear weapons misstated the origin of plutonium.
Physicists manufactured it in 1940 in early work on the atomic bomb, but they did not invent it; it was subsequently detected in nature.


So Many Contenders And So Little Time
The last time the Giants and the Jets made the National Football League playoffs together was after the 1986 season.
The Jets won a playoff game, lost one and were done.
The Giants won all of theirs, including Super Bowl XXI.
This season, the Giants (10-3) have become the first team to qualify for the playoffs.
And with three games remaining, the Jets (8-5) have a solid chance to make the playoffs as a wild-card team.


Max &amp; Erma's Restaurants Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Quiet German Role
Germany is playing a subtle yet powerful role as an intermediary in the negotiations between France and the United States in the efforts to reach a global trade agreement.
So far, Germany has been reluctant to do Washington's bidding in trade disputes with France.
Article, page D7.


U.S. Settles Bias Case With Bank
The Justice Department said today that it had settled its large lending discrimination case against the Shawmut National Corporation, New England's third-largest banking institution, a decision that could clear the way for Shawmut to continue its buying binge in the region.
Prosecutors said they approved the settlement because the company had agreed to take steps to prevent discrimination and pay at least $960,000 to black and Hispanic customers who were denied loans.
Under the settlement, Shawmut denied the allegations but agreed to pay $10,000 to $15,000 to any black or Hispanic customer who could provide evidence of possible discrimination.


On Charting a Course To Reach Prosperity
THIS is a time of the year when many people think of putting their financial affairs in order.
Luckily, most of us get over it.
Others turn to computers for help.
There is ample help available in the form of software.
One person swears by Quicken, another wouldn't make a move without Managing Your Money.
Wealth Builder, an optimistically titled program from Reality Technologies of King of Prussia, Pa., has gone into version 3.1, an indication that it is at least managing its own money pretty well.


CHRONICLE
Don't say, "Break a leg," to MARGARET ILLMANN before she goes on stage in the leading role in "The Red Shoes," which opens Thursday night at the Gershwin Theater.
She almost did so already.
At a preview performance on Friday, Ms.
Illmann, tripped and fell during the opening moments of "The Red Shoes Ballet." She picked herself up and continued the 18-minute ballet, "but I had to do everything on my right foot, so I had to make up steps," she said yesterday.


Alastair Stair, 80, Dealer and Expert In English Antiques
Alastair A. Stair, a leading dealer in English antique furniture, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80.
The cause was complications from Parkinson's disease, said his son, A. John.


Autonomy in Gaza? No, It's Business as Usual


Violence Sputters On in the Gaza Strip
On the day that Israeli authority was supposed to begin changing into Palestinian autonomy in the Gaza Strip, it was business as usual here.
Early this morning a Islamic guerrilla drove an ambulance loaded with explosives into an Israeli Army jeep, killing himself and wounding an Israeli soldier.
Israeli troops shot and killed two Palestinians, and over at the Jabaliya refugee camp, children threw stones at Israeli patrols.


Playoffs Help Reeves Salve Doubts
It is unusual for a professional football coach to publicly admit that he had doubts about himself.
But Dan Reeves is no ordinary coach.
He doesn't mind, every now and then, dropping his football coach persona and being himself.
Being honest.
Being real.
And that's what he was today.


Study Finds Rising Concentration Of Black and Hispanic Students
Despite three decades of costly and difficult efforts to integrate public schools, the number of black and Hispanic students in schools with predominantly minority enrollments is rising, a Harvard University study has found.
The study, released yesterday by the Harvard Project on School Desegregation, attributed the rise to higher birth rates and immigration rather than white flight to the suburbs.
It also said poverty and housing patterns had concentrated black and Hispanic students in large cities.


Standard Training In Laparoscopy Found Inadequate
WHILE much is to be said for the new surgical techniques that allow major abdominal, chest and urological operations to be performed through tiny incisions using a laparoscope, a new study has found that simply attending the single training course that is now standard may not be enough for a surgeon to become proficient in the procedures.
The study found that a year after taking the course surgeons' complication rates were up to 7.7 times higher for those who had attended a two-day training course alone, were in a solo practice or performed laparascopic surgery with a variety of assistants, compared respectively with those who attended the course with a partner, were in a group practice and used the same assistant when performing the procedures.
There were no deaths reported in the study, which appears in the current issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association.


Argentine Files Show Huge Effort to Harbor Nazis
Two years after President Carlos Saul Menem announced that he would open Argentina's "Nazi files," investigators here say they have found more than a thousand names of suspected Nazi war criminals and collaborators who fled to this country after World War II -- a number that is many times more than previously documented.
And the investigators say the hundreds of thousands of pages of documents they have studied in the last eight months show not only the Government's policy of welcoming Nazi war criminals, but also its efforts to impede the search for and prosecution of them by other governments.


LDI Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Guggenheim Honors the LeFraks
Samuel J. LeFrak, the real estate developer known more for red-brick apartment towers than for architectural landmarks, is about to have his name on one of the most celebrated pieces of architecture of the 20th century, the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
In return for an unrestricted $10 million gift from Mr.
LeFrak and his wife, Ethel, the museum is naming its landmark Frank Lloyd Wright structure at Fifth Avenue and 89th Street the Samuel J. and Ethel LeFrak Building.
The gift is the largest cash donation the museum has received from an individual since the Wright building opened in 1959.
"This becomes part of a lifelong commitment to the museum from the LeFrak family," Michael Govan, the Guggenheim's deputy director, said yesterday.
Although the gift did not include any art, the museum also indicated it was having discussions with the LeFraks about the possibility that their collection of Impressionist and Post-Impressionist paintings might ultimately go to the Guggenheim.


3 Miami Police Officers Arrested in Drug Case
Three Miami police officers and 21 other people were arrested early this morning on charges that they were members of a drug ring that was responsible for distributing up to 90 kilograms of cocaine a week.
The authorities said they were expecting more arrests.


Interstate Bakeries Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 13


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Pro Bono Accounts
*
United Way of America, Alexandria, Va., to Temerlin McClain, Irving, Tex., to handle its account, previously at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York.


Dust in Sea Mud May Link Human Evolution to Climate
FROM the sea floors around Africa, scientists have found intriguing evidence about forces that may have shaped the evolution of humankind.
Cores drilled out of the sea bottom contain layers of dust blown off the surface soils of Africa.
Analyzing these layers of dust back to five million years ago, a critical period in hominid evolution, paleoclimatologists have constructed a picture of changes in climate and vegetation, matching them to major developments in the evolution of humanity's ancestors as shown by the fossil record.


Classical Music in Review
New York Youth Symphony Carnegie Hall


No Power and No Average. Sure, He's Definitely a Met.
The player to be named later is not likely to be the 1994 answer at shortstop for the Mets.
But Pablo Martinez is a legitimate prospect who can go and get the baseball, and the Mets aren't exactly overloaded with players who can do that.
Martinez, a 24-year-old shortstop who has never hit enough to become a sure-fire star in the minors, joined the Mets yesterday as one of the two final pieces in a five-player trade the Mets and Padres made last Friday.


Southwest Airlines to Buy Morris Air


Review/Music; The Sixteen, a British Vocal Group, Wanders Through Several Epochs
A major force in English early-music performance for 15 years, the vocal ensemble the Sixteen made its long-awaited New York debut on Sunday afternoon at Corpus Christi Church.
Those who had encountered the group through recordings on various English labels were not surprised by the wide-ranging, well-judged program: large sacred pieces by John Sheppard, Richard Hygons and Thomas Tallis, together with shorter settings and carols appropriate to the Christmas season.
Although its repertory ranges well into the 20th century, the Sixteen, conducted by Harry Christophers, has done perhaps its most important work in behalf of English composers of the Tudor period.
Picking up from the pioneering work of David Wulstan, Mr.
Christophers has greatly expanded our knowledge of John Sheppard, resident composer at Magdalen College in Oxford in the second half of the 16th century.
Sheppard was represented on Sunday's program by "A solis ortus cardine" and "Verbum caro factum est," each a small masterpiece of stately, intricate polyphony.


A Vow to Return to the Sea
Two survivors of an awesome weekend Atlantic storm that sank their sailboat and set them adrift on a raft for 11 hours in 40-foot seas and hurricane-force winds luxuriated in a stateroom aboard a Japanese freighter yesterday.
Grateful for salvation but undaunted by the perils of the sea, they vowed to sail again.
"I may give up owning a boat -- it's a bit much at my age," Herbert Clarity, a 63-year-old retired Harrison, N.J., fire captain, said in a ship-to-shore radiophone interview from the Shin Kakogawa Maru, out of Tokyo and bound for Ireland.
"But I'm not going to give up sailing. I have no fear of that."


PLM International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Northwestern Steel &amp; Wire Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Payton Is Still Pushing For St. Louis Franchise
Ostensibly, WALTER PAYTON was in town yesterday to present the award named for him that goes to the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I-AA player of the year.
But the leading rusher in National Football League history, who played his college ball at I-AA Jackson State, may also have had another agenda on his mind at The Sporting Club in Manhattan: getting an N.F.L. franchise for St.
Louis, which was passed over when the league recently awarded expansion teams to Charlotte and Jacksonville.


Medicine Show
The health and insurance industries have never been stingy about providing members of Congress with money for their campaigns -- contributing tens of millions to senators and House members over the last decade.
But now, with Congress poised to debate a dramatic overhaul in the nation's health care system, lobbyists for doctors, insurance companies and drug makers are pumping in campaign dough at a record rate.
In the first 10 months of this year, reports Neil Lewis of The Times, donations from the American Medical Association and associations of chiropractors, podiatrists, anesthesiologists, ophthalmologists and other health care providers increased by more than 30 percent compared with the same period two years ago.
Groups representing hospitals, health maintenance organizations and nursing homes upped their giving by 23 percent.


2 Groups Plan Projects On Computer Standards
Two groups of computer and telecommunications companies announced separately yesterday that they planned to begin work on standardizing how computers will talk to each other on the future information superhighway.
Currently, when fax machines and personal computers communicate over telephone lines, they use a relatively simple language of screeches and whistles.


Avalos Faces a Ban
OLGA AVALOS , second in last month's New York City Marathon, may be suspended by the Mexican Athletic Federation for participating without its authorization.
The federation also wants to know why Avalos sat out the Central American and Caribbean Games in Ponce, P.R.
It has given her 30 days to answer the charges or face an unspecified suspension.
Avalos says she is so fed up by what she calls the federation's mistreatment and lack of support for her career that she has considered becoming an American. (AP)


Observer; With Malice Galore
Behind the lovely, turbulent spleen-venting that is the argument over political correctness lies something far more authentically American than the spirit of goodness and love for constitutional freedoms which ostensibly motivate the disputants.
That something is malice for one's fellow man.
For those opposed to P.C. doctrines, what a joy it is to tee off on those fascistic language suppressors who are out to destroy freedom of speech by punishing people for Badspeak.


G.M. to Assemble Opel Cars at a Plant in Poland
After four years of scouting the Polish car market, the General Motors Corporation announced today a $25 million investment for the assembly of 10,000 Opel Astra cars at the plant of a state-owned auto maker.
The joint venture will be General Motors' third foray into Eastern Europe since the collapse of Communism.
The company has an Opel plant at Eisenach, just inside the former East German border, and an engine and small assembly plant in Hungary.


On the Russian Vote, Clinton Accentuates the Positive
President Clinton today welcomed the outcome of Russia's first parliamentary elections, saying that despite the strong showing by nationalist parties, the new Constitution and Parliament had swept away the last remnants of the Soviet system and had laid a foundation for democracy.
In a brief chat with reporters after an economic conference at Bryn Mawr College, Mr.
Clinton sought to put the best face on the Russian vote.
While noting that not all the ballots had been tallied, Mr.
Clinton did say that the strong showing of the fervently nationalist Liberal Democratic Party in the early returns should serve as a reminder to the West about how difficult the transition to democracy was for Russian working people.


Of Two Rookie Linebackers in the Bloom of Youth
They are not joined at the hip. It only seems that way.
"If you see me here," Jessie Armstead said today, "then you know Marcus is here, too."


Classical Music in Review
Chanticleer Male Choir Metropolitan Museum of Art


Norman Picks Spots, and Shots
Like his namesake, he seems to require no sleep.
That much is clear about Greg Norman, the Shark.
It is 9 in the morning on a balmy day, and the president and C.E.O. of Great White Shark Enterprises Inc. has already put in half a day at the office.
Norman, wearing shorts, a golf shirt and some casual Italian loafers, has been here since 4:50 A.M., catching up, going through mail, writing notes to fans, sizing up the competition.
This is Norman's way.
He does things on his time.
The company that manages him, International Management Group, would be a whole lot happier if Norman were planning to be in Jamaica this week for the Johnnie Walker World Championship, an elite 27-player tournament that I.M.G. helps to stage.
But Norman has decided to take his family to Australia for Christmas, as soon as he clears up a few other matters, and no amount of I.M.G. persuasiveness could change his mind.


3 Heroes Recall Amtrak Disaster on a Bayou
Three men whose heroism was credited with saving scores of lives in the worst wreck in Amtrak's 22-year history vividly recounted today the chaos in which 47 people died when their train plunged into an Alabama bayou this fall.
They told a National Transportation Safety Board hearing here of calming hysterical passengers on the Sunset Limited, hoisting them through windows and fishing them out of the Big Bayou Canot.
Their accounts were confirmed by Federal officials who had investigated the Sept. 22 tragedy and marveled at how ordinary people took extraordinary risks to save others.


Stricken Thornton Hopes to Return
Giants defensive lineman George Thornton spoke to the news media for the first time today since he had a mild stroke in October.
He said he isn't ready to give up football.
Thornton said doctors still don't know why he was stricken Oct. 10 during a game against Washington.
Thornton said he has not been told when, or even if, he can play again.
But he still hopes he can return.


Classical Music in Review
Virgin Consort Church of St. Mary the Virgin


SOCCER
Reward the Victors  To encourage teams to look for victory and avoid negative tactics that were prevalent in the last World Cup, FIFA is expected to award teams 3 points for a victory, instead of two, in the 1994 tournament.


Michael Jackson Returns to Fight Sex Accusation
His career in turmoil, Michael Jackson was back home today to defend himself against an accusation that he molested a 13-year-old boy.
"He is back to establish his innocence," said Johnnie Cochran, a lawyer for the 35-year-old singer, after a brief court hearing today.
Mr.
Jackson was named in a civil suit filed on behalf of the boy, who said the singer abused him, and the police have been investigating Mr.
Jackson since the summer for possible criminal charges.


Homecare Management Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Accounts
*
Reily Foods Co., New Orleans, to Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss, New York, to handle its JFG Coffee products account, previously in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.


Breast Cancer Screening Under 50: Experts Disagree if Benefit Exists
IN the wake of the National Cancer Institute's decision to stop recommending regular mammograms for women in their 40's, many radiologists and other doctors who treat individual patients continue to be convinced by their clinical experience and intuitive reasoning that the benefit of routine screening for these women would be obvious if the proper studies were done.
Meanwhile, women and their doctors are left in a quandary about the best use of this weapon for early detection of breast cancer, the disease that women fear most.


Dow at Record as a Few Stocks Jump
Stocks were mixed yesterday, with blue-chip issues posting modest gains and the broader market slipping in subdued trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average set another closing high, rising 23.76 points, to 3,764.43.
Its previous record close occurred on Friday.


Bond Prices Off in Light Trading
Treasury prices fell and yields rose yesterday as traders and investors awaited important fourth-quarter economic data this week and a Treasury auction next week.
For now, the bond market seems to be stuck in a trading range that analysts say should hold until the end of the year unless there is some surprise in the new economic data.


Chess
Jun Xie of China used the King's Indian Defense every time she had Black in her women's world title defense against Nana Ioseliani of Georgia, and what a weapon it was.
The 23-year-old champion won five times and had one draw out of six games with it in the series, which was held at the Metropole Palace Hotel in Monaco and concluded in mid-November.
The reason this mode of play suits Jun so well is that her strength is in daring tactics and pyrotechnical combinations and these are critical in the King's Indian, which concedes White an early spatial superiority and relies on a speculative counterattack against the king.
Ioseliani repeatedly overlooked the seriousness of the black threats; or else she failed to calculate deeply enough to unearth Jun's beautifully hidden tactical motifs.


From Running Family Business to Living in a Shelter
For Donald Armstrong, who worked steadily for 20 years and now faces every morning without a regular job, the lowest point was not when he was evicted from his apartment in Astoria, Queens.
It was not when he resigned himself to seeking charity, nor even when he had to move his battered suitcases into a men's shelter on lower Broadway.


Quanex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Social Justice Eludes a Midwest Hero
To the Editor:
"Did Time. Fought Flood. Willing to Work" (front page, Dec. 6) about Greg Yance, a 23-year-old hero from the Midwest floods, is another example of our deteriorating social justice fabric.
Greg Yance's quest to become a productive member of society, after being convicted of dealing drugs and serving time in a marine-style boot camp, is an American tragedy.
Mr.
Yance is a young man who worked feverishly for eight days trying to save a small farming town from the ravages of flood last July.


U.N. Agrees to Create Human Rights Commissioner
The most contentious issue facing the 48th United Nations General Assembly this year was resolved over the weekend when the nations of the world accepted a plan, under discussion for more than 40 years, to appoint a High Commissioner charged with insuring respect for human rights around the globe.
The agreement to create a United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights with the power to intervene wherever basic freedoms are being suppressed was reached in a working group of rich and poor countries and is expected to be endorsed unanimously by the 184 members of the General Assembly next week.


JAPAN IS TO ALLOW SOME RICE IMPORTS
The Japanese Prime Minister eked out a costly victory early this morning when the Socialist Party, the largest member of his shaky coalition, dropped its resistance to a small opening of the country's rice market.
After a marathon of resistance and infighting, the solemn Prime Minister, Morihiro Hosokawa, announced on television at 3:50 A.M. that Japan was pushing global trade talks closer to success with what he termed a "regrettable" decision to accept a modest amount of rice imports.


Banks Seek Mutual Funds, But Not Many Are for Sale
In the wake of the Mellon Bank Corporation's agreement to acquire the Dreyfus Corporation last week, banks across the country are taking a hard look at what mutual fund companies they might buy.
But few mutual funds are up for sale.
"In the mutual fund business, there are a large number of buyers, but a small number of sellers," Avi Nachmany, an analyst with Strategic Insights, a consulting firm, said.
"A lot of investment bankers are floating a lot of names. But the problem is to find the sellers."


On My Mind; Deliver Your President
Picking them up in North Korea, Russian cargo planes delivered truck chassis to Syria.
They are special chassis, used as mobile launchers for Scud missiles targeted at Israel.
For months, the U.S. and Israel have kept the transfer secret from their publics.
It was too embarrassing, after all the warm talk from Washington and Jerusalem about how the Russians and Syrians would now help bring peace to the Mideast.
On Sunday, the story was broken in The New York Times by Michael R. Gordon.


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Federal Farm Credit Banks is selling $25 million of 4.9 percent medium-term noncallable notes due in 1997 and priced at 99.985 to yield 4.924 percent through Salomon Brothers.
*
Federal Home Loan Bank, Washington, is selling $400 million of noncallable notes due in 1994 100 to yield 3.33 percent through Lehman Brothers.


Russia's Chastening Vote
Russia's parliamentary elections on Sunday, which produced a large vote for ultra-nationalists and hard-line Communists, represent a rebuff both to economic reform and warm relations with America.
But they need not be a calamity.
The passage of a new Constitution gives President Boris Yeltsin new powers, and his allies will occupy ministerial posts.
Still, Mr.
Yeltsin and his fellow reformers will face a Parliament at least as unruly as the one he forcibly dissolved this fall.
The current political mood is likely to limit the pace of reform.
And the resurgence of anti-Western nationalists and the Communists is chastening.


Hurley Survives, but Basketball Future Is Unsure
The dim street lamp at the intersection of Del Paso and El Centro Roads was no help to Bobby Hurley Sunday night.
The two-lane country highway was dark and, little did the Sacramento Kings rookie know, it was not deserted.
On his way home from a game, he turned left into a speeding car, was ejected approximately 75 feet into a drainage ditch and today was breathing with the aid of a ventilator after eight hours of overnight surgery to save his left lung.
Hurley, 22, was listed in serious condition today at the University of California-Davis Medical Center.
He suffered two collapsed lungs, several broken ribs and facial, knee, wrist and back injuries.
Doctors said that his pulmonary injury at the time of his hospitalization was so severe that it was "potentially life threatening," and they warned of possible complications in the next four to five days.
Their operation included reattaching the main airway -- or trachea -- to his left lung, which they said was "completely torn" in the accident.


Topics of The Times; Hooting at Owls
Sighted on East 69th Street in Manhattan: an apartment building with owl decoys attached to several fire escapes and another dangling from the eave.
The idea, of course, is to scare away pigeons and keep them from fouling the escapes and windowsills.
The decoys were of the sort advertised in gardening magazines.
They are supposed to be sovereign cures for the crows and other birds that raid suburban gardens.
Judging from the spectacle on 69th, they work differently in the city.
That is to say, they are pigeon magnets.


CHRONICLE
DANIEL PARKE LIEBLICH, the president of the Princeton Club of New York, was searching through the club's computer files recently when he stumbled on a fact that surprised him: there were 280 members who had been in the club for 50 years or more.
"We thought that was so wonderful that we decide to salute and honor them at a special luncheon," Mr.
Lieblich, class of '38, said yesterday as he prepared to welcome more than four dozen half-century members to the club, at 15 West 43d Street.


With Time Waning, Europeans Reject U.S. Movie Compromise
The European Community today rejected an offer by the United States aimed at securing better treatment for American movies in Europe, virtually insuring that the final content of a world trade accord, likely in some form by the deadline Wednesday, will remain in doubt until the last minute.
After a report here today from the community's chief negotiator, Sir Leon Brittan, foreign ministers of the 12 members sent Sir Leon back to Geneva for renewed talks with Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative.
The European foreign ministers plan to meet again in Brussels on Wednesday, to make a final decision on the seven-year negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.


Transcisco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Using Cards For Credit In Casinos Is Approved
Both houses of the New Jersey Legislature today passed a bill that would allow gamblers to use their credit cards to obtain betting chips in casinos.
Proponents of the change said it was little different from the present system of buying chips with personal checks.
But critics said that it would amount to a further loosening of credit controls in a state-regulated industry that relies heavily on credit for its profits and that it would make it easier for compulsive gamblers to fall victim to their addiction.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  A CALL TO UNITE IN RUSSIA  Leaders of Russia's main Government party urged all pro-reform parties to unite against the rising threat of "radical extremists." A1  THE WORLDVIEW OF A NATIONALIST  Man in the news: If his party had not won so many votes, Vladimir Zhirinovsky could be dismissed as a parody of a right-winger.
A1  News analysis: Zhirinovsky has a platform to run for president.
A16  President Clinton welcomed the outcome of Russia's elections.
A16  Kazakhstan endorsed a treaty to halt the spread of weapons.
A15


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Insist Notice Be Given in Drug-Case Property Seizures
The Supreme Court ruled today that the Government may not seize a house or other real estate that it suspects of having been used in a drug transaction without giving the owner notice and a chance to contest the seizure at a hearing.
The 5-to-4 decision, written by Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, was the latest indication of the Court's discomfort with the Government's aggressive use of its forfeiture authority.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Malone Sparks the Jazz  Karl Malone scored 27 points and the Utah Jazz outscored the Spurs by 15-6 in the first 9 minutes 6 seconds of the fourth quarter last night in a 102-87 victory at Salt Lake City. (AP)


Prodded by Gore, Kazakhstan Signs Arms Accord
Kazakhstan endorsed an international treaty today to halt the spread of arms and signed an agreement with the United States to dismantle the Central Asian republic's nuclear arsenal.
The actions, which came during a visit by Vice President Al Gore, are important because Kazakhstan has the third-largest nuclear arsenal of the former Soviet republics, behind Russia and Ukraine.
The moves are intended to put additional pressure on Ukraine, where leaders have been adamant in not relinquishing their missiles without concessions that United States officials say are unrealistic.


Lapses in Oversight Found In Residences for Disabled
A state investigation into the death of a mildly retarded woman has found serious lapses in the oversight of small, family-style residences for people who are mentally disabled, which are becoming more popular as large institutions are emptied of their patients.
The report by the Commission on the Quality of Care for the Mentally Disabled, a state watchdog agency, chronicled the life and final days of a woman it called "Joan Stalker," who died in May 1992.
The report revealed signs of abuse and neglect that went unchecked, including bruises a coroner found on Ms.
Stalker's chest, abdomen, shoulder, back and thighs and an untreated bladder infection so serious that it caused bleeding.
The autopsy concluded, however, that Ms.
Stalker died of natural causes and no criminal prosecution followed.


Suicide Law Struck Down, But Kevorkian Stays Jailed
Michigan's law barring all suicide assistance was ruled unconstitutional here today by a judge presiding over a case involving Dr.
Jack Kevorkian.
But in neighboring Oakland County, where the 65-year-old Dr.
Kevorkian has been in custody for two weeks on a charge of violating the law in a second case, the authorities said that the decision was not binding in their jurisdiction and that they would not release him.


Exploring the Frontiers Of Electronics at Home
AFTER more than a decade of providing software for the business community, the Microsoft Corporation is going home.
The Redmond, Wash., software giant, which is best known for its DOS-Windows operating systems, programming languages and business applications, last week created a new Microsoft Consumer division to develop entertainment and creativity programs for Windows and Macintosh computers.
The new division inherits more than 30 existing Microsoft programs that now fall into the "home" category, including titles like Flight Simulator, Works, Publisher, Cinemania, Multimedia Beethoven and an assortment of Windows games.
Embracing the philosophy that all work and no play makes Bill a dull boy, Microsoft plans to increase the offerings to more than 100 titles in the next year.


Candidate Drops Out
If the next baseball commissioner is a woman, it won't be LYNN MARTIN .
The committee charged with finding a commissioner announced yesterday that Martin, a former Secretary of Labor in the Bush Administration, had withdrawn her name from consideration.
The committee, headed by BILL BARTHOLOMAY , the chairman of the Atlanta Braves, has made it a point not to identify candidates under consideration, but Martin was the only woman among several names that have surfaced as potential choices, among them HARVEY SCHILLER , the executive director of the United States Olympic Committee; PAUL KIRK , a former chairman of the Democratic National Committee, and DICK THORNBURGH , a former Attorney General.


An Alternative School in the Bronx Offers Hope; To Students Who Enter as Misfits, a Public Academy Promises a Fresh Start
In the nurturing and sometimes unusual environs of Fordham Heights Academy, an alternative public high school in the Bronx, Chad Ali is a model student.
His teachers say he is a respectful, hard-working fixture in the computer laboratory, where he quietly scrolls through information on his favorite subject: social studies.
But before he voluntarily came to the 85-student school that is a string of rooms shoe-horned into the first floor of a subsidized housing project near 187th Street and Webster Avenue.
Chad was a ghost of a ninth grader.
Rather than go to class, he preferred to haunt the hallways and stairwells of DeWitt Clinton High School as a chronic truant. 'A Lot of Stress'
"I couldn't concentrate at all," the 16-year-old recalled of his days at DeWitt Clinton, where he roamed faceless in a crush of thousands of students.
"It was just a lot of stress."


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday describing a play in the Giants-Indianapolis Colts football game misidentified the Colts' player.
He was Jon Hand.


Washington Talk; 3 Schools of Thought On Clinton's '3d Way'
As a candidate, President Clinton prospered by promising a "third way" for the Democratic Party, an exquisitely calibrated course between left and right.
Welfare would be "a second chance, not a way of life." Government would "expand opportunity, not bureaucracy." A new health care system would "cover everybody, and control costs."


Rifkin's Mother Testifies About Day of Son's Arrest
Joel Rifkin's mother took the witness stand at a pretrial hearing today, charging that the police misled her after her son's arrest on murder charges by implying that he did not need a lawyer.
But the mother, Jeanne Rifkin, 70, also said that after the arrest, Mr.
Rifkin, an unemployed landscaper who has confessed to killing 17 women, told her of the killings.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Bozell Acquires Salvati Agency
Bozell Worldwide said yesterday that it had acquired Salvati Montgomery Sakoda in Costa Mesa, Calif., and merged it with the Bozell Los Angeles office as part of a reorganization of its West Coast operations.
Terms were not disclosed.
The new shop, to be named Bozell/ Salvati Montgomery Sakoda, will also incorporate the Newport Beach, Calif., office of CME KHBB Advertising, which becomes part of Bozell next month as a result of a consolidation of the estimated $180 million North American account of Chrysler's Jeep/Eagle division at Bozell.
The combined agency, with 91 employees, will have billings estimated at $100 million from clients like American Airlines, Chrysler, International House of Pancakes and Kawasaki.


In 1990, U.S. Was Still Training Salvador Civilians Tied to Killings
As recently as three years ago, American military officers in El Salvador trained a group of wealthy Salvadorans associated with right-wing death squads, State Department documents show.
The training occurred as the threat of Communism was receding and the Bush Administration was pursuing peace settlements in Central America.


Adrenaline a Go-Go: Islanders and Devils Now a Rivalry
The longer schedule, the far-flung expansion cities and the divisional realignment have added strain to traveling National Hockey League teams in the 1990's.
Even dedicated players don't always have the energy or familiarity with opponents to offer top effort.
On some nights, they seem to just go through the motions as fans sit on their hands and listen to the intrusive rock music that blares phony excitement through the speaker system during lengthy television timeouts.
But boredom shouldn't be the case tonight, when the Islanders are hosts to the Devils at Nassau Coliseum.
The third game of the season between these Atlantic Division rivals might be one of the better local shows so far.
Both teams are well rested, having spent two off days at home after victories.
Both know each other well and share the familiarity that breeds an enhanced level of competition, if not contempt.


INSIDE
New School Chief in Trenton
Governor-elect Whitman said she would nominate a senior Education Department official to be her Commissioner of Education.
Page B1.
Giuliani Fills 2 Posts
Mayor-elect Giuliani named a former Koch administration official as Corporation Counsel and a lifelong friend as deputy mayor.
Page B3.


Bad Week for Danny Hurley
It had been a difficult week for Danny Hurley. And then it got immeasurably tougher.
On Friday, the younger brother of Bobby Hurley told Seton Hall Coach P. J. Carlesimo that he needed a break from basketball, that he wanted out, for now, from his role as the Pirates' starting point guard.
Then came Monday morning, and the news that Bobby Hurley, a Sacramento Kings rookie, had been critically injured in a car accident.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Parents' Fears About Toy Marketing: Children Transformed Into 'Consuming Monsters'
IT comes as no surprise that toy advertising irks parents.
But the reasons they give for their annoyance are as unexpected as frantic shoppers being able to find Mighty Morphin Power Rangers at Toys "R" Us on Christmas Eve.
Conventional wisdom has it that parents dislike the barrage of toy commercials aimed at their children primarily because of the pressures generated by young viewers' demands for the Power Rangers figurines, the My Size Barbie dolls or whatever products toy marketers choose as the focus of their relentless Christmastime sales blitzes.


Chile's Other Miracle
Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle easily won Chile's presidential election on Saturday.
His effortless victory signals a remarkable political change for Latin America's economic pathbreaker.
For decades, Chilean politics was split into three hostile camps -- Marxist left, conservative right and Christian center.
After Salvador Allende, a Marxist, was elected President in 1970, the country went into political and economic meltdown.
Desperate Christian Democrats and rightists hated Allende more than they loved democracy, opening the door to Gen.
Augusto Pinochet's 1973 coup and the 16-year dictatorship that followed.


France Is Seeking Support in U.N. For Tightening Sanctions on Haiti
France sought the backing of the United States, Canada and Venezuela today for tighter United Nations economic sanctions against Haiti in the hope of forcing the country's military Government to allow the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to return to office.
But French officials said it was still unclear whether France would win support for its initiative, which was presented to a meeting of senior officials from the four countries.
The United States reportedly fears that tougher sanctions would bring greater suffering to ordinary Haitians.


Mexico's Unions, Frail Now, Face Trade Pact Blows
Less than a week after the United States Congress passed the North American Free Trade Agreement, with all its promises of a better future for workers on both sides of the border, three Mexicans working at a General Electric motor factory in Ciudad Juarez, across from El Paso, Tex., were abruptly dismissed.
A General Electric spokesman says the company is investigating what happened.
But the men say they were dismissed for trying to organize a union not tied to the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party.
Bitterly, they say this is the real proof of what free trade will bring.


High Court Orders Shift In Insurers' Accounting
In a decision expected to change the way the insurance industry keeps track of the billions of dollars in pension funds that it manages, the Supreme Court ruled today that Federal law rather than state law governs an insurance company's handling of pension assets beyond those needed to pay the guaranteed minimum benefit on group annuity contracts.
The 6-to-3 decision, the first majority opinion written by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, applied the standards of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 to the insurance industry's management of excess earnings on investments from contributions to group annuities, a popular type of retirement plan.


In Genetics, Too, an Ounce of Prevention
To the Editor:
People marry for love and companionship.
But most people who marry hope and expect children to be born to them.
We are willing to expend enormous amounts of love and attention and care as well as money to raise capable and healthy offspring.
Surely, giving some thought to their genetic load is not misplaced ("Nightmare or the Dream of a New Era in Genetics?", front page, Dec. 7).
Dor Yeshorim, an Orthodox Jewish program using advanced molecular technology to screen young people considering marriage, was formed to enhance the effort to have healthy children by sparing potential partners the agony of conceiving genetically defective children.
With increased medical research, there are many more conditions that can be prevented than Tay-Sachs disease.
While ethicists agonize over some people's being marginalized as marriage partners, they would do better to focus on the fact that medical conditions not manifesting themselves until middle age do not make them benign or pleasant to live with.
Very few of us are interested in spending much effort to maintain good health.
Rather, good health is seen as a birthright.
And while it is true there are many common conditions that do not compromise actual life, they do not enhance it either and many sufferers would prefer a less flawed genetic endowment.
Dor Yeshorim's purpose is to allow potential marriage partners to establish in advance of emotional involvement whether or not a relationship should be pursued.
For those with multiple problems, presumably a pool of potential partners can be identified with whom normal children can be produced.
Prevention beats remediation any day.
SURA JESELSOHN Bronx, Dec. 7, 1993


Roy E. LaGrone, 72, A Tuskegee Airman And Ex-Art Director
Roy E. LaGrone, a retired art director and illustrator who flew with the Tuskegee airmen in World War II, died on Wednesday at his home in Somerset, N.J.
He was 72.
The cause of death was a heart attack, his family said.


PWA Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


South Africa Whites Kill 2 Blacks
White gunmen assaulted a group of blacks near Johannesburg today, killing two and wounding five in what the police described as one of the worst terrorist attacks by whites against blacks in South Africa this year.
The police said the killers, dressed in camouflage uniforms, forced two vehicles with black occupants off the road early Monday morning.


A Bill to Aid Battered Immigrant Women
To the Editor:
Your article on battered immigrant women ("Enduring Violence in a New Home," Dec. 6) accurately described the cultural barriers facing many women seeking to escape abusive relationships.
But even if education and support help immigrant women overcome cultural taboos, the legal barriers facing these battered women may be insurmountable.
Under current law, many battered immigrant women must depend upon their abusive spouses to initiate a petition for legal status on their behalf.
Abusers frequently refuse to file this petition, instead using their absolute control over their victims' ability to live and work in this country to perpetuate abuse and force women and children to stay in violent relationships.


Nordson Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Cobra Industries
Shares of Cobra Industries hit a new low yesterday after the recreational-vehicle maker said its financial results in the quarter were likely to be hurt by lower-than-expected sales and higher production costs.
Some analysts said the sales drop might have been caused by a delay in dealer orders until after rivals' new models had been introduced.


Bridge
The player best known in the world of bridge died on Saturday at his Florida home at the age of 84.
Sam Stayman, who lived most of his life in Manhattan, first wrote about the two-club response to one no-trump, the convention that bears his name, almost half a century ago, and it has since been adopted by almost every enthusiast.
Few appreciate that he was not only a great theorist but a player of the highest class.
He won three world team titles and had 19 national victories, including seven in the Spingold Knockout Teams and five in the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams, a record that few have matched.
He competed fiercely and effectively for half a century, often against players less than half his age, and played with enthusiasm until a few days before his death.


Huffman Koos Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Zimmerman Gets Mitsubishi Dealers
The New York/New Jersey Mitsubishi Dealers Association has awarded its estimated $5 million account to Zimmerman &amp; Partners Advertising in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., after Mitsubishi Motor Sales of America decided to allow its local dealer groups to select their own agencies.
Until now, the dealers had been using the auto maker's national agency, the new G2 division of Grey Advertising Inc. in Fountain Valley, Calif., for their retail advertising.
Jordan Zimmerman, chairman and president at Zimmerman, confirmed a report of the account award this week in Adweek.
He said he expected to sign additional dealer groups.


N.C.A.A. Consultant Is Under Fire
The controversy surrounding eligibility standards for college athletes intensified yesterday when a member of Congress said that key people in a research group responsible for advising National Collegiate Athletic Association committees on such issues have ties to Ray Cattell, a psychiatrist whose views on social engineering have provoked charges of racism and elitism.
In a seven-page letter to Joe Crowley, president of the N.C.A.A., Congresswoman Cardiss Collins complained that three of the 10 members of the Data Analysis Working Group, which is studying graduation rates, have close academic and philosophic ties to Cattell.


Classical Music in Review
'Die Fledermaus' Amato Opera 319 Bowery East Village


Sports of The Times; The Hurleys Respond To a Tragedy
IN the middle of the night, Ed Ford was knocking at the door of the Hurley home in Country Village, where the house lights and Christmas decorations shone through the windows.
The Hurleys live less than 20 minutes from Ford's apartment in Jersey City, where he had heard the terrible news about Bobby Hurley after being awakened by a neighbor's phone call, who had heard it on a radio.


After 2 Weeks of Mayhem, The Nation Is Asking Why
After a murderous two weeks that Americans could only wish was a bad made-for-TV movie, a sense of outrage and urgency has spread from small towns to big cities to state capitals and the White House, as the country searches itself for the causes of crime and ways to make people safer.
The fateful first weeks of December have been a period of random, brutal violence in which any one of a number of murders would have been chilling enough by itself.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FIDELITY MEDICAL INC., Florham Park, N.J., said its officers would take a 10 percent pay cut for the fiscal year ending in September.
NORTHERN TRUST CORP., Chicago, agreed to acquire Hazelhurst &amp; Associates Inc., a privately held retirement-benefits services company, for $22.5 million in stock.
VALUE MERCHANTS INC.,Milwaukee, said yesterday that it had filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.


Jets' Defense Ready for Cowboys
Players usually receive tickets for friends and family when their team plays a road game in the player's hometown.
But the Jets-Cowboys game on Saturday at Giants Stadium is so big that defensive end Marvin Washington has people traveling from Dallas to New York.
And the Jets defensive end doesn't plan to let them down.
"I'm from Dallas and I want to give it all up in this game so that when I go home during the off season I can say we beat the Cowboys," Washington said.


Credit Markets; Paramount Board Said to Reject Bid Panel
The board of Paramount Communications Inc. decided late yesterday not to set up a committee of independent directors to evaluate rival takeover bids from QVC Network Inc. and Viacom Inc., an executive close to the Paramount board said.
The move was something of a surprise, because the board has come under stinging criticism both in the courts and on Wall Street for its failure to consider QVC's higher bid in the face of a friendly merger agreement with Viacom.


Books of The Times; Portrait of a Portraitist Of a Century's Horrors
Francis Bacon  His Life and Violent Times  By Andrew Sinclair  Illustrated. 354 pages.
Crown Publishers.


WISCONSIN PLEDGES TO TAKE OWN PATH ON WELFARE BY '99
Wisconsin vowed today to withdraw from the Federal welfare program by 1999 and to replace the much-criticized system with an unspecified state plan for public relief.
The pledge, signed into law, is the first instance of a state seeking to drop the Federal welfare program since its inception during the Great Depression, and it reflects the political turmoil engulfing the welfare system around the country.


'Smart Water' Fails a Scientific Test
FIVE years ago the prestigious British journal Nature published results of a French experiment that were so manifestly implausible that the journal's editors themselves warned readers to beware.
Although the French experiment was generally discredited immediately after its publication, Nature last week got around to driving what it hopes will be the final nail into the French claims.
The original research was conducted by Dr.
Jacques Benveniste at Inserm Laboratory of the University of Paris and his colleagues at Hebrew University of Jerusalem, the University of Milan and the University of Toronto.


No Headline
"No dates are sacred." -- YITZHAK RABIN, Prime Minister of Israel.  [ A1:2. ]


It's Basic Training For Riley's Knicks
The Knicks went back to basics today at practice, working on fundamentals as they prepared to play the Denver Nuggets on Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden.
New York (13-4) has not been impressive on offense lately, despite its three-game winning streak.
Pat Riley felt the Knicks' execution has been lacking, so he emphasized that point.


METRO DIGEST
CLINTON URGES INTOLERANCE TO CRIME Preaching to a choir of contributors to Sen.
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, President Clinton urged his audience at the Waldorf-Astoria to "become more intolerant of things we take for granted" such as violent crime and the collapse of the American family -- things, he said, that Mr.
Moynihan has been warning about for a generation.
B3.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Young &amp; Rubicam Wins Lufthansa
Lufthansa German Airlines said yesterday that it had consolidated its global account, with billings estimated to exceed $60 million at various agencies around the world, at Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., which already handles the account in countries including Germany.
Charles Croce, a Lufthansa spokesman in New York, said that Young &amp; Rubicam was awarded the account after a two-month review between it and McCann-Erickson Worldwide, which has handled the account in the United States and some countries in Latin America and Asia, with billings estimated at $12 million.
Susan Irwin, a McCann spokeswoman in New York, said that McCann and the airline had "mutually decided to part ways."


Debate on Benefit Of Breast Screening
Experts disagree on the benefits of using mammograms to screen women under 50 for breast cancer.
Looking at several surveys, the National Cancer Institute found no proof of lives being saved, but some radiologists say there are reasons to believe a benefit will emerge with other studies over time.
Science Times, page C1.


By Design; Fast Festive Hair
Everyone wants to look festive for holiday parties, but who has time for the beauty salon?
Never fear.
Elaborate hairdos have faded into the background and simplicity reigns, so you can do your own styling.
Long hair can be pulled back into a chignon or a French twist and adorned with one or more of Brad Johns's silver or vermeil hairpins, which are sold in the Oribe salon at Elizabeth Arden.


Clinton Warns of Harm in Accepting Violence
Preaching to a choir of Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan's contributors, President Clinton last night urged his audience to "become more intolerant of things we take for granted" such as violent crime and the collapse of the American family -- things, he said, that Mr.
Moynihan has been warning about for a generation.
Speaking before a giant American flag, Mr.
Clinton also suggested that Americans eschew "political correctness," which, he hinted, has sometimes left people afraid of appearing insensitive and thus thwarted frank discussion of the causes and consequences of poverty, violence and social disintegration.


Corrections
A picture caption on Dec. 6 about domestic violence among immigrants misidentified the support group to which the women shown belong.
It is Sakhi, an organization of Indian women, not the New York Asian Women's Center.


Germans Whisper Softly in Trade Rivals' EarsDow at Record as a Few Stocks Jump
Everybody always knew that in the end it would come to this: the United States and Europe -- France, really -- haggling down to the wire over a global trade agreement, with millions of jobs and billions of dollars worth of potential business hanging in the balance.
Everyone knew that failure to reach an accord would be a disaster -- for the recession-ridden European Community, for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, for trans-Atlantic economic and strategic relations.


Ploy for Aid: Cracking Down on Mexican Students
In a rural school district here on the Texas-Mexico border, 99.6 percent of the students have a Hispanic surname.
Roughly half of the district's 12,850 students are children of migrant farm workers, and just about all the students have relatives or friends across the border, a stone's throw away.
Some children, school officials say, even commute from Mexico.
Now the La Joya Independent School District has announced plans to crack down on Mexicans attending American schools, with students to be required to prove that their parents or legal guardians live in the district.
Appearances aside, the proposal is by no means an example of anti-immigrant fervor.


Q&amp;A
Lightning Rods
Q. What shape of lightning rod works best and how does it work?


Agent Drops Client
The agent for PAT VALENZUELA does not know why the star jockey canceled his mounts Sunday at Hollywood Park and has quit representing the rider.
Valenzuela, who tested positive for cocaine in 1989 and served a suspension, said he was ill but did not elaborate on his condition when he informed the stewards.
Among the five mounts he passed up Sunday was a ride on Fraise, who won the $500,000 Hollywood Turf Cup under jockey CHRIS McCARRON .
Two other horses scheduled for Valenzuela also won.


Richter, Who Doesn't Lose Anymore, Wins Duel of the Goalies
Mike Richter had joked about how he would spend the Rangers' recent layoff.
He said he would eat a little, drink a lot and probably end up a bit chubby when he returned to the ice.
This, of course, was nowhere near to the truth.
After a two-day vacation and four-day layoff, Richter met Buffalo's Dominik Hasek -- the league's other red-hot goaltender -- last night at Madison Square Garden and upstaged his challenger with a sparkling 2-0 shutout.


Sam &amp; Libby Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 2


New Leader Of Education In New Jersey
In her first cabinet selection, Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman announced today that she would nominate Leo F. Klagholz, a senior official in the Department of Education, to be her Commissioner of Education.
The current Commissioner, Mary Lee Fitzgerald, had expressed hopes of being kept on by the new administration and Mrs.
Whitman had considered that idea for weeks, even though the Education Commissioner had publicly criticized some major points of the Governor-elect's education plan.
Dr.
Fitzgerald left her office early this afternoon and was not available for comment, said Al Wicklund, a department spokesman.


Susan Molinari Will Not Run for Governor
Representative Susan Molinari, a Staten Island Republican, said today that she would not run for governor next year.
Ms.
Molinari, who is 35 and serving her second full term in Congress, had announced last month that she was considering the race.
Her father, Guy V. Molinari, the Staten Island Borough President, said today that he would take a fresh look at the gubernatorial race in light of his daughter's withdrawal.
Mr.
Molinari had put aside his thoughts about the race while his daughter was exploring it.


Housing Chief Is Said To Decline Senate Seat
Spurning entreaties from the Texas Democratic Party, Henry G. Cisneros, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, has ruled out a bid for the United States Senate, a close aide said tonight.
Mr.
Cisneros's decision came after an unusual debate in recent days that reached the highest levels of the Clinton Administration.


Steve Nelson, Ex-Communist Tied To Ruling on Sedition, Dies at 90
Steve Nelson, the defendant in a case that led to a Supreme Court ruling in 1956 that invalidated state sedition laws, died on Saturday at Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan.
Mr.
Nelson, who was a member of the Communist Party at the time of the ruling, was 90 and lived in Truro, Mass.
The cause was complications after aorta surgery, his family said.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.90
2.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.03
3.04
3.23
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.23
3.40
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.32
5.29
6.49
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.23
6.20
7.46
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.27
7.24
8.43
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.53
5.50
6.37
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Russian Vote; NATIONALISTS MOVE FAR OUT IN FRONT IN RUSSIAN VOTING
Stunned by still-partial results that show them trailing far behind ultranationalists in Sunday's parliamentary elections, leaders of Russia's main Government party called on all pro-reform forces today to join forces urgently against the rising threat of "radical extremists."
First Deputy Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar admitted that his party, Russia's Choice, had received a "big and unpleasant surprise" after incomplete returns put the Liberal Democratic Party, led by the hard-line nationalist Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, ahead with the support of almost a quarter of the voters.  10-Point Lead for Nationalists
Based on unofficial returns from 53 of Russia's 89 regions, the news agency Interfax tonight reported that Mr.
Zhirinovsky's party had 24.5 percent of the vote and that Russia's Choice was far behind with 14.5 percent, closely followed by the Communist Party with 11.3 percent.
Only five other parties were reported to be clearing the 5 percent threshold required to seat delegates in the new Federal Assembly.
They included the Women's Party of Russia with 8.4 percent, and the reform party led by the economist Grigory A.  Yavlinsky with 6.7 percent.


Insurer Sells Off Commercial Mortgages
The Phoenix Home Life Mutual Insurance Company said yesterday that it had sold more than $500 million of commercial mortgage loans, of which about $96 million were in default.
The sales by the Hartford-based company are the latest in a string of real estate sales announced by large companies in response to problems with those investments and tougher capital standards that take effect at the end of this year.
Prudential Insurance, for example, recently agreed to sell nearly $1 billion of shopping centers and is planning to sell as much as $700 million of real estate it acquired through foreclosure of loans.
Travelers recently sold $643 million of loans and real estate to the investor George Soros.


Patterns
Adidas Strikes Back
It looks like the cozy relationship between street-wear stores and the established brands idolized by their customers may be drawing to a close.
Adidas took several small stores in New York to court last week, accusing them of infringing on the registered Adidas trademark.
So far, the stores that have consented to stop selling the merchandise include Union, Basic Wheels, Big Drop and the Spot Downtown.


Gun Control Today Has Proved a False Prophet
To the Editor:
How many more innocents will have to die before we realize that "gun control," in its present incarnation, is a false prophet?
The tragic events on the Long Island Rail Road prove that the new Brady legislation has been weighed, and found wanting.
Not only did Colin Ferguson buy the Ruger P-89 he used legally, after filling out a bevy of state and Federal forms, but he bought it subject to a California law requiring a 15-day waiting period, three times that of the Brady waiting period.
So much for a "waiting" period resulting in a decrease in crimes committed in the heat of passion.


Eating Well
THOUSANDS of Americans have been led to believe that the Food and Drug Administration plans to take away their vitamins and minerals and herbals and botanicals and amino acids.
A headline in The Washington Post last week read, "Next Week, F.D.A. Will Take Vitamins." Maybe the headline writer misread the story or just has a malevolent sense of humor.
But to many people, the issue of regulating dietary supplements is no laughing matter.


As the Elections Near, Killings Shake El Salvador
Three months before national elections intended to introduce a stable democracy in El Salvador, a resurgence of prominent killings is threatening to upset progress toward national reconciliation, diplomats and many political leaders say.
In a recent three-month period, 43 people, many of them associated with the country's formerly belligerent leftist and rightist political factions, were the victims of "arbitrary executions," said the United Nations, which has been overseeing El Salvador's transition to peace.


Sights Are Set on Other Anti-Gay Measures
Heartened by a judge's decision in Colorado yesterday striking down that state's initiative opposing gay rights, advocates of gay rights say they are encouraged about their chances of keeping similar measures off the ballot in other states.
"The decision affirms clearly that the fundamental rights of lesbians and gay man cannot be voted away by the general public," said Suzanne Goldberg, a New York lawyer for the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund, a gay rights group.
"With courts in California, Oregon and Colorado declaring anti-gay initiatives unconstitutional, it's a big boost for us."


Picking a Class of '98: The Early Returns Are In
After an 11-day struggle that started on Dec. 3, the admissions team at Brown University began assembling the class of 1998, selecting the first members from among the 1,975 high school seniors who applied last month for early-decision admission.
Today, Brown, like many universities across the country, is mailing out its acceptances, deferrals and rejections to these applicants.
Of them, 535, or 25 percent, have been accepted, 15 percent rejected and 60 percent held over for consideration in the spring, when they will have to compete with 20,000 other applicants for the remaining 2,000 acceptance spots.
About half will go elsewhere, leaving an entering class of about 1,350.


New York Struggles to Lure Coveted Biotech Labs
Innovir Laboratories, a small company seeking cures for hepatitis, leukemia and other maladies, plans to leave New York City soon.
"We need to expand," said Allan R. Goldberg, Innovir's president.
"There's all this empty office space in Manhattan, but it's practically impossible to find anything that's right for us. Believe me, I've tried."


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Mark Eichhorn, pitcher, and Rich Gedman, catcher, on minor-league contracts.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Scioscia, catcher, on a minor-league contract.


Stage Set for New Round of Paramount Bids
Under intense scrutiny in the courts and on Wall Street, Paramount Communications Inc. laid down court-ordered ground rules yesterday for the sale of the company while withdrawing support for an existing bid from its handpicked merger partner, Viacom Inc.
Paramount called for new bids to be tendered by Monday.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-20  WORLD TRADE AGREEMENT  The United States and Europe agreed to put aside major trade disputes, clearing the way for a global trade pact covering more industries in more countries than any other trade agreement in history.
A1  FREE TRADE GAINS HARD TO PROVE  The view that free trade means prosperity and economic growth is more often asserted than explained, and is one of the most difficult economic concepts to prove.
A1


Different Paths for Workers and Students


Claim of Rights Violation Of Hasidic Jews Is Rejected
A Federal judge ruled today that a Rockland County village had not violated the housing rights of Orthodox and Hasidic Jews by trying to place zoning restrictions on the establishment of small synagogues in private homes.
In dismissing a Justice Department civil lawsuit against the village of Airmont, Judge Gerard L. Goettel of Federal District Court rejected the Government's claim that the village had discriminated against Orthodox and Hasidic Jews, and infringed on their ability to worship, by opposing the efforts of some to create synagogues within their houses.


In America; Nurses On the Advance
Nurses have been moving steadily, relentlessly toward more autonomy and responsibility, advancing ever more boldly in the last few years into territory previously controlled by physicians.
Now the doctors, feeling threatened, are counterattacking.
The issue is whether registered nurses with advanced training should be allowed to deliver primary health care on their own.
Primary care refers to the first contact a patient has with the health care system.
It's the basic, initial care that you receive when visiting a clinic or a doctor's office -- the care you get before being referred, if necessary, to a specialist.


Investigators Tell How Search Led to a Record Heroin Seizure
The sparsely furnished West Side apartment contained little furniture and few signs of being lived in, but as the police raiders snapped open five suitcases they discovered a small mountain of evidence and a fortune in illegal drugs -- 424 pounds of pure heroin worth an estimated $240 million in street sales.
Culminating an intricate two-year investigation that spun from the sidewalks of Hell's Kitchen to Europe to Asia and finally to a luxury Manhattan apartment building, law-enforcement officials said yesterday that they had found the hideaway of an international drug importer.
The heroin, authorities said, could have been diluted and divided into at least 12 million packets selling for from $10 to $20 each.


Review/Music; Oratorio as Theater Without Visuals
The music of Berlioz draws its peculiar powers from storytelling.
Narrative is the engine for the eccentric surges of movement and for the unexpected twists and turns that go with it.
The vocabulary may be symphonic, but the syntax is not.
Berlioz's colleagues built pieces of music; he himself imagined characters and situations and set music in pursuit of them.
Indeed, it is the unevenness of "L'Enfance du Christ," which Roger Norrington, the Orchestra of St.
Luke's and the Tanglewood Festival Chorus brought to Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday, that creates much of its charm.
Part 1, given over to King Herod's anxious dreams and the Slaughter of the Innocents, is opera pure and simple.
In the first of many pictorial strokes, Roman sentinels pace to bass pizzicatos.
Minor principals introduce the scene.
Herod soliloquizes on his bad dreams.
Soothsayers predict the coming of the Christ Child.
Herod orders the murders of the newborn.


Buyers Turn Wary, and the Dow Falls 21.80
Stocks declined in moderately active trading yesterday as buyers turned cautious following a drop in bond prices that pushed interest rates higher.
Blue-chip stocks gave back much of their gains of the previous day.
Usually positive news like lower oil prices, the successful negotiations in Europe on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and a modest gain in November retail sales was discounted.


Corrections
An article yesterday about two appointments announced by Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani misidentified the Manhattan neighborhood where Paul A. Crotty, who was named Corporation Counsel, lives.
It is Stuyvesant Town, not the Upper East Side.
In some copies the picture caption with the article misidentified the official who would be designated to run City Hall in Mr.
Giuliani's absence.
He is Peter J. Powers, the Deputy Mayor for Operations, not Mr.
Crotty.


A Feminism for All
To The Living Section:


Conner's Project Gets a Major Backer
DENNIS CONNER announced in New York yesterday that the Cadillac division of General Motors has agreed to become a major sponsor of his 1995 America's Cup effort.
Cadillac is joining Team Dennis Conner as a "gold-level" supporter, which indicates a $3 million contribution in cash and services.
Having Cadillac behind him, as it was in Conner's 1992 America's Cup defense, helps to solidify an effort that is expected to cost about $15 million in 1995.


Federal Express Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


THE WORLD TRADE AGREEMENT: THE FRENCH STRATEGY Months of Risk, Moments of Isolation, Now Boasts of Triumph
Having risked disaster in the GATT negotiations, France said today that it had won an important victory by forcing the United States to be flexible about agricultural exports and to exclude movies and television from a proposed world trade-liberalization package.
Opposition parties and farmers were less enthusiastic over what the conservative Government of Prime Minister Edouard Balladur had achieved, but for the Government, the gamble of testing its will against Washington and risking a crisis in relations with its European partners seems to have paid off.


CHRONICLE
As the Christmas season moves into high gear, L. JAY OLIVA, the president of New York University, becomes concerned that students from distant places may feel isolated.
So tonight, as he has for the last several years, he will take nine of them to Macy's to see Santa Claus.
"The first year we did this, one student in our group gave me a weird look and said, 'What, no Toyland?' " Dr.
Oliva recalled.
"So we go through Toyland and stop at the wishing tree to make a wish and get our pictures taken with Santa.


Kovalev to Return From Suspension Without Apologies
Aleksei Kovalev has watched the last five Ranger games on television.
Even when he came to Madison Square Garden, for the three home games the Rangers played during his suspension, Kovalev watched the games in the wives' room rather than from the stands.
He sat and he stood and he paced and he wrung his hands in frustration.
Patience is not one of Kovalev's virtues.
"It was too hard," said Kovalev, who will be back in the lineup Wednesday night when the Rangers play the Whalers at Madison Square Garden.
"I don't like games when I'm not a player. They are no fun."


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 10
Dec. 3
Dec. 11
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.8
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.5
3.6
3.1
Gasoline stocks
223.4
222.6
212.6
Distillate stocks
144.9
145.7
140.4
Crude imports, daily
7.1
8.0
7.0
Product imports, daily
1.9
2.0
1.4
Crude stocks
345.4
339.3
329.4
Crude production, daily
7.0
6.9
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
92.4
93.1
86.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Executive Changes
DONALDSON, LUFKIN &amp; JENRETTE, New York, named Stuart Robbins co-manager of its 400-member institutional equities division.
MELVILLE CORP.,Rye, N.Y., named Jerald L. Maurer senior vice president of human resources.
PAINE WEBBER INC., New York, said Joyce N. Fensterstock, president of Paine Webber Mutual Funds and managing director of the Mitchell Hutchins Asset Management Inc. subsidiary, had been named to the additional post of president of Mitchell Hutchins Asset Management.


Head of Failing S.&amp; L. Helped Clinton Pay a $50,000 Personal Debt in 1985
The owner of a failing Arkansas savings and loan association raised money for Gov.
Bill Clinton in 1985 to help relieve the Clinton family of a $50,000 personal debt that the Clintons would otherwise have had trouble repaying, newly discovered documents show.
The disclosure that the money covered a heavy private debt, rather than a less personally onerous campaign obligation, shows that the savings and loan executive, James McDougal, performed a more valuable favor for Mr.
Clinton than has been previously known.


Robert Lewine, 80, Programmer Responsible for First Disney Show
Robert F. Lewine, who worked as a vice president for programming at all three national television networks, died on Monday at his home in Beverly Hills.
He was 80.
The cause was a respiratory condition, said an announcement by the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences in North Holywood, of which he was a past president.


Myrna Loy, Model of Urbanity in 'Thin Man' Roles, Dies at 88
Myrna Loy, the urbane actress who personified a liberated wife of intelligence and wry good humor in some of the best American movie comedies of the 1930's and 40's, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 88.
She died in surgery after a long illness, said Sherlee Lantz, a longtime friend of Miss Loy.


Fit to Print?
To The Living Section:
After reading Caryn James's article "A Life in Exile From America, From Memory"  [ Nov. 17 ] , I felt that you had forgotten your motto, "All the News That's Fit to Print." Why any respectable paper would waste ink on Roman Polanski is unfathomable.


At Least 34 Crushed to Death in Cairo


Clarifying Decision, Judge Voids All of Suicide Law
A day after declaring a state law banning assisted suicide unconstitutional, a Michigan judge officially struck down the law, making it clear for the first time that his ruling was intended to void the entire bill, not just the parts of it he found unconstitutional.
"I am unaware of any case dealing with a fundamental right where such a ruling could leave any vitality in such a statute," said the judge, Richard C. Kaufman, of Wayne County Circuit Court.
Moments earlier, he ruled that Dr.
Jack Kevorkian had met all four of the conditions that the judge said were necessary to challenge the law in a case involving Donald O'Keefe, 73, who had been suffering from bone cancer.


Learning to Play Transition Game
Something was going on in the barracks.
It was a normal Friday night at the University of Connecticut, and students were doing the things students do on Friday night.
Doron Sheffer, the 21-year-old freshman who was discharged from the Israeli Army last summer, tried to understand why there was so much noise.
When Sheffer later mentioned the situation to Jim Calhoun, the basketball coach, it was more an observation than a complaint.
"I said, 'First thing, it's a dormitory,' " Calhoun remembered, smiling at the memory.
"The second thing is, that's what they're supposed to do."'


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.97
2.96
3.17
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.03
3.03
3.20
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.23
3.49
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.35
5.32
6.45
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.29
6.23
7.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.34
7.27
8.43
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.55
5.53
6.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Dance; Show Business's Deep Side, Seen by Ellington and Ailey
Among the many dance pieces Alvin Ailey choreographed to Duke Ellington's music, "The Mooche" (1975) retains a distinct flavor.
Ailey took Ellington's composition of the same funky title and used it as a prologue to a suite evoking the jazz age through a series of danced portraits.
The overall style, unusual for Ailey, is straight show business.
The inspiration was a series of musical portraits by Ellington, dedicated to popular female performing artists.
The women who lead the current revival of "The Mooche" -- which was given on Saturday night at City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan -- are splendidly differentiated from one another.


David Shainberg, 61, A Psychoanalyst, Dies
Dr.
David Shainberg, a Manhattan psychoanalyst, died on Dec. 5 at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 61 and had homes in Manhattan and Wellfleet, Mass.
The cause was pulmonary fibrosis, his family said.


Sports of The Times; Who Says Football Is Boring?
FOR years I've been insisting that football puts me to sleep, that all they ever do is run or pass or kick, in between commercials.
Then Peter King of Sports Illustrated wrote a stimulating article about the artistic decline of the National Football League, and half the country jumped in on this theme.
Could football have become even more boring than I remembered?
A friend of ours -- she knows who she is -- is always prodding me to take a fresh look at American football with the same enthusiasm I have for soccer.
Look at the skills.
Look at the stars.
Look at the drama.
She has a point.


U.S. Concerns Split Over Japan Law
Several American computer companies are arguing in favor of a change in Japan's copyright law that the United States Government and many other American companies vigorously oppose.
The break in the unified front of the American computer industry at a hearing here Monday could make it easier for Japan's Government to justify the revision of the law.


Mental Health Management Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Helping a Struggling Family Now To Prevent More Problems Later
With papers fanned out on his lap and a pencil tucked behind one ear, Suresh Jaikaran described his latest work in progress, a 26-page research paper on the Persian Gulf war, as if it were the thorniest problem ever to face a 16-year-old.
"It has to have covers and an index and everything has to be perfect, just like a book," he said.
"It's for social studies class."


Why 'Politically Correct' Still Has Its Uses; Proscribed
To the Editor:
Liberal laments are often self-satires.
A fair summary of your Dec. 5 Editorial Notebook by Brent Staples might be "politically correct" is no longer politically correct.
Think about it.
MIKE KAUFMAN  Roslyn Heights, L.I., Dec. 6, 1993


A Gay Comedian With a School Shtick
Like many struggling stand-up comedians, Tom Ammiano draws much of his material from his day job.
So just about every weekend he leaps to the smoky stage of a club and launches into his "school board routine."
Mr.
Ammiano, 51, a former teacher, is the San Francisco school board president.
He is also one of the few openly gay comics in the country, having made a point of his sexuality when he began performing in the early 1980's.


Sound Settlement on College Aid
The Justice Department and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology are close to settling an antitrust suit on terms that would permit universities to cooperate in determining how much financial aid to offer applicants.
That is a sound resolution to a misguided case, brought by the Bush Administration, that charged M.I.T. and eight other schools with breaking antitrust laws by agreeing to limit aid to an applicant's financial need.
To the Bush Administration, the schools were engaging in a price-fixing conspiracy that deprived applicants of the opportunity to shop around for the best offer.
M.I.T. countered that financial aid was charity, not commerce, and that its cooperative arrangement with the other schools was designed to spread a limited amount of aid over the maximum number of needy students.
By cooperating, the universities avoided a bidding war that would have driven up aid to star applicants while leaving thousands of qualified students no means to attend the college of their choice.


Israel Allows Return of 200 Arabs Left in Deportee Camp in Lebanon
About 200 Palestinians who were expelled by Israel a year ago packed their belongings at a hillside tent camp in southern Lebanon today as the Israeli Government closed the book on a mass deportation that had brought it international condemnation and few of the hoped-for security benefits.
A Lebanese messenger drove to the camp with an Israeli letter listing the names of the deportees, all accused Islamic militants, who would be allowed to return to the occupied territories on Wednesday by way of the buffer strip across southern Lebanon that Israel calls its security zone.


Ex-Salomon Trader Gets 4 Months
The former head of Salomon Inc.'s Government securities trading was sentenced yesterday to four months in a minimum-security prison for his role in the 1991 Treasury auction scandal.
United States District Judge Pierre N. Leval also fined the former trader, Paul W. Mozer, $30,000.
Mr.
Mozer had faced a maximum 10 years in prison and a $500,000 fine.
The jail term is to begin on Jan. 18.


Shopping Power
"Every one looked at the motor car. Septimus looked. Boys on bicycles sprang off. Traffic accumulated. And there the motor car stood. . . . Was it the Queen in there -- the Queen going shopping?"  -- From "Mrs. Dalloway," by Virginia Woolf
The car that stopped traffic on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan Monday, the car with the darkened windows and the flags fluttering in the late afternoon breeze, was that of the President of the United States; and he was, indeed, going shopping.
Like Woolf's mysterious passenger, he was "removed only by a hand's-breadth from ordinary people who might now, for the first and last time, be within speaking distance of . . . majesty. . . ."


Intense Shelling and Firefights in Sarajevo Leave 11 Civilians Dead
Intense firefights and heavy shelling left at least 11 civilians dead and more than 20 wounded in Sarajevo today, hospital officials and news reports said.
The central-city clashes were the heaviest here in weeks, with Bosnian Army and Serbian forces trading fire with anti-aircraft guns, automatic rifles and rocket-propelled grenades.
Fighting here has gradually increased since last week, when the Bosnian Army mounted assaults on the Serb-held Grbavica neighborhood in the southern part of the city.


Book Notes
Cheever, Abridged
No one ended up happy after Academy Chicago Publishers tried to publish a book of uncollected, hard-to-find stories by John Cheever and the Cheever family sued.
The stories weren't representative of Mr.
Cheever's best work, his survivors said; moreover, they thought the author, who died in 1982, would have objected wholeheartedly to their publication.


Tacos With Fish? Why Not?
SOFT fish tacos are a recent phenomenon from California.
Before guffawing at the idea of fish tacos, try this low-fat version.
After all, when you think about it, what could be bad about swordfish with black beans and mango salsa?
The only difference is that everything has been wrapped up in a tortilla.
It's a little messy because the tortillas are crammed with ingredients, but the mess is delicious.
Once you've made swordfish tacos you will want to make red-snapper tacos and tuna tacos and shrimp tacos and crab-meat tacos.


INSIDE
A Big Bet on Satellite TV
Hughes Communications is betting $1 billion that it can beam 150 channels of television directly from space satellites to any home in the continental United States.
Page D1.
Questions on S.&amp; L. Owner
The owner of a failed Arkansas savings and loan helped raise money for Gov.
Bill Clinton in 1985 to help cover a $50,000 personal debt, newly discovered documents show.
Page B8.
Myrna Loy Is Dead
The urbane actress of "The Thin Man" and movie comedies died yesterday.
She was 88.
Page B11.
Her Choice on Caesarean
An Illinois court ruled that a woman cannot be forced to have a Caesarean section to save her fetus.
Page A22.
Imagining the Holocaust
"Schindler's List," directed by Steven Spielberg, opens today.
Janet Maslin's review is on page C19.


Stock Plan's Victory Margin Was Slim, Green Point Says
Depositors of the Green Point Savings Bank approved its plan for an initial public stock offering by a narrow margin in heavy voting, according to a tally released by the bank late Monday.
The bank had originally declined to disclose the results of the vote, held at a depositors meeting last Friday, but was compelled to do so by the New York State Banking Department.


Nets Resume Breathing: X-Rays Clear Anderson
Kenny Anderson skipped practice today.
No, he wasn't tired after playing 52 minutes during the Nets' 110-105 double-overtime victory over the Miami Heat on Monday night.
He had to undergo more tests on his sore left wrist.
Anderson banged his wrist -- the same one he broke last season -- during a game against the Chicago Bulls last Friday.
Although a CAT scan was negative, Coach Chuck Daly is concerned about the health of his most consistent performer and its effect on the team's scoring.
Impressive Minutes
In the last four games, Anderson has played 36, 39, 41 and 52 minutes.
Over that span, he has notched three double doubles and a triple double -- a career-high 32 points, 11 assists and 10 rebounds -- on Monday.
His 19.1 points per game is second to Derrick Coleman's 21.5, and his 38.6 minutes lead the team.


Oil Imports Up 11%
Imports of crude oil jumped last month by 11 percent compared with November 1992, the American Petroleum Institute reported yesterday.
The jump accelerated the growth of imports for the year so far, to 7.5 percent.
The growth in imports comes as domestic oil production continues to fall, according to the institute's monthly statistical report.


Mexican TV Stock Issue Is $1 Billion
The principal owner of Mexico's biggest media company, Grupo Televisa S.A., and members of his family offered 10 percent of the company's stock for sale today in a $1 billion worldwide stock offering.
The sale by Emilio Azcarraga and his family came after Mexican authorities granted final approval for the company's proposed 3-for-1 stock split.


Daly to Miss First 12 Events of 1994
JOHN DALY, who was suspended last month by the PGA Tour commissioner, DEANE BEMAN, will miss the first 12 events of the 1994 season.
Daly, 27, who was suspended indefinitely after he picked up his ball during play at the Kapalua International in Hawaii, will play his first PGA Tour event next year at the Freeport-McMoran Classic in New Orleans, March 31-April 3, according to a report in Golf World magazine.


Al Unser Sr. Is Still in the Running
Retirement isn't in the picture for AL UNSER Sr., the oldest Indianapolis 500 winner and the oldest driver still active in Indy car racing.
Unser, a four-time Indy champion and a member of one of the most famous families in auto racing, said yesterday that he will drive a new Lola-Cosworth in 1994 for the AMS Racing team of Indianapolis.


60-Minute Gourmet
IN recent years I have probably devised dozens of recipes that blend seafood with pasta.
The variations are endless, and if you pay close attention to cooking time and seasonings, these dishes are invariably a big hit.
Almost any kind of pasta can be used.
One exception might be angel hair.
Despite its popularity in restaurants these days, angel hair is so delicate that it does not hold well.
That is why in restaurants it so often arrives at the table overcooked or glutinous.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A young talent tries to straddle both Madison Avenue and Hollywood.
A YOUNG copywriter, whose rapid rise surprised Madison Avenue almost as much as his unexpected decision to leave advertising, has returned to the business.
But rather than writing commercials, this time he is shooting them.
Tom DeCerchio, who was a co-founder of one of the hottest New York "brat pack" shops at the age of 28, left for Hollywood in 1991 to pursue a career as a screenwriter and film director.
Today, he is also filming commercials for advertisers like Anheuser-Busch and the Indiana state lottery.


Rapp Collins Is Hired For Pepsi Projects
The Pepsi-Cola Company said yesterday that it had selected Rapp Collins Worldwide of New York to handle direct marketing assignments on what it called "a per-project basis." Though billings were not disclosed, Advertising Age estimated them to exceed $10 million.


Food Notes
For Now, Marrons Glaces
The aroma of roasted chestnuts may be winter's street perfume, but when it comes to the lushest chestnut flavor, nothing compares with marrons glaces, those plump, rich candied chestnuts from France.
La Maison du Chocolat, 25 East 73d Street, has them until the end of January, for $58 a pound.
Barocco's Food to Go
Barocco restaurant in TriBeCa has opened Barocco Food to Go, 121 Greenwich Avenue (near West 13th Street) in Greenwich Village.
It's an edition of Barocco Alimentari, the prepared-food shop next door to the restaurant on Church Street, with an equally inviting array of rustic salads, sandwiches, pastries and other foods.


Rule on Contributions Is Delayed
The board that governs municipal bond dealers said yesterday that it had set April 1 as the effective date for its proposed restrictions on political contributions by underwriting firms.
The Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board also made some changes in the proposed rule, which was first revised last month.
The additional changes increase the amount of disclosure required of firms and the number of employees covered by the restrictions on political contributions.
Officials would not provide details, except to say that the "basic outlines of the rule" had been retained.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COCA-COLA ENTERPRISES INC., Atlanta, said it had appointed Howard Buffett, son of the investor Warren E. Buffett, as a director, expanding its board to 14 members.
VENTRITEX INC., Sunnyvale, Calif., began clinical trials of its own intravenous lead system for use with its implantable heart defibrillator.


Inquiry Details Due In School Elections
The New York City school system's top investigator has turned up evidence that there was fraud or other wrongdoing in at least six of the city's 32 community school districts during last May's school board elections, law-enforcement officials and a Bronx community organizer familiar with a seven-month investigation into the vote said yesterday.
Edward Stancik, the special commissioner for investigation of the New York City school district, has scheduled a news conference for today, promising to detail his results.
During Mr.
Stancik's inquiry he has investigated reports of election wrongdoing in District 1 in Manhattan; Districts 8, 9, 10 and 12 in the Bronx, and District 21 in Brooklyn, one of Mr.
Stancik's investigators told Mildred Bonilla, a Bronx community organizer who cooperated with the investigation.


Battle Lines in the War on Drugs; No, Fight Harder
Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders's foray into the legalization of drugs reveals a stunning disregard of history, experience and human nature.
President Clinton was right to cut her off at the pass.
The nation has made significant progress against illegal drugs.
Campaigns like the Partnership for a Drug-Free America have helped reduce cocaine use more than 75 percent from its 1985 peak.
Marijuana use is at its lowest level since 1973.


Victims of Drunken Driving Seek to Heighten Awareness
"What you see is the headlights, and you know it's predestined," said Marge Lee, of Franklin Square, L. I. At that moment -- 10:10 P.M. on a crystal-clear summer night in July 1990 -- she told her stepson, as he drove their Suzuki Samurai down Route 7 in New Jersey toward the Holland Tunnel, that it looked like the oncoming Mustang was straying across the double yellow line.
She had always worried about her stepson, Kenney, because he rode a motorcycle.
"Typical neurotic mother, right?" she said yesterday at a news conference given by "survivors" of drunken drivers.
But he died in a car.


Betting Big on Small-Dish TV
At a rocket pad deep in the rain forest of French Guiana, technicians at Hughes Communications are about to launch the most audacious scheme yet to pour television straight into American living rooms.
On Friday, weather and technology permitting, a hired French Ariane rocket will soar out of the jungle, carrying the first of two 6,000-pound satellites to orbital parking spaces 22,300 miles over the Equator.
Roaring into a business now dominated by cable television, Hughes plans to beam 150 channels of television directly from space to any home in the continental United States.


Mullin Gets Ready to Return to Warriors
CHRIS MULLIN, who hasn't played in a regular-season game since February, is ready to return to the Golden State Warriors.
He says he could be back this week, maybe even tonight.
The All-Star swingman, who was rehabilitating from a torn ligament in his right hand when he developed tendinitis in his right shin two weeks ago, wasn't sure whether he will play tonight at Phoenix or wait until later in the week.
The Warriors will play Friday at Sacramento and Saturday at Seattle.


How Free Trade Prompts Growth: A Primer
Free trade means growth.
Free trade means growth.
Free trade means growth.
Just say it 50 more times and all doubts will melt away.
Those who dutifully followed the debate over the North American Free Trade Agreement and are now struggling to figure out what the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade has to do with the price of peas in Peoria may be excused for a dash of skepticism about a link that is more often asserted than explained.
It is, in fact, one of the most widely held yet most difficult to prove ideas in economics.


Trade Accord Draws a Mix Of Reviews
The trade agreement between the United States and the European Community drew mixed reviews from some big companies yesterday.
Such companies have said throughout the negotiations for a worldwide trade accord that the provisions to protect intellectual property and eliminate barriers on foreign investment could be more beneficial to them than reduced tariffs.


Knight's Punishment Comes to End
Indiana Coach BOB KNIGHT, having served a one-game suspension imposed by the university, will not be further disciplined by the Big Ten, Assistant Commissioner MARK RUDNER said yesterday.
Knight missed the opening game of the Indiana Classic on Friday for unsportsmanlike conduct during a game three days earlier against Notre Dame.
He was reinstated for Saturday night's title game.
"We did receive the report from Indiana, and the commissioner is not going to take any further action in the matter," Rudner said from his office in Park Ridge, Ill.
"The institutional action was deemed acceptable."


Away in a Manger, They Prepared


Jess Thomas Memorial
A memorial service for the Wagnerian tenor Jess Thomas is to take place in San Francisco on Friday at 3 P.M. at Grace Cathedral, California Street at Taylor Street.
Mr.
Thomas died of a heart attack on Oct. 11 at the age of 66.


Jeremiah Sullivan, 58, Actor and Astrologer
Jeremiah Sullivan, a theater and television actor and a professional astrologer, died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 58 and lived in New York City.
The cause was AIDS, said a friend, Joe Regan.


New York Leads in Workplace Murder
Working in New York can be murder.
Nearly half the deaths on the job in the New York metropolitan region last year were caused by homicides, a far higher percentage than in any other big urban area, including such crime-ridden cities as Miami, Los Angeles, Washington and Detroit.


PRO BASKETBALL Break Out the Anchovies: Knicks Finally Deliver a Pizza Night
The Knicks' fourth-quarter defense put the Denver Nuggets' offense under temporary house arrest last night.
By the time the Nuggets freed themselves, the outcome of the game had been decided and the pizza was on the house.
Starting the final period with a decisive 18-5 run, the Knicks (14-4) won their fourth consecutive game, 93-84, at Madison Square Garden.
The Nuggets were held to 16 points in the third quarter, then scored only 8 during the first eight minutes of the fourth quarter.


Synetic Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Senate Lawyers Say Packwood Altered Tapes of His Diary
Senate lawyers asserted today that Senator Bob Packwood altered a tape-recorded diary that they had subpoenaed as part of a yearlong ethics inquiry against him.
They asked a Federal court to seize the recordings and any transcriptions of them immediately.
In court papers filed here, the lawyers quoted a former aide to Mr.
Packwood, who said the Oregon Republican had made "revisions" in tapes that he had given her to transcribe.
The Senate ethics committee began investigating sexual harassment accusations against Mr.
Packwood early this year.


Germans Ask If Film Hurts Or Aids Nazis
Is it right for a state-subsidized German film to show an attractive young neo-Nazi spouting lies and propaganda?
Does government have the right, or even the duty, to ban such a film?
Germany is wrestling with these questions as it confronts an 83-minute documentary called "Profession: Neo-Nazi." The debate spilled past German borders this week when organizers of an Amsterdam film festival announced plans to show it on Wednesday, even though it has been pulled from distribution in Germany.


Inaugural Ethics
New York City's voluntary campaign finance program requires mayoral candidates who accept public matching funds to limit individual campaign contributions to $6,500.
But the cap doesn't apply to fund-raising for the winner's inaugural celebration, creating the potential for favor-seekers to buy influence by handing over much bigger checks to help pay the inaugural tab.
Mayor-elect Rudolph Giuliani deserves credit for confronting the problem.
He has decided to subject all donations to his public swearing-in and reception to the same $6,500 limit that applied during the campaign, and to disclose a complete list of donors in January.


Train Shooting Victim Speaks For First Time Since Injury
Carolyn McCarthy could not be sure how much her son remembered of what happened on the night of the shooting on the Long Island Rail Road.
And so, when 26-year-old Kevin McCarthy began asking this week about his father from his hospital bed, his mother was at something of a loss.
"There was a look in his eye," Mrs.
McCarthy said, recalling the moment she entered his room at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset on Monday after attending the funeral of her husband, Dennis, 52.
"He didn't say anything. There were a couple of friends in the room. When they left, he said, 'Dad. Where is Dad?'


Reeds Jewelers Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


A Deadline Slips in the Mideast
Israel's Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, and the Palestine Liberation Organization's chairman, Yasir Arafat, took brave risks this summer when they initialed a framework agreement on self-rule for Gaza and Jericho.
Both understood that they had moved far ahead of public opinion on their respective sides.
They gambled that a gathering momentum for peace would draw the doubters into the fold.
Now, however, the crucial momentum has been put at risk.
Israeli withdrawals from Gaza and Jericho that were supposed to begin on Monday had to be postponed when no agreement was reached on key details by Sunday night.


U.S. SET TO RESIST ANY KOREA ATTACK
In his first news conference since being sworn in as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili sought today to reassure allies and the American public that the United States could repel a North Korean attack on South Korea.
But he echoed statements that Defense Secretary Les Aspin made last weekend that there is no evidence an attack is more imminent now than it was several months ago.
North Korean leaders have spoken of such a possibility in the dispute over monitoring their nuclear installations.


In School
Connecticut residents know all about school integration.
They've been talking integration 30 years, and the more they talk, the more segregated the public schools grow.
When the talk started, Hartford schools were 50 percent black and Puerto Rican; now they're 93 percent.
This is not unusual.
Every few years Gary Orfield, a Harvard professor, updates his national segregation study.
The latest results, out yesterday: Two-thirds of America's black children go to predominantly minority schools, the highest level of segregation since 1968.
Two-thirds of America's black children know few, if any, white people.


Line at Hess Station Was for Toy Cars
The Christmas shopping season is just about over at Amerada Hess's 535 gas stations on the East Coast.
After two weeks of sellouts and short tempers, the company still has plenty of gasoline, but a shortage of toy police cars.
The surge in demand for the toys caught the company -- which has been selling different models each year starting on Thanksgiving Day for 30 years -- by surprise.
In New York and New Jersey, there were long lines even while the turkeys were cooling, as regular station customers and families hoping to fill stockings competed with a growing number of toy collectors.


Sales Brisk At Stores Last Month
Spending heavily for big-ticket goods, shoppers kicked off the holiday gift-giving season by sending retail sales in November up briskly, a preliminary tabulation by the Commerce Department showed today.
Consumers shoved $178.93 billion across counters last month, four-tenths of 1 percent more than in October, despite severe wintry weather that curtailed activity in much of the country toward the end of the month.


Why 'Politically Correct' Still Has Its Uses; Peirce and Pragmatism
To the Editor:
Brent Staples proposes (Editorial Notebook, Dec. 5) that we retire the cliche "politically correct." It is darkly ironic that politically correct should itself fall prey to linguistic stormtroopers.


Kenneth Scott, 93; Studied Genealogy And Taught History
Dr.
Kenneth Scott, a scholar of New York and American genealogy, died on Saturday at a nursing home in Maryland.
He was 93 and lived in Douglaston, Queens.
He had pneumonia, his family said.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Maine
Suddenly, the Black Bears, who lost but one of 45 games in winning the national championship last season, are just another hockey team.
They have lost four of their last five; they were beaten, 5-0, by UMass-Lowell on Sunday, their first shutout loss in 304 games dating to 1986, and their coach, Shawn Walsh, is under suspension.
Walsh's three-week, five-game suspension will include two games against Ferris State this weekend at Orono, Me., and end with the first match of the Mariucci Tournament at Minneapolis against Lake Superior State on Dec. 31.


At Purdue, a Wealth of Data on Consumer Debt
America speaks to Dr.
Robert W. Johnson through credit cards, mortgages and installment loans -- the many voices of consumer debt.
Since 1974, Dr.
Johnson and his colleagues at the Credit Research Center of Purdue University have been watching how Americans spend money they do not have, becoming the nation's leading repository of credit expertise.


Portuguese Wines From Small Estates
ALTHOUGH Joao Portugal Ramos is virtually unknown abroad, he is famous at home, but not for the patriotism of his middle name.
His colleagues compare him with Emile Peynaud, Bordeaux's leading enologist.
Americans now have a rich opportunity to discover why 17 estates have hired him to make their wines.
Three of Mr.
Ramos's reds, two imported for the first time, depict his style and illustrate a new sophistication in Portuguese reds.


U.N. Resolution Endorses Mideast Accords
The United Nations adopted a resolution today that endorses the recent agreements between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization and Jordan, and calls on all countries of the region to cooperate in settling their disputes.
The resolution, the first the General Assembly has adopted in 20 years calling for an overall Middle East peace agreement without criticizing Israel, represents an important step toward ending the quarrel over the region that has been a feature of previous General Assemblies, diplomats said.


Cheer or Stay Home, Jet Says
Tight end Johnny Mitchell practiced yesterday without wearing his knee brace for the first time in two weeks.
He must have been feeling better, because after practice he was sounding like the Mitchell of old.
This time his target was Jets fans.
Asked why the Jets have a 5-1 record on the road (one victory at Giants Stadium counted as a Giants home game) but are only 3-4 at home, Mitchell said the fan support isn't there.
"They kind of get down when we're not doing what they expect us to do," he said.
"It's sad. We have fair-weather fans here. That's why we can't worry about the fans and we have to go out and play our own game. When you go to places like Denver and Kansas City they have the 12th man. Here a team scores first and everything is quiet. We need that 12th man to get into the game.


Use of Antidepressant in Children at Issue
A DRUG commonly prescribed to treat bedwetting, hyperactivity and depression in children has come under Federal scrutiny after reports that some children using it have died suddenly.
An article published in July in The Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology described four cases of sudden death in children taking the medication, desipramine, made by Marion Merrell Dow Inc. under the brand name Norpramin.
Experts say three more cases of sudden death in children taking desipramine will be reported in another medical journal early next year.


Wine Talk
IF anything is meant to relieve the dry throat and rising panic of last-minute holiday shopping, it's wine.
Not drinking it, although that's never a bad idea at this time of year, but buying it.
Wine is the ideal last-minute gift.
And not only wine; there is a wide selection of wine-oriented gifts at all prices.


Job Training Offers New Chance to Disabled Man
Ed W. gets up at 4 A.M. weekdays and arrives at the Pfizer plant in Brooklyn at 6:30, always an hour before his shift starts.
This is a man who does not want to sleep through a second chance.
To Ed, who is disabled and a recovering alcoholic, his job is not just packing tablets into boxes.
It is the focus of his life, and a step toward recovery.
Ed is among 30 people in a job-training program operated by Adult Rehabilitation Services, a division of the Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service.
The bureau is one of seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
For people like Ed, donations to the Neediest Cases will be more important than ever this year because government financing for the bureau's job training program has been cut.


Dreaming of a White House Christmas
Hillary Rodham Clinton remembers the Christmas when, as an angel in her school's annual pageant, she stared so long at the flame of her candle that she hypnotized herself and fell over.
She also remembers the year she went skating with her family and friends, came home, took off her warm clothes, and discovered that she had chicken pox.
Calamities included, memories of earlier Christmases make her laugh.
But it's obvious from the entrance she makes as she greets a reporter in the White House Map Room that, no matter how tightly she is scheduled, no matter how tired she may be -- and her friends say she is very tired -- the Christmas season makes her feel very good.
As she gets off the elevator from the family quarters, in a Santa Claus red dress, she does a little dance, kids with her staff and trills a few notes.
This is another side of the First Lady, the side the public seldom sees as she makes speeches about health care and the importance of family values.


Driver Who Hit Hurley Is Tested For Drug
The 37-year-old house painter who drove the car that seriously injured Sacramento Kings rookie Bobby Hurley in an accident Sunday night has tested positive for an unspecified amount of amphetamine, an official in the Sacramento police department said today.
According to the official, who asked not to be named, tests administered at a hospital after the collision showed traces of the drug in the bloodstream of the driver, Daniel Wieland.
The police, alerted to the discovery, issued a search warrant this morning to obtain the test sample and then re-tested the blood to measure the precise amounts of the drug.
Depending on the level of amphetamine detected, a felony charge of driving under the influence could be filed against Wieland.


Legal Fight Over Caesarean Pits Mother Against Fetus
Until these days of anguish, the young mother-to-be followed her doctor's advice closely.
The pregnant woman wanted to make sure the birth of her first child went as smoothly as possible, so she listened to the medical experts.
But she also put her faith in God, even when doctors told her that only science could save her 37-week-old fetus.


Review/Television; Musical Approach to Middle East Accord
Bolstering his reputation as a top producer of music documentaries, Peter Rosen monopolizes prime time on Channel 13 tonight with the 60-minute "Playing for Peace" at 8 and the two-hour "Ninth Van Cliburn International Piano Competition: A Life in Music" at 9.
There can be no doubt that Mr.
Rosen and his accomplished crew love music.
"Playing for Peace" chronicles a 1992 Middle East tour by a New Hampshire group called the Apple Hill Chamber Players.
The players offered concerts, master classes and workshops, and sought out students to receive scholarships for study at Apple Hill in the month of August.
Previously the group had limited its search to Israel, carefully singling out both Jews and Arabs for the program.
This time, with State Department assistance, it expanded its tour to Egypt, Jordan and Syria.


Real Estate Investment Trusts Face a Sour Market
The fortunes of two much-anticipated initial public offerings yielded more signs yesterday that the market for real estate investment trusts appears to be souring because of fears of rising interest rates and a glut of issues.
A $600 million offering from the DeBartolo Realty Corporation was postponed after the company announced that it would not lower the stock price to the level that investors seemed to be demanding.
And an $840 million offering from the Simon Property Group Inc., the largest REIT in the nation's history, went through only after the company dropped its stock price.
A Blow to the Market
Investor reaction to the two offerings was another blow to the REIT market, which has stumbled recently after soaring the last two years because of an influx of money from investors fleeing low rates of returns on bonds and bank accounts.
Several other REIT offerings were also been postponed in recent weeks.


Fewer Are Insured For Medical Care
The number of people without health insurance reached 38.9 million last year, up 2.3 million from 1991, new Government data show.
The increase was greater than in the two previous years combined.
The Employee Benefit Research Institute, which tabulated the data, said today that "a major reason for the 1992 increase in the number of uninsured is a decline in coverage among people working for small firms."


Pieces for Haydn Puzzle: Six Sonatas Are Found
The discovery of six keyboard sonatas composed by Franz Joseph Haydn in the late 1760's or early 1770's was announced yesterday in London by H. C. Robbins Landon, a musicologist and Haydn scholar.
The works, which are to be performed at Harvard University in February and published in April, are likely to shed considerable light on Haydn's middle period, a time from which comparatively few authenticated keyboard works exist.


The Pop Life; 'Gold Circle' Strategy Is Bid to Scalp Scalpers
Tickets for Sting's two concerts in March at the Paramount are $35, the advertisement in newspapers this week said, with "limited gold circle seating available." In other words, for $30 more you can join a couple of hundred other fans in the best seats in the 5,600-seat house.
Until a few years ago, a pop concert was one of the few places in culture's galaxy without the sort of first-class seats long common at the opera or on Broadway.
But pop concerts now routinely feature reserved special seats, described as "V.I.P." by some venues, for those willing to pay higher prices.
Earlier this year, for example, Paul Simon's monthlong engagement at the Paramount boasted a top ticket price of $100, as did Bette Midler's 30 shows at Radio City Music Hall.
American Express is one company that has offered premier seating at such concerts to the holders of its Gold Card, which may explain the origins of the "gold circle" label.
Ticketmaster has been an advocate of the practice.
Concert promoters and others say that these higher-priced tickets are now being offered in large part in response to the success of scalpers.


Russian Nationalist Leader Offers To Cooperate in New Government
While Russia continued its painfully slow counting of votes from Sunday's election, its biggest vote-getter, the acerbic nationalist Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, offered today to play a responsible part in any new government.
Appearing at a news conference in a black tuxedo, Mr.
Zhirinovsky, who appears to have won nearly a quarter of the vote from a population angry with the price of change, was by turns reasonable and bombastic, promising to do nothing to destabilize the Government while he waits for a presidential election to be called.
Willing to Wait
Even if President Boris N. Yeltsin completes his five-year term in June 1996, Mr.
Zhirinovsky said, "then my election to that post would be a nice present for my 50th birthday."


Board of Elections Plans To Recount Mayoral Ballots
The New York City Board of Elections ordered a recanvass of the Nov. 2 election yesterday after it was discovered that more than a thousand ballots cast in Manhattan when voting machines malfunctioned were never tallied in the official results.
Although it is highly unlikely that uncounted paper ballots citywide would change the election outcome, they raise questions about the efficiency of the Board of Elections, said the Manhattan Elections Commissioner, Douglas A. Kellner.


The Drumming of Children
To The Living Section:


The Season's Gifts For Cooks and Kin
IF the purpose of a cookbook is to inspire and instruct, there is plenty of worthwhile material this season.
Many of the new books are beautiful, lavishly photographed volumes that explore exotic or specialized cuisines.
They broaden the food lover's horizons.
Even a cook who has no desire to experiment with wild hyacinth bulbs, quinces, snails or homemade yeast is still likely to find useful new concepts in the well-researched texts.
Others tread more familiar terrain -- many are focused on France -- but are sure to become classics.
And in some there are disappointments and expectations not met.


One Killed and 3 Wounded in Crown Hts.
One man was shot to death and three other men were wounded yesterday when two gunmen opened fire on a street in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, the police said.
The four victims, who were not identified, were shot as they left Gippy's Smoke Shop on Bergen Street near Kingston Avenue, officers at the scene said.
The gunmen then fled.


Phyllis C. Coffey; Philanthropist
Phyllis C. Coffey, a philanthropist who supported many causes in New York City and Israel, died on Sunday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
A resident of Manhattan, she was believed to be in her late 80's.
She had been ill for several months and died of natural causes, a hospital spokeswoman said.


Another Free Agent Signs With the Orioles
Relentless in their pursuit of free agents, the Baltimore Orioles signed their fifth of the off season yesterday.
The Orioles added relief pitcher Mark Eichhorn by giving him a minor league contract and assuring him that he would be added to their major league roster on or before Jan. 15.
The club also gave the 33-year-old right-hander a $25,000 signing bonus and guaranteed $350,000 of the $500,000 salary he will earn if he makes the club.
The deal includes an option for a second year at a $537,500 salary, or Eichhorn would receive a $37,500 buyout.


Rabbi Stanley Witty, Educator, 62, Is Dead
Rabbi Stanley Witty, an educator and religious leader who was a principal of Hebrew and public schools in the New York City region for more than 37 years, died on Monday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 62 and lived in Kew Garden Hills, Queens.
His family said the cause was cancer.


Why 'Politically Correct' Still Has Its Uses; Goes Back to 1793
To the Editor:
I agree with Brent Staples that the term "politically correct" deserves to be retired (Editorial Notebook, Dec. 5), but it has a longer history than Mr.
Staples believes.


Vatican and Israel Plan Full Diplomatic Links, Ending Their Long Rift
Israel and the Vatican will end years of diplomatic standoff by establishing official relations by the end of this month, Israeli officials and American religious leaders said yesterday.
The 14-point agreement is to be signed in Jerusalem on Dec. 30 after being initialed in Rome the day before, they said.


Rockets Go 20-1 and Chase 1970 Knicks Mark
Rockets 97, Heat 88
Vernon Maxwell scored 25 points and hit four 3-pointers early in the final period last night to help the Houston Rockets hold off the Heat, 97-88, in Miami.
"This is a team that when I came out of college told me I couldn't play in the N.B.A.," said Maxwell, referring to a conversation with Stu Inman, the Heat's former player personnel director.
"Every time I play them, it's in the back of my mind. It keeps driving me."


Review/Film; A Family's Struggle in Stalin's Man-Made Famine
The indelible images of human suffering that permeate Oles Yanchuk's film "Famine-33" are memorable precisely because they are so far removed in tone from the raucous, shoot-'em-up violence and hysteria of Hollywood movies.
In this drama of a Ukrainian family's struggle to survive a Government-created famine that killed more than seven million (a quarter of the population) in 1933, the suffering is etched in the stony faces of people too weary and weak to raise their voices.
In an early scene, the members of an impoverished farming family solemnly take turns dipping their ladles into the single bowl of watery soup that is their only meal of the day.
Later in the film, scores of villagers numb with despair and hunger huddle silently in the pouring rain outside a Government office until a truckload of armed soldiers arrives to disperse them.
In the most poignant scene, a little boy who has lost his parents calls for his mother as he wanders panic-stricken through a snowy woodland where the trees are outnumbered by crosses marking the dead.


Votes Born in Anger
In the end, the most damning consequence of the Russian vote may not be anything Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky does, but the shattering of Russia's tenuous image here and abroad as an apprentice democracy, virtually a full partner with Western nations.
Before the final count was in, before there was any concrete idea what the distribution of forces would be in the new Parliament, there were horrified reactions to Mr.
Zhirinovsky's xenophobic Great Russian sentiments, which include calling for the restoration of the former Soviet Union and Soviet bloc.


Colorado Judge Overturns Initiative Banning Gay Rights Laws
A state district judge ruled here today that a ballot issue passed by Colorado voters banning gay rights laws violated United States Constitution's guarantee of equal protection.
In light of the ruling, groups that had been calling for a boycott of Colorado said they were suspending their campaign, which had cost the state about $38 million in lost convention business.


Personal Health
NOW that prenatal diagnosis has become widespread, many pregnant women are being told that although their babies will not have Down syndrome, they are carrying boys who have an extra X chromosome, the so-called female sex chromosome.
The condition, one of the most common genetic abnormalities known, is called Klinefelter syndrome.
It is named after Dr.
Harry Klinefelter, a Boston physician who 51 years ago published a report about nine men with enlarged breasts, sparse facial and body hair, small testes and an inability to produce sperm.


Huffman Koos Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Oilers' Turning Point After Player's Death?
What a season this has been for the Houston Oilers.
Their owner, Bud Adams, declared in training camp that in all likelihood this was it for this group of Oilers and issued a win-or-else edict.
Then came the 1-4 start.
Then sniping from within.
Buddy Ryan had arrived as the team's defensive coordinator and purported savior, but initially he was a thorn.
The David Williams, newborn-baby, family-values flap followed.
Coach Jack Pardee was on the firing line.
Quarterback Warren Moon was benched.


A Condom for Women Is Winning Favor; Among Women First to Use It as a Shield Against H.I.V., the Device Gains Interest
Despite the jokes, warnings and lukewarm endorsements that greeted its approval by the Government, the condom for women is quietly gaining interest and often acceptance among the women who have been the first to try it in the United States as a weapon against H.I.V.
Many of the family planning and AIDS clinics in New York City and other areas of the country that have given out or sold the condom in recent months said it remained to be seen whether the product would be a success when it hits store shelves, but that their clients and staff workers have been willing to try it and many said they would use it again.
Based on informal discussions with clients, they estimate that half or more of those who have tried it say they like it.


Metropolitan Desk
DEAR DIARY:
Amtrak's evening express to Boston is barely free of the tunnel from Penn Station when a passenger commences a series of loudly irritating phone calls on a cellular phone: "Guess who this is, guess where I am!" is the overarching theme.
"Hold on for a tunnel, we're under a culvert or something, sweetie, don't hang up!" he pleads.


Chief of Asian Shops At Burnett to Retire
Malcolm Glenn, regional managing director of the Leo Burnett Company's Asian network in Hong Kong, said yesterday that he would retire in June.
A successor is expected to be named early next year.


Bowne &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $350 million of debentures due in 2003 priced at 100 to yield 6.41 percent through Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The issue is callable in two years.
*
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $100 million of notes due in 1996 priced at 100 to yield 4.61 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The issue is callable in a year.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The World Trade Agreement
The U.S. and Europe put aside major trade disputes to clear the way for a worldwide pact by 117 countries that would cut average tariffs by a third and cover more industries than any other trade agreement in history.  [ Page A1. ]  The conviction that free trade brings economic growth is widely held yet hard to prove.  [ A1. ]
The trade talks reflect the rising importance of economic issues after Communism's collapse.
News Analysis.  [ D19. ]  France declared a victory in forcing the U.S. to be flexible on trade.  [ D19. ]


Don't Blame Slovakia for Gypsy Problem
To the Editor:
A report on Gypsies in Slovakia surprised me by its subjective approach and lack of objective information (some editions, Nov. 28).


With a Hoop on His Back and Hope in His Heart
DAVID LADSON knows about hoops.
He's jumped through enough of them calling television producers, buttonholing superstar athletes and writing to sneaker companies in his single-minded search to become known as the world's finest (if only) "basketball performer" -- a cross between a dancing dribbler and juggling jumper.


METRO DIGEST
STRUGGLING TO RETAIN BIOTECH COMPANIES
Innovir Laboratories, a company seeking cures for hepatitis, leukemia and other maladies, plans to leave New York City.
The move reflects the problem city and state planners, who have identified biotechnology as one of New York's most promising industries, have had attracting and keeping biotechnology companies.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


For New York City's Battered Children Nothing Has Improved
To the Editor:
Your report on a drop in child abuse deaths in New York City could lead readers to believe things are getting better for abused and neglected children (news article, Dec. 2).
They are not.
In 1991 and 1992, almost three-quarters of the children whose deaths were listed as "homicides" lived in troubled families known to the Child Welfare Administration.


Signing of Lease for Expanding Tennis Center Put Off by Dinkins
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday postponed signing a lease for expansion of the National Tennis Center in Queens because several senior elected officials who supported the project were not available for a ceremony at City Hall, mayoral advisers said.
The delay did not reflect any substantive disagreements between the Dinkins administration and the United States Tennis Association, which operates the center, said Leland T. Jones, the Mayor's press secretary.


Her New York, Again in Chaos, Gets a 'Downtown' Look
Her New York, the two-month-old women's newspaper that has struggled through a series of editors, a change from a daily to a weekly, mass dismissals of writers and other turmoil, appeared near chaos yesterday.
The newspaper's newest editor, Meme Black, said this week's edition, with the cover story "The Year in Sex '93," represented a complete overhaul that was needed because "the paper wasn't selling." Ms.
Black is the fourth editor since the newspaper began publication on Oct. 1.


CHRONICLE
They may not have written their books in tandem, but LEONARD WOLF and his daughter, NAOMI WOLF, will celebrate the publication of their new books together tonight.
Mr.
Wolf is the author of "The Glass Mountain," a novel based on an old fable about a father who places his daughter on a glass mountain to protect her from the desires of men.
It is being published by Overlook Press.
Ms.
Wolf's new book, "Fire With Fire: The New Female Power and How It Will Change the 21st Century," published by Random House, has attracted considerable attention.


At Year's End, Time for a New Beginning


Karnishovas Leads Rout With Six 3-Pointers
Arturas Karnishovas, Seton Hall's pinpoint-accurate 3-point gunner, had not been so pinpoint going into tonight's game with Iona.
But Karnishovas, the Pirates' leading scorer, was not worried about his 35 percent field goal shooting, his 34 percent from behind the 3-point line or even his 12 for his last 40 from the floor.
"It's just not falling, but there is nothing wrong with my shot," he said after Seton Hall struggled to get past St.
Bonaventure last Saturday.


Prosecutors Link Blast Letter to Defendant
The text of a letter warning that the World Trade Center would continue to be a target if "our demands are not met" was presented as evidence by prosecutors in the trade center bombing trial yesterday and linked to one of the defendants, Nidal A. Ayyad.
An F.B.I computer specialist, Elizabeth Louise James, who was called to the stand yesterday by the prosecution, said she had searched computer files seized in Mr.
Ayyad's office at the Allied-Signal Corporation in Morristown, N.J.


PRO BASKETBALL Break Out the Anchovies: Knicks Finally Deliver a Pizza Night
The Knicks' fourth-quarter defense put the Denver Nuggets' offense under temporary house arrest last night.
By the time the Nuggets freed themselves, the outcome of the game had been decided and the pizza was on the house.
Starting the final period with a decisive 18-5 run, the Knicks (14-4) won their fourth consecutive game, 93-84, at Madison Square Garden.
The Nuggets were held to 16 points in the third quarter, then scored only 8 during the first eight minutes of the fourth quarter.


In Sarajevo, a Different Kind of Islam
Among the graves crowding the tiny courtyard of his mosque are five mounds of fresh earth that Imam Ismet Spahic tends particularly well and prays over each evening: they hold his wife, three daughters and a granddaughter, killed by Serbian shelling while fetching water.
Firmly, the gray-bearded Muslim clergyman spoke of his abiding faith and his certainty that his family awaits him in paradise.
But when asked if, perhaps, he thought the government of a largely Muslim Bosnia should be a secular one, he seemed astonished that anyone could ask such a question.


No Headline
"It writes new rules of the road for world trade well into the next century."-- PRESIDENT CLINTON.  [ A1:6. ]


Wellstead Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Edwin A. Schoenborn; Banker, 76
Edwin A. Schoenborn, a retired New York banker, died on Saturday at his home in Somers, N.Y.
He was 76 and formerly lived in Thornwood, N.Y.
He had had a long illness, his family said.


New York Education Chief Notes Disparity in Schools
New York State has two distinct types of school systems -- one urban, minority, poor and failing, and the other suburban, white, affluent and successful, the State Education Commissioner, Thomas Sobol, said yesterday.
Mr.
Sobol's remarks followed the release of a new study on Monday showing that New York's schools are among the most segregated in the country, with more than half of all black and Hispanic students attending schools where at least 9 out of 10 students are from minority groups.


In Midlife, the Leanest Men Survive
THIN is not just in.
For middle-aged men, at least, it is also the route to a longer life, according to a 27-year study of more than 19,000 graduates of Harvard University.
The findings, published in today's issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association, strongly suggest that increases in so-called desirable weights for men, which have been made over the last three decades, are unjustified and are likely to result in higher death rates, especially from heart disease.


Books of The Times; Reality, Illusion and the Photographer's Art
Do or Die  Photographs by Martine Barrat. Foreword by Martin Scorsese.
Unpaged.
Viking. $45.
Phil Stern's Hollywood  Photographs, 1940-1979  By Phil Stern  115 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $40.
When William Butler Yeats wrote a short, fierce poem called "The Fascination of What's Difficult," he was writing about the struggle to make art.
But the lines could be written in ink or in blood beneath Martine Barrat's stoically beautiful photographs of young boxers training at gyms in Brooklyn, Harlem and the South Bronx.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING  Duran, 42, Beats 21-Year-Old
Roberto Duran celebrated the 100th fight of his career last night by beating up an opponent who hadn't been born when Duran won his first world championship in 1972.
Duran, 42, stopped 21-year-old Tony Menefee in the eighth round after scoring two knockdowns and forcing him to take a standing 8-count in the bout in Bay St.
Louis, Miss.
The fight was stopped on the suggestion of Duran.
After Menefee got up from a knockdown late in the eighth round and took an 8-count, Duran started forward, then stopped and motioned to the referee, Elmo Adolph, to stop it.
Adolph took another look at Menefee, then halted the fight.
"I signaled to the referee because he's a young fighter, an up-and-coming guy, and I didn't want to hurt him," Duran said through an interpreter.
"If they hadn't stopped it, I would have killed him. He was out on his feet."


Theater Wing Awards $100,000 in Grants
The Manhattan Theater Club, Playwrights Horizons, the New York Shakespeare Festival and the American Academy of Dramatic Arts are among 27 theater companies, schools and organizations in the New York metropolitan area awarded grants by the American Theater Wing.
The wing, which is the founding organization of the Tony Awards, has been giving grants annually for 36 years; this year's total, $100,000, is the largest ever.


Factoring In the Negative When Gifts Miss the Mark
Surveying the holiday season from the vantage point of the dry science of economics, a Yale professor has calculated the money lost in giving gifts that the recipients don't like.
The figure may come to $4 billion a year of the estimated $40 billion spent annually on gifts, the professor, Joel Waldfogel, calculated in the December issue of The American Economic Review.


Dr. Samuel Wolfe, 70, Professor And Public-Health Expert, Dies
Dr.
Samuel Wolfe, professor emeritus at Columbia University's School of Public Health, an early advocate of Canada's national health insurance plan, and a proponent of better access to medical care for the poor, died last Friday in Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 70.
His family said he had had a long illness.


Why 'Politically Correct' Still Has Its Uses; A Campus Reality
To the Editor:
Re "Time to Retire a Cliche" (Editorial Notebook, Dec. 5): While the term "politically correct" could become trite, I believe it has not exhausted its descriptive power.
You used the term as recently as your Sept. 24 law page in "Free Speech on Campus? It's a Matter of Debate."


RESULTS IN RUSSIA SHAKE WASHINGTON
Despite their confident public comments, President Clinton and senior officials in his Administration were "startled and shaken," one of them conceded today, by the results of Sunday's parliamentary voting in Russia.
Several said that while it was not clear precisely how American policy would change toward Russia, the other former states of the Soviet Union and the former Soviet satellites, it was clear that the policy would have to be rethought.
At a minimum, several officials said, Mr.
Clinton will have to find some way to ease the exclusive identification of American policy in the region with the success of the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin.


Bridge
Those seeking holiday gifts for bridge players have a wide choice.
Here are some of the possibilities.
Magazine subscriptions: Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York, N.Y. 10025; $38 for 12 issues.
Bridge Today, 3838 Catalina Street, Los Alamitos, Calif., 90720; $24 for 6 issues; bidding quiz issue, $6.


Boy Scouts Pledge
To the Editor:
Re the Supreme Court's refusal to hear a challenge to a Boy Scouts membership policy requiring affirmation of a belief in God (news article, Dec. 7):


Munitions Company Charged in Sales to Iraq
A New Jersey munitions company and its top officers were charged today with violating Federal arms-export laws by participating in an illegal plan to provide Iraq with 300,000 fuse systems for artillery shells before the Gulf War in 1990.
The United States Attorney for New Jersey, Michael Chertoff, said that the company, Rexon Technology Corporation of Wayne, N.J., was accused of providing the State Department with a false application in December 1988 for an export license for the fuse components for 155-millimeter howitzer shells.


The Drumming of Children
To The Living Section:


Fighting for the Soul Of Eliza Dolittle
Whose fair lady is she, anyway?
Does Eliza Doolittle owe her soul and newly stiffened spine to Prof.
Henry Higgins, the taskmaster whose unforgiving lessons transform her from a mewling, filthy street peddler into a consort fit for royalty?
Or has his stern pedagogy merely allowed Eliza to come into her own and claim her better self for herself?
The questions have always been central to Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe's famous musical adaptation of George Bernard Shaw's "Pygmalion."


Review/Film: Schindler's List; Imagining the Holocaust to Remember It
There is a real photographic record of some of the people and places depicted in "Schindler's List," and it has a haunting history.
Raimund Titsch, an Austrian Catholic who managed a uniform factory within the Plaszow labor camp in Poland, surreptitiously took pictures of what he saw.
Fearful of having the pictures developed, he hid his film in a steel box, which he buried in a park outside Vienna and then did not disturb for nearly 20 years.
Although it was sold secretly by Titsch when he was terminally ill, the film remained undeveloped until after his death.
The pictures that emerged, like so many visual representations of the Holocaust, are tragic, ghostly and remote.
The horrors of the Holocaust are often viewed from a similar distance, filtered through memory or insulated by grief and recrimination.
Documented exhaustively or dramatized in terms by now dangerously familiar, the Holocaust threatens to become unimaginable precisely because it has been imagined so fully.
But the film "Schindler's List," directed with fury and immediacy by a profoundly surprising Steven Spielberg, presents the subject as if discovering it anew.


THE WORLD TRADE AGREEMENT: The Overview; U.S. AND EUROPE CLEAR THE WAY FOR A WORLD ACCORD ON TRADE, SETTING ASIDE MAJOR DISPUTES
The United States and Europe agreed to put aside major trade disputes today, clearing the way for a world trade accord covering more industries in more countries than any other trade agreement in history.
Though the negotiations involved 117 countries, the major sticking points lay between the United States and the European Community, principally over agricultural issues and greater access for American films and television programs in Europe.
Seven years of talks had resolved some of them, notably some of the farm-subsidy disputes.


Stockholm Journal; Sweden May Flirt but It Isn't Wed to Europe Yet
Sweden has long seemed aloof from the rest of the world.
It hasn't fought a war since 1914.
It straddled the divide in the cold war.
And it didn't take to the idea of joining groups of nations.
Now Sweden is up for membership in the European Community, and for many Swedes the critical question of to join or not to join seems to turn on arcane issues that range from the mundane to the apocalyptic.


Review/Television; Musical Approach to Middle East Accord
Bolstering his reputation as a top producer of music documentaries, Peter Rosen monopolizes prime time on Channel 13 tonight with the 60-minute "Playing for Peace" at 8 and the two-hour "Ninth Van Cliburn International Piano Competition: A Life in Music" at 9.
There can be no doubt that Mr.
Rosen and his accomplished crew love music.
"Playing for Peace" chronicles a 1992 Middle East tour by a New Hampshire group called the Apple Hill Chamber Players.
The players offered concerts, master classes and workshops, and sought out students to receive scholarships for study at Apple Hill in the month of August.
Previously the group had limited its search to Israel, carefully singling out both Jews and Arabs for the program.
This time, with State Department assistance, it expanded its tour to Egypt, Jordan and Syria.


Nationalists Build a New Cult of the Leader
The party behind Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky boasts a dues-paying membership of 100,000.
But besides Mr.
Zhirinovsky, the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia has little to offer.
Mr.
Zhirinovsky's face is on all the party's posters, on the front of every issue of its newspapers -- "Liberal," "Zhirinovsky's Truth" and "Zhirinovsky's Falcon" -- and on the cover of its campaign literature.


Japan's Trade Surplus Dips; Long-Term Decline Is Seen
Japan's trade surplus, which has been a political sore point worldwide, has peaked and is starting to decline, according to a growing number of economists.
The strongest evidence came today when the Government reported that the excess of exports over imports fell 2.2 percent in November from a year earlier to $7.4 billion, the first such decline in 35 months.
"This really confirms that the direction of the Japanese surplus basically has turned," Mineko Sasaki-Smith, senior economist in the Tokyo office of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, said.
"The decline will continue."


PLM International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Russian Vote Stirs Uncertainty for NATO Talks
The strong showing by staunch nationalists in Russia's parliamentary elections has thrown a new element of uncertainty into the preparations for next month's NATO summit meeting in Brussels.
At the meeting, scheduled for Jan. 10-11, the leaders of the Atlantic alliance are expected to approve an American proposal to offer increased political and military cooperation between NATO and former members of the Warsaw Pact on a basis that would put Russia on the same footing as Poland, Hungary, or the Czech Republic.


Increase in Number Of Uninsured Is Seen
The number of Americans without health insurance reached 38.9 million last year, up 2.3 million from 1991, new Government data show.
Researchers said that a major reason for the increase was a decline in health coverage among workers in small companies, perhaps because such businesses have dropped employee insurance as the costs have climbed.


Jet Task: Get From Red Zone to End Zone
It has become so bad for the Jets' offense these days, quarterback Boomer Esiason jokes that when he goes out people yell, "Hey, there's the field-goal king."
The Jets haven't scored a touchdown in 14 quarters.
In three games, they have scored on four of just six opportunities once they have moved inside the other team's 20-yard line, which is referred to as the red zone (forbidden zone, to the Jets).


Macy Says Cash Flow Was Better
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company reported yesterday that despite slipping sales volume, cash flow was markedly stronger in its first fiscal quarter, largely because of cuts in expenses.
Because of a change in accounting practices, Macy, which is operating under bankruptcy court protection from creditors, had earnings of $67.4 million in the quarter, in contrast to a loss of $135.9 million in the corresponding period last year.
Without the accounting change, it would have posted a $117.9 million loss in the quarter that ended Oct. 30.


A Friend Dies, and Oiler Kills Himself
Minutes after crashing his car on a freeway exit ramp and watching as his best friend was thrown to his death early today, Houston Oilers defensive tackle Jeff Alm took a shotgun from the car and killed himself, apparently in a fit of guilt or despair, the police said.
While some details of the incident just after 2:30 A.M. local time were still unknown, authorities said they believed that the car crashed accidentally, after Alm was speeding and lost control of his 1993 Cadillac El Dorado.
He then ran across the ramp and looked down an embankment, discovering that his boyhood friend, Sean P. Lynch, had been thrown to his death.


U.S. Aide to Seek New Policy on Fleeing Haitians
With human rights abuses increasing and the number of people leaving Haiti on the rise, the United States should review its policy of forcibly returning all Haitian boat people, the Administration's top human rights official said today.
At the end of a 24-hour trip to Haiti, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, John Shattuck, said he would return to Washington and advise that the policy be re-evaluated.


The Neediest Cases
A Manhattan family recovering from years of abuse is getting help from the Neediest Cases Fund now to prevent problems later.
Page B7.


Kasparaitis Shows Flash of Old Form
Last season, when he was a fiesty rookie defenseman, Darius Kasparaitis distracted opponents with rude collisions while leading the Islanders in the plus-minus statistic with a plus-15.
That meant the Islanders scored 15 more even-strength goals than their opponents did when Kasparaitis was on the ice.
That success was recalled before tonight's game between the Islanders and Devils when Dennis Potvin, the Islanders' Hall of Fame defenseman, appeared on behalf of a corporate sponsor to present Kasparaitis with an award for his accomplishment.


State Sales Of Old Guns Are Faulted
New York State agencies sold or traded more than 6,800 guns to licensed gun dealers over the last five years, at least one of which might have been used in the commission of a crime.
The gun sales were legal and were carried out in an attempt to reduce the cost of buying replacement weapons for state law-enforcement officials.
But the transactions, which are detailed in a report released today by Republican Assembly members, are likely to fuel an emerging national debate over what law-enforcement agencies should do with their old guns as they upgrade to rapid-fire semiautomatic weapons.


A Realignment Made Reluctantly
For all its arcane murkiness, the trade agreement struck today has traced important contours of the post-cold war era.
The negotiations that began seven years ago in moderate obscurity have ended as a pivotal political event, engaging heads of state in discussions about rice and placing the likes of Steven Spielberg and Mario Vargas Llosa in heated debate about cultural values.
Most fundamentally, this unlikely transformation reflects the collapse of the Iron Curtain.
In a world no longer defined by military and ideological conflict, what counts for politicans are economic success and the creation of jobs.
That is why President Clinton and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany have been as involved in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade talks as their predecessors were in negotiations to station new missiles in Western Europe.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about American military training of civilians in El Salvador in 1990 referred incorrectly to William G. Walker, then the United States Ambassador there.
He remains with the State Department, but has not been nominated to be Ambassador to Panama.


A Feminism for All
To The Living Section:


Why 'Politically Correct' Still Has Its Uses
To the Editor:
"Time to Retire a Cliche" by Brent Staples (Editorial Notebook, Dec. 5), on the uselessness of the phrase "politically correct," is its own disproof; it is itself politically correct.
It attributes the phrase to a conspiracy of conservatives, out to defame liberalism and capture all virtue for a narrow orthodox conservatism.


Holiday Cheer at the Cardinal's Party


Woman Is Killed in Bronx
A 50-year-old Queens woman was shot and killed last night as she left her job at a drug rehabilitation center in the Bronx, the police said.
Two men walked up behind the woman, Lillian DeJesus, of Ozone Park, just after 5:30 as she left the three-story Promesa rehabilitation center at 2064 Boston Road and turned onto 179th Street, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.
He said that one of the men fired a single shot into the back of her head, then both men fled.
The police said that they did not know the motive for the shooting.
It was unclear whether Ms.
DeJesus had been robbed.


Frazier Will Remain No. 1 in Savvy
Sometime this week, most likely tomorrow, Patrick Ewing will surpass Walt Frazier as the all-time scoring Knick.
Frazier, the word man of Knick radio, admits to a touch of "melancholy."
He liked being the Knick who scored the most.
He included this achievement on his post-playing career corporate resume because, as Frazier said, "I doubt people would say Walt Frazier if you asked them which Knick had the most career points."


Circuit City
Shares of Circuit City Stores were among the most actively traded issues on the New York Stock Exchange for the second consecutive day yesterday.
On Monday, the retailer reported weaker-than-expected results for the third quarter.
The company also said it would step up a three-year expansion plan.
Analysts said that could cut into profit margins.


Clinton Is Seeking to Increase Role for Ethanol in Gasoline
In a proposal intended to clear the air of the nation's smoggiest cities and help the nation's corn-processing industry, the Clinton Administration said yesterday that it wanted to require the nation's oil refiners to develop cleaner gasoline by using far more ethanol, a corn derivative, than they do now.
The proposal, to be formally introduced on Thursday, is part of the effort to meet the Clean Air Act of 1990.
The law calls for cleaner-burning gasoline in the nine smoggiest cities by 1995.
Under the proposal, at least 30 percent of the cleaner-burning gasoline would have to be made with renewable resources, like corn, as opposed to nonrenewable sources like petroleum.


It's Hail To Reeves For Giants' Resurgence
Take a 6-10 team, bring in a winning coach, ship out some veterans, change starters at 11 positions (including the kickers), and the result is the 1993 Giants, the first team to make the playoffs.
At 10-3, they have the best record in the National Football League.
They are in the playoffs for the first time in three seasons, and the anger and animosity that existed when the shake-up started has receded.


Namath to Toss the Super Bowl Coin
JOE NAMATH will toss the coin before the Super Bowl in the Georgia Dome on Jan. 30.
Twenty-five years ago, Namath, the Jets' quarterback, "guaranteed" a victory by his team over the Baltimore Colts.
The Jets won, becoming the first American Football League team to take the championship. (AP)


Envirotest Systems Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Market Place; Ad agency stocks may fit on a contrarian's shopping list.
THE stores are bustling with shoppers, and newspapers and magazines are thick enough with ads that they can double as barbells.
Economic reports of good news have advanced to at least a steady trickle.
All this might seem to portend a bright year ahead for advertising agencies, but it ain't necessarily so.


NASA to Send Craft to Study Asteroid
The space agency announced plans today to launch the first spacecraft to orbit an asteroid, the first project in a new program to fly smaller, simpler and cheaper space science missions.
An unmanned spacecraft is to be launched toward the asteroid Eros in February 1996.
After a circuitous journey that will take it through the asteroid belt that lies between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter and bring it back to the Earth for a gravity boost, the 1,700-pound craft is to arrive at Eros in December 1998.


Leighton A. Wilkie, Tool Manufacturer And an Inventor, 93
Leighton Allyn Wilkie, founder of the international DoAll Group of companies that make and distribute machine tools and other industrial equipment, died on Monday at his home in Santa Barbara, Calif.
He was 93.
He had a brief illness, said a spokesman for DoAll, of Des Plaines, Ill.
Mr.
Wilkie was a former chairman of the company and a senior vice president at his death.


Revco D.S. Inc.  reports earnings for 12wks to Nov 13


Map of All Chromosomes To Guide Genetic Hunters
Scientists have roughed out the first comprehensive map of all human chromosomes, a feat considered one of the high hurdles of the ambitious and expensive international effort to parse the complete genetic blueprint for a human being.
The map should sharply accelerate scientists' efforts to isolate the 100,000 genes that make up human DNA, to track down mutations that result in disease, to trace the evolution of humanity as recorded by subtle runes inscribed in the genes and to solve other grand puzzles of biology.
Those efforts are all part of the Human Genome Project, a 15-year program now under way at dozens of laboratories in the United States and abroad.
Flaws Are Conceded
The new map, called a physical map, is still preliminary, and the researchers who generated it concede that it has many flaws.
Nevertheless, the effort is considered a significant stride forward.
Although scientists have been analyzing the chromosomes in piecemeal fashion for years, the map is the first effort to give an overview of the 23 pairs of chromosomes.
Yeast Cells and Lists
"It's not perfect, and I don't want anybody to think I'm saying it's perfect," said Dr.
Daniel Cohen, a molecular biologist at the Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain in Paris who helped devise the map.
"As with all maps, it needs to be refined. "But best is an enemy of good, and good things, even if they're imperfect, are very useful."


Passage at the Pentagon
Les Aspin, who surprised Washington yesterday by announcing his resignation as Secretary of Defense "for personal reasons," spent much of his adult life preparing for the job.
In 22 years in Congress, first as an articulate member, then as chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, he earned wide respect as a "defense intellectual." As a challenging and original thinker he seemed ideally suited to serve a new Democratic President trying to prepare the Pentagon for the realities of the post-cold-war world.


Holiday Dilemma at Schools: Is That a Legal Decoration?
Pity the public school principal in December.
Between Hanukkah, Christmas and Kwanzaa, this long last month lays a minefield of grand proportions for educators trying to acknowledge the holidays without bridging the separation of church and state.
Every decoration is fraught with peril.
Every lesson and every song must pass the "does not promote religion" test.
Red and green cookies?
Maybe.
"A Christmas Carol?" Maybe.
"Silent Night?" Definitely not.
Teaching, Not Celebrating
Between parents who want their religion in the schools, parents who want less of some other religion in the schools and parents who want no religion at all in the schools, school officials in the New York region know that come December, their phones will be jingling.
They also have to deal with cultural events like Kwanzaa, a black American holiday that celebrates family and community and is based on African harvest festivals, and the Chinese New Year, a month or so later.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MOCO CHEMICAL CO., Chicago, has been awarded a manufacturing license by the Malaysian Government to build a purified terephthalic acid plant in Malaysia with an annual capacity of 500,000 metric tons.
BURMAH CASTROL P.L.C., London, a British lubricants, specialty chemicals and fuels company, said it would buy the metal-working fluids plant of S. C. Johnson &amp; Son Inc. in Japan for about $18 million.


E.P.A. Acts To Cut Sulfur In Gasoline
The Environmental Protection Agency will issue regulations today that will sharply limit the amount of sulfur allowed in gasoline in an effort to cut emissions of nitrogen oxides, which cause smog.
The regulations may also bar the importation of gasoline from refineries in Venezuela because it does not meet some pollution standards.


QVC Objects to Procedure In Bidding for Paramount
No sooner had the ink dried on a plan by Paramount Communications to sell the company than QVC Network Inc. took issue with the bidding procedure.
QVC's reaction yesterday, which came in the form of a letter delivered to Paramount's investment banker, Lazard Freres &amp; Company, reflected in part the continued animosity between Paramount and QVC, which is competing with Viacom Inc. for control of the giant media company.


Corrections
An obituary on Monday about Prime Minister Jozsef Antall of Hungary referred incorrectly to the formation of a new government when the Prime Minister dies.
The ruling party has the right to try to form a government; if it fails, the President can call an election.


For Drink or Drugs, Prohibition Doesn't Work; Chemical Madhouse
To the Editor:
Statements by the Surgeon General, Dr.
Joycelyn Elders, on the possible benefits of legalizing addictive drugs, and the subsequent dialogue on radio and television, astound me.
It is apparent to me, as a psychopharmacologist who specializes in the cumulative effects of these drugs on brain and behavior, that many who speak on this issue have very little scientific knowledge of the subject, and that those working against drug addiction rarely adopt such a stance.


Economic Scene; The villain theory about savings and loans gets some backing.
EVERYBODY -- everybody, that is, but economists -- knows that the great savings and loan bust of the 1980's was the handiwork of thieves.
Now, a couple of heavyweight academics, George Ackerlof and Paul Romer of the University of California at Berkeley, have come around to the popular view.
Indeed, in an article to be published later this month in the Brookings Institution's Papers on Economic Activity, they go much further, blaming the perpetrators of the savings and loan scam for the junk bond and corporate takeover excesses of the decade.
Where the truth lies is still unclear.
What is clear, though, is that the Ackerlof-Romer "looting" hypothesis will raise the dander of economists who are convinced that the financial scandal had much more to do with perverse Government incentives than outright villainy.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. is selling $200 million of notes due in 2003 priced at 100 to yield 6.375 percent through Paine Webber Inc.
The 10-year issue is callable in three years. *
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. is selling $200 million of notes due 1998 priced at 100 yield 5.39 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The five-year issue is callable in three years.


Nordson Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Reviews/Music; Speed-Metal From Brazil Is Flexibly Pessimistic
Metallica has slowed down.
Slayer is inactive.
Anthrax has been dabbling in melody.
That leaves bands like Sepultura, which performed on Monday night at the Academy, to uphold pure speed-metal: high-speed hammering power chords, double-time drumming, barked lyrics about death and destruction.
The music fights fear with muscle; its dire tidings are hurled back in the face of unseen tormentors, providing the temporary escape of an adrenaline high.
Sepultura is from Brazil, and now and then the band showed its roots with tapes of traditional drumming and a few syncopated drum licks.
But most of the music wholeheartedly embraced its genre.
The lyrics are in English, terse and slightly stilted, though no more awkward than words by speed-metal bands from English-speaking countries: "Army in siege/ Total alarm/I'm sick of this," Max Cavalera growled in "Refuse/Resist" from the band's new album "Chaos A.D." (Roadrunner/Epic).


Kodak Joins Others in Scaling Back Expectations
The newly installed chairman of the Eastman Kodak Company yesterday followed a pattern common to new chief executives of troubled companies: deflating the expectations of the shareholders whose ire ousted their predecessors.
George M. C. Fisher, who became chairman of Kodak two weeks ago, sent the company's stock plummeting more than 11 percent yesterday by issuing a statement that said the company was unlikely to meet its earlier predictions for 1994 earnings and that the figures would be well below analysts' forecasts of 20 percent higher profits.


Rabbi Maurice Davis, A Cult Authority, 72
Rabbi Maurice Davis, the retired senior rabbi of the Jewish Community Center of White Plains and an authority on religious cults in the United States, died Tuesday at his home in Palm Coast, Fla.
He was 72.
The cause of death was complications from a stroke, said Jane Friedberg of the Jewish Community Center.


Frederick L. Zimmerman, Professor, 87
Frederick L. Zimmerman, a political science teacher at Hunter College for more than 30 years, died on Tuesday at the Highgate Manor Nursing Home in Troy, N.Y.
He was 87.
He had a long illness, said his son, Lloyd K. Zimmerman of Coxsackie, N.Y.


Bahr Joins Patriots
The New England Patriots have claimed the veteran kicker MATT BAHR off waivers, reuniting him with Coach BILL PARCELLS.


Just in Case Anybody Decides to Sue; Group Formed by Lawyers Makes Sure New York City Knows Where Its Potholes Are
The block of well-kept, two-story houses with tidy front yards stretches along 209th Street from Jamaica Avenue in Queens, a seeming symbol of urban solidity.
But not to Joseph Cherubini.


WHITE HOUSE SPLIT OVER BUDGET CUTS
Working against a Christmas eve deadline, members of President Clinton's Cabinet have begun lobbying in earnest for relief from the tight spending ceilings that are forcing many to slash their 1995 budget requests.
Most Cabinet secretaries are keeping their complaints relatively quiet to maintain an illusion of solidarity within the President's top ranks.
But the fissures are widening as senior Administration officials find themselves feuding with each over policy and politics while the White House prepares its budget proposal for the 1995 fiscal year, which begins next October.
The plan will be submitted to Congress in February.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Mountain Laurel
Q.
I love the wild mountain laurel and want to grow it in my garden, but I've never seen it sold.
Where can I buy one? -- Jerome Tierney, Staten Island.


Review/Dance; 'Hard Nut': Rethinking by Mark Morris
A great deal has been said and written about "The Hard Nut," Mark Morris's production of "The Nutcracker," which opened on Tuesday night and will be performed through next Thursday at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
But no one has summed the piece up better than Mia Sanchez, a young dancegoer who is quoted on posters for "The Hard Nut." "It was weird," the 9-year-old critic wrote, "but I loved it."
Mr.
Morris's ballet is certainly a weird experience for those familiar with George Balanchine's standard-setting production of "The Nutcracker." As if to thumb his nose at history and some of ballet's most cherished conventions, Mr.
Morris has set his piece in a nightmarish American home in the 1960's and inserts a confusing subplot from the story by E. T. A. Hoffmann on which "The Nutcracker" was based.
And there is almost no bravura classical dancing.


Cunningham Out for '93
RANDALL CUNNINGHAM's broken leg hasn't healed enough for him to play.
The Philadelphia Eagles' trainer, OTHO DAVIS, said yesterday that Cunningham, who broke his left leg in the season's fourth game, against the Jets, will miss the team's final three games, against Indianapolis, New Orleans and San Francisco.


Harmon Duncombe, Law Firm Partner, 84
Harmon Duncombe, a partner in general practice at the Manhattan law firm of Fulton, Duncombe &amp; Rowe for the last 47 years, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 84 and a Manhattan resident.
The cause of death was cancer, the firm said.


The Talk of London; Tension Lifts in London Over Orchestra Funds
After all the talking, the furious newspaper columns and anguished letters to the editor, and months of behind-the-scenes lobbying and whispered vilifications, nothing much happened after all.
Late this afternoon, the Arts Council of Great Britain, which had threatened to eliminate public financing of two London orchestras, announced that it would modify only slightly its pattern of support.


Saatchi Sells Last Of Consulting Units
The Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company said yesterday that it had reached an agreement to sell the last of its consulting subsidiaries to focus on advertising and related services.


Different Routes to Success For Riesenberg and Roberts
Right tackle Doug Riesenberg recently took the name tag over his locker and turned it around.
The reason?
"If they don't know who I am, why would they want to talk to me?" he said.
For Riesenberg, it is more a matter of philosophy than being unfriendly.
He says he believes that offensive linemen should always be in the shadows, that they should never be quoted in a newspaper or appear on the cover of Sports Illustrated.


CHRONICLE
JENNIFER NEWMAN, a sales manager for a watch company in New York, thought her boyfriend, ANDREW WAHL, a marketing executive, was taking her to California for the weekend to celebrate her 27th birthday.
Only when Mr.
Wahl's car pulled up to the Air France terminal did she suspect they were going elsewhere.
"At the Concorde desk, Andrew pulled out my passport and said, 'Happy birthday! We're going to Paris for the weekend,' " she said yesterday.
"I had never been to Paris and never been on the Concorde. My legs got weak."


Thanks, Mom. Here's Your New House.
IN a material world, perhaps there is no greater gift than a house.
"Any kid growing up in the ghetto wishes to buy Mama a decent house," said Shabba Ranks, 27, a Jamaican reggae star.
Mr.
Ranks bought his mother, Constance Christie, a house in Kingston, Jamaica.
Mother and son are to move in at the end of this month.


Lower East Side Squatters' Camp Is Torn Down
A small squatters' camp on the Lower East Side that had been the target of neighborhood complaints was bulldozed yesterday, leaving behind mud, bags of garbage and splintered wood where makeshift homes once stood.
The shantytown, on East Fourth Street near the corner of Avenue D, had been a neighborhood concern for years, city officials said.
Across the street from an elementary school, the encampment had become a magnet for drug peddling, prostitution and even murder, they said.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Mighty Ducks Shock the Leafs  Guy Hebert made 38 saves for expansion Anaheim's first shutout, and Tim Sweeney scored a short-handed goal in the third period that gave the Mighty Ducks a 1-0 victory over the Toronto Maple Leafs last night at Maple Leaf Gardens. (AP) Canadiens 3, Panthers 3: Brian Bellows had two goals and an assist as Montreal rallied to tie Florida in Miami.
The Canadiens, who trailed by 3-0 late in the second period, tied it on Gilbert Dionne's power-play goal halfway through the third period. (AP)





School Work Falls, New Report Shows
A report released yesterday by the New York City Board of Education showed a decline in school performance, and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines vowed to increase efforts to rebuild schools that have repeatedly been identified as educational failures.
Mr.
Cortines said that improving failing schools may require the removal of failing principals, negotiations with unions representing teachers and administrations, expanded staff training, and developing more innovative schools.


Wesley's Hat Trick Trips Devils
The Devils clearly lacked discipline for the first time this season and paid the price tonight.
They were penalized five times and allowed four power-play goals that helped the Boston Bruins to a 5-4 triumph.
"We took some stupid penalties," Coach Jacques Lemaire said.
"They got a quick jump on us by scoring a couple goals early."


Osaka Journal; Pride and (Ouch!) Price: The $14 Billion Airport
Some of the floor tiles were definitely not right.
Renzo Piano, the Italian architect, peered across a few acres of polished gray stone on which thousands of air passengers would soon be treading, and with one eye squeezed skeptically closed he sought to persuade several Japanese engineers that the minute dips and ridges catching the afternoon light were all wrong.


Public &amp; Private; The Unworthy
He wears camouflage clothes, the man who works the cars waiting to pass through the Holland Tunnel, and a sign that says "Homeless Vet." Tucked beneath his arm, or what's left of it since he lost the part below the elbow, is a military helmet, inverted now, turned into a beggar's bowl.
But he never asks for money, and his black eyes bespeak not entreaty but anger.
The children clamor to put a bill in the helmet, and they speculate about the lost arm, about whether it was a grenade or a bullet that did it.
Never do they wonder, as I do, whether the arm was lost in a car accident, whether the camouflage clothes and helmet came from the army-navy store, whether the dollar goes for drink and drugs, whether the homeless vet is nothing of the sort.


Rebuking Aide, U.S. Says Haiti Policy Stands
Rebuking its top human rights official, the Clinton Administration said today that it had no intention of changing its policy of returning Haitian boat people without granting them a chance to seek political asylum.
"There is no change in Administration policy on that question," Michael McCurry, the State Department spokesman, said today.


Memories of '40 as Richter's Streak Reaches 19
Mike Richter knows nothing about Dave Kerr.
Nothing about his goaltending style, nothing about his statistics and nothing about his history in New York.
Until a week or so ago, Richter didn't even know about Kerr's longstanding record, about the 19-game unbeaten streak Kerr put together in 1939-40, the last season the Rangers won the Stanley Cup.
Now Richter shares that record with him.
Last night at Madison Square Garden, the Rangers' 5-2 victory over the Hartford Whalers was game No. 19 in Richter's unbeaten streak, tying him with Kerr for the club record.
Richter is 16-0-3 over that stretch, and his play is a big part of why the Rangers have only one loss in their last 22 games.
With Toronto's 1-0 loss to Anaheim last night, the Rangers are in sole possession of first place in the National Hockey League with 47 points.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Robert Lewine, who was a vice president for programming at all three national television networks, omitted the name of a survivor.
He is Mr.
Lewine's brother, Richard I., of Manhattan.


Bridge
A 96-deal international challenge match that is rare in one respect and unique in another will be played today and tomorrow in Manhattan.
A European foursome will oppose an American foursome, playing for a stake of $50,000 in a format reminiscent of the Schwab Cup matches played in Britain 60 years ago.
The extraordinary feature of the match is that every deal will be opened with one no-trump.
Thanks to computer generation, the dealer will always have 16 to 18 points and 4-4-3-2 or 4-3-3-3 hands.
The purpose is to test the system of no-trump responses devised by Leandro Burgay, a television producer and insurance executive who issued the challenge that led to the match.
He has recruited as his teammates Dano De Falco, a former Italian world champion, and Herve Mouiel and Alain Levy, two members of the French team that won the world team title in Italy last year.


8 Charged in Crackdown on White Tigers Gang
In the third crackdown on an Asian gang in three months, Federal authorities announced the indictment yesterday of eight members of the White Tigers gang, a Queens-based group that law-enforcement officials say was deeply involved in smuggling illegal immigrants from China.
Leading gang members, including David (Lobster) Lien and Edwin (Lumpy) Arroyo, were not charged with immigrant smuggling, but with murder, arson and racketeering activity over a five-year period.
Law-enforcement officials said the arrests effectively beheaded the gang, as did arrests of members of the Fuk Ching gang in September and of the Tung On gang last week.


CompUSA Chairman Ousted by Directors
CompUSA Inc., the fast-growing computer retailer, ousted its chairman and chief executive during a board meeting late Tuesday night.
Nathan P. Morton, who presided over the company's five-year expansion from a two-store enterprise to a $1 billion-plus chain of superstores, was replaced as chief executive by James P. Halpin, a veteran of the warehouse store industry who was hired last May as the president of CompUSA.
Giles H. Bateman, an outside director, was named chairman of the company, which is based in Dallas.


THE WORLD TRADE AGREEMENT: The Negotiators; Odd Couple Bring a World Trade Accord Home
One is portly, one is slim.
One is subtle, the other blunt.
One is a committed free trader and a one-time protege of Margaret Thatcher; the other is a Los Angeles lawyer, willing to argue almost any position, who started in politics as an advocate of the dispossessed.
But to an extraordinary extent, today's global trade pact is the product of the unusual friendship between Sir Leon Brittan, the Englishman who represented the European Community, and Mickey Kantor, who represented the United States.
Frosty at First
When they met 10 months ago, their relationship was frosty.
That is not surprising, since one is the product of Cambridge University and Britain's traditionally aristocratic Tory Party and the other, folksier in style, started life in America's country-music capital, Nashville, and made his name as a wheeling-and-dealing entertainment lawyer.


Argentine Experiment A Resounding Success
Germany has Rome. Argentina has Miami. Rome is better.
The last time these two squads met, it was in Italy for the World Cup, and today it was for the championship of south Florida.
Argentina won, 2-1, and did not make light of it.


BRITAIN APPROVES NUCLEAR-FUEL UNIT
The British Government today approved the start-up of a nuclear-fuel reprocessing plant despite Americans concerns that the tons of plutonium the project would yield each year might undermine efforts to halt the spread of nuclear arms.
The plant, which was completed early this year, will reprocess used fuel from nuclear power generators around the world, and has already accepted shipments of spent fuel from Japan.
It is expected to produce as much as seven tons a year of plutonium, the primary material in a nuclear bomb, adding to a worldwide plutonium stockpile estimated by Greenpeace, the environmental group, at 150 tons.


Salesman for Studio Is Convicted In Forging of Artist's Signature
A salesman for Mark Kostabi, the flamboyant artist who employs people to mass-produce paintings that he signs, was convicted yesterday of conspiring to make and sell additional paintings without Mr.
Kostabi's knowledge but with his forged signature.
That, prosecutors charged, was conspiracy to defraud, and a jury in Federal District Court in Brooklyn agreed.
It convicted the salesman, Andrew Behrman, on a conspiracy charge punishable by up to five years in prison and a $250,000 fine.


Review/Music; A Big Band in Unconventional Territory
Joe Roccisano's big band doesn't swing particularly hard, nor does it have an especially deep sense of history.
The orchestra, which performed at Zanzibar in Greenwich Village on Monday night, gets by on Mr.
Roccisano's writing, which at times can be enough, especially since his arrangements are so resourceful.
The 13-member band jams high, brittle notes into a piece, creating dissonances, and Mr.
Roccisano splits up the players, with the brass and reed sections talking back to each other.
He has the horns use mutes or change instruments mid-song to change texture.
Odd meters keep the rhythms of the band from going stale, and occasionally the rhythm section cuts out, leaving the band to play without it.
Rarely does this ensemble venture into conventional territory; Mr.
Roccisano has his own sound.


BASKETBALL: Notebook; Title Ewing Wants Comes in Spring
For someone who tallied just 3,906 points in nine seasons in the National Basketball Association, offense didn't matter too much to Pat Riley.
Winning championships was more important.
Patrick Ewing has scored a lot more points but he shares his coach's philosophy.
"My goal is to win a championship," Ewing said today after practice at the State University of New York at Purchase.
"That's the goal, the bottom line. I've personally accomplished everything. The championship is the thing we need to accomplish. From day one, that's been my goal. I don't have time to be thinking about records."


Extension for Perry
The Cleveland Browns have reportedly agreed on a contract extension with defensive lineman MICHAEL DEAN PERRY that will total $9.3 million over three years.
The Cleveland Plain Dealer reported yesterday that the contract extension would make Perry's salary the third highest among defensive linemen in the National Football League. (AP)


Review/Dance; Indians Add Winter Topics for First Winter Visit
The American Indian Dance Theater, a regular visitor to the Joyce Theater since 1989, has never performed here in the winter.
Now it has returned with an aptly seasonal theme and a spectacular new program called "Winter Dances."
There are, as displayed in Tuesday's opening of a three-week season, very different ways to celebrate a time when Nature is supposedly asleep and man's relationship to the spirit world alters accordingly.
True to its goal of celebrating diversity in the shared culture of North American Indians, the company presented two highly contrasting groups of guest performers.


Franco to White Sox In One-Year Contract
JULIO FRANCO became the second of the Texas Rangers' big hitters of 1993 to move to a new team this week.
Following RAFAEL PALMEIRO's free-agent footsteps, which took him to Baltimore, Franco agreed yesterday to a one-year contract with the Chicago White Sox.
Franco, whose shaky right knee made him strictly a designated hitter this past season, will have a guaranteed $1 million salary, but he can earn an additional $1 million if he goes to the plate 600 times.
He had 607 plate appearances this year, batting .289 and driving in 84 runs.


Ex-Law Department Aide Named Attorney General
Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman said today that she would nominate Deborah T. Poritz, a Princeton civil lawyer and occasional lobbyist for banking and insurance interests, to be Attorney General in her new Republican administration.
Ms.
Poritz, 57, spent 12 years in the department she will now head, first as deputy attorney general, then as head of various departments, including the Departments of Law and of Banking, Insurance and Public Securities.


No Headline
"The door is open to them. They won't have a better opportunity and they don't have a better option." -- JOHN MAJOR, Prime Minister of Britain, speaking of the Irish Republican Army.  [ A1:1. ]


Janos Scholz Tribute
A musical tribute to Janos Scholz, the cellist and scholar, is to be held on Monday at 5:30 P.M. at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola, Park Avenue at 83d Street.
The performers scheduled to perform are Mary Louise Boehm, pianist; Kees Kooper, violinist, and Susan Salm, cellist, who will play Dvorak's "Dumky" Trio; and choir members of St.
Ignatius Loyola.
Mr.
Scholz, who was also a benefactor of the Pierpont Morgan Library, died on June 3 at 89.


Review/Theater: First Lady Suite; Jackie, Mamie and Eleanor, Traveling to Their Destinies
Michael John LaChiusa's "First Lady Suite" is all about flights of fantasy.
Literally and figuratively.
Each of the three segments making up this quirky chamber musical, which opened last night at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, unfolds at least partly in an airplane headed someplace strange or fateful.
In each one, too, Mr.
LaChiusa gives free rein to a decidedly antic imagination.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING -- ADDENDA
*
Meat and Livestock Commission, London, to BMP DDB Needham, London, to handle its account in Britain, previously divided among three London shops: D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Laing Henry and the Media Centre.
Billings were estimated at $12 million.


In Moscow, Zhirinovsky Is Remembered as Jewish Advocate
As a candidate, Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky has portrayed himself as a dyed-in-the-wool Russian, and he has made anti-Semitic remarks.
But Moscow Jews remember him as a man who regarded himself as a Jew several years ago, and who for a while served as an active director of a Jewish cultural organization formed in 1989.
They said he identified his father, Volf Zhirinovsky, as a Jew, and his mother as a Russian.
The father died in an auto accident soon after Mr.
Zhirinovsky was born, after only a year of marriage to his mother.


American Greetings Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


For Drink or Drugs, Prohibition Doesn't Work; Pot and Chemotherapy
To the Editor:
The next time Dr.
Gabriel Nahas and Dr.
Nicholas Pace attack marijuana as a way of controlling nausea in chemotherapy, they should check with their colleagues at New York University Medical Center (letter, Dec. 4).
I underwent chemotherapy at N.Y.U. for four months in the summer of 1992, and not one of my doctors or nurses discouraged me from turning to pot for relief from the inevitable vomiting.


Inacom
Shares of the Inacom Corporation lost 26 percent of their value at one point yesterday.
The computer products distributor said its fourth-quarter earnings would be below those of the comparable period a year ago because of a slower than expected recovery from changes in distribution systems in the third quarter.
Analysts were forecasting earnings of 63 cents a share; the company earned 45 cents in the fourth quarter of last year.


ASPIN RESIGNS FROM CABINET; PRESIDENT LOST CONFIDENCE IN DEFENSE CHIEF, AIDES SAY
Defense Secretary Les Aspin resigned today.
He had concluded that President Clinton had lost confidence in his leadership, senior Administration officials and associates of Mr.
Aspin said.
Senior Administration officials said tonight that Bobby Ray Inman, former deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency in the Reagan Administration, was the front-runner to succeed Mr.
Aspin and that Mr.
Clinton might announce a successor as early as Thursday.
Mr.
Inman, a retired admiral who lives in Texas, refused to take a phone call from a reporter tonight at his hotel in Washington.


For Drink or Drugs, Prohibition Doesn't Work
To the Editor:
As a physician, I applaud the courageous call by Dr.
Joycelyn Elders, the Surgeon General, for the study of the legalization of drug use (news article, Dec. 8).
I am the author of a resolution that resulted in the California Medical Association's reversing its long opposition to the decriminalization of drug use this year.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  FOR SCHOOLS, A HOLIDAY MINEFIELD Pity the public school principal in December.
With Hanukkah, Christmas and Kwanzaa, this long last month lays a minefield of grand proportions for educators trying to acknowledge the holidays without bridging the separation of church and state.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI TEAM REVIEWS AGENCIES Transition advisers to Mayor-elect Giuliani have embarked on a broad review of the municipal government to identify agencies that can be abolished or merged and services that can be handed over to the state.
A1.


Market Place; Offering for investing in Lloyd's is sailing against the wind.
THE insurance business being what it is, Lloyd's of London will eventually ring the Lutine Bell, which traditionally heralds a new disaster.
But as the Dec. 31 deadline for signing up investors in Lloyd's draws near, questions are growing about whether American securities dealers will ring their own bell and offer stock in the Lutine Capital Corporation, a company that will invest in Lloyd's insurance syndicates.
The proposed offering, which as been reduced to 10 million shares at $20 each from 12.5 million shares at $25 in late October, is suffering from a flood of insurance stock offerings.
In addition to a record $8.3 billion of insurance stocks sold publicly this year, Securities Data Company reports another $4.4 billion has been registered for sale by 32 companies, including 18 initial public offerings.


Trying to Build Secret Weapons, U.S. Spread Radiation in 1950's
The United States deliberately released large amounts of radiation into the environment in the 1940's and early 1950's as part of a secret program aimed at developing a weapon that would kill enemy soldiers with radioactive fallout, according to a Congressional study made public yesterday.
The Government's extensive program to develop a radiation weapon came as Government scientists and medical specialists were insisting that radioactive particles falling to earth from open-air tests of atomic bombs posed little or no risk to civilians.


More Joining Quest for Cleaner Cars
A leading manufacturer of military hardware and a nuclear-bomb laboratory both entered the rush yesterday to apply weapons know-how to building cleaner-running cars.
The Grumman Corporation of Bethpage, L.I., said it had teamed up with the Long Island Lighting Company to build a hybrid natural gas/ electric delivery van, of the type used by Federal Express and UPS.
Grumman's last hybrid was a remote-controlled battlefield reconnaissance vehicle it built for the Army.


CLINTON REAFFIRMS POLICY ON YELTSIN
President Clinton today played down the importance of the unexpectedly strong showing of anti-reformers in the Russian elections and said there was no need to change Washington's policy toward Moscow.
Mr.
Clinton expressed concern about statements made by Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, an ultranationalist and the biggest winner in the election Sunday, and said Washington's support for President Boris N. Yeltsin and the reformers would continue.


After Seven Years, a Global Gift
The trade agreement completed yesterday after seven tortuous years of negotiations among 117 countries is good for the U.S. and good for the world.
Its real importance lies less in its individual provisions than in its vibrant message; the world's trading partners have now pledged to keep marching relentlessly toward liberalized trade.
And that, in turn, will bring higher living standards than any other government policy will.
For the first time, agriculture, services, textiles and investment will be covered by international rules of fair trade.
Tariffs and trade barriers will tumble.
Those changes should drive down consumer prices on everything from clothing to computers.
And lower prices will mean higher living standards, especially for the poor.


Dow Loses 25.71 in a Mixed Day for Stocks
Stocks were mixed yesterday, with a sharp drop in the price of Eastman Kodak shares depressing the Dow Jones industrial average.
Kodak's dive, touched off by the company's announcement that earnings next year would be below analysts' expectations, rattled an already shaky market that was anticipating Friday's "triple witching" expirations of futures and options, which can affect stock prices.


WITNESSES RECALL CHAOS OF CRASH
The captain and pilot of a Mobile River towboat today described a night of confusion and horror in which they slowly realized that their vessel, lost in the darkness and fog, was involved in a terrible train wreck, one that ultimately killed 47 people.
They said finally realized that a "bump" they had felt earlier had been their barge hitting a bridge.
The impact pushed the railroad tracks on that bridge out of alignment and caused the Amtrak train, the Sunset Limited, to plunge into the Big Bayou Canot in the early morning of Sept. 22.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Signed Julio Franco, designated hitter, to a one-year contract.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Signed Ray Martinez and Omer Munoz, infielders, and Apolinar Garcia, Calvin Jones, Ramser Correa and David Lynch, pitchers.
National League
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Signed Archie Corbin, pitcher; Frank Bolick, first-third baseman; and Dave Rohde, Mike Simms, and Tracy Woodson, infielders.
Canoe-kayak
U.S.
CANOE-KAYAK TEAM -- Announced that Paul Podgorski, flatwater sprint canoe and kayak coach, has been relieved of his duties.
Football  National Football League
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Released Tony Williams, offensive guard, to the practice squad.
Signed Greg Briggs, safety, to the practice squad.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Claimed Matt Bahr, kicker, off waivers from Philadelphia.
Hockey  National Hockey League
ANAHEIM MIGHTY DUCKS -- Recalled David Williams, defenseman, from San Diego of the International Hockey League.
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Traded Brent Grieve, left wing, to Edmonton for Marc Laforge, forward.
Soccer  Continental Indoor Soccer League
CISL -- Awarded franchise to San Jose for the 1994 season. College
AZUSA PACIFIC -- Announced the resignation of Jim Milhon, football coach, following the 1994 season.
C.W.
POST -- Added women's soccer as a varsity sport, to begin play in the fall of 1994.
Named Bob Blitz women's soccer coach.
Named Kim Gwydir softball coach.
MISSOURI -- Named Larry Smith football coach.
Promoted Joe Castiglione, associate athletic director, to athletic director.
NAVY -- Announced James Norris, forward, has left the basketball team for academic reasons.


Supervalu Inc.  reports earnings for 12wks to Dec 4


Corrections
A front-page chart yesterday about the highlights of the world trade agreement referred incorrectly in some editions to the timetable for its approval by Congress.
The agreement requires the President's signature by April 15; he may submit it to Congress at any time after signing it.
The pact is scheduled to go into effect July 1, 1995.
If Congress has not approved it by then, the United States will be vulnerable to trade sanctions.
A related front-page article yesterday about how free trade promotes growth misstated the first name of an economist at the Institute for International Economics in Washington.
She is Kim Elliott, not Tim.


Mother Hale Memorial
A memorial service honoring Clara Hale, who died a year ago, will be held tomorrow at 10:45 A.M. at Riverside Church on Riverside Drive between West 120th and 122d Streets.
Known as Mother Hale, she devoted her life to helping the children of drug-addicted parents.


Vestaur Securities Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Essay; Panic Over Mr. Z
Is Vladimir Zhirinovsky, the racist demagogue whose party took a surprisingly big chunk of the vote in the new Russian parliament, an incipient Adolf Hitler?
No.
Is Russia, in the painful throes of transition to capitalism, another Weimar Germany?
No.
Are we pumping up this man's support by insulting voters who used him as their vehicle of protest?
Yes.
He won a Perot-sized slice of the ballots by organizing a party first; by outspending his dozen rivals on television in the final two weeks; by staying on his message of resentment of corruption, crime, unemployment and loss of national pride; by inheriting the support of fringe parties foolishly banned by a remote Boris Yeltsin; and by running against an establishment slate that took its pompous campaign style from Thomas E. Dewey.


A Year of Exile Ends for 197 Palestinians


Hurley Is Beginning to Show Some Major Progress
Bobby Hurley was breathing on his own yesterday.
Hurley, the Sacramento Kings rookie whose left lung was seriously injured in a car accident on Sunday night, had spent 48 hours hooked up to a ventilator.
But the same trauma doctors who reattached his windpipe in the hours after the crash saw enough improvement in Hurley late Tuesday night that they disconnected the machine.
"He has started taking fluid by mouth," said a surgeon, F. William Blaisdell, who still listed Hurley in serious condition and still restricted him to the intensive-care unit.


CHRONICLE
When officials of AIDS organizations around the country learned that the opening of the film "Philadelphia" was approaching, they began deluging the producers, JONATHAN DEMME and EDWARD SAXON, with requests to be the beneficiaries of premieres and screenings.
In the movie, Tom Hanks plays a lawyer with AIDS who fights the discrimination he encounters.
"There were dozens of requests from all over the country," Mr.
Saxon said yesterday from Santa Monica, Calif., "and many more organizations approached us than we ever would have been able to help, I'm sad to say." He was in California to attend openings in San Francisco on Monday and Los Angeles on Tuesday.


Arafat, the Toast of London, Is Sanguine on Mideast Peace
Basking in the warmth of his first official visit to Britain, Yasir Arafat gave few hints today that he is troubled by the growing thicket of problems facing the accord between the P.L.O. and Israel.
Only days after the P.L.O. chairman and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel agreed to scrap Monday as a target date for beginning Israel's withdrawal from Jericho and the Gaza Strip, Mr.
Arafat seemed sanguine when asked about the possibilities of resolving the dispute, despite growing violence in Gaza and the West Bank and mounting criticism of his role by many of his own supporters.


Harmon Duncombe, Law Firm Partner, 84
Harmon Duncombe, a partner in general practice at the Manhattan law firm of Fulton, Duncombe &amp; Rowe for the last 47 years, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 84 and a Manhattan resident.
The cause of death was cancer, the firm said.


NBC Fights Accusation Of Violence in TV Film
NBC defended itself yesterday against charges from a North Dakota Senator that it is seeking to raise ratings by showing a television movie with a gratuitously violent scene of an execution.
The network was denounced on Tuesday by the office of Senator Kent Conrad, a Democrat, for planning the movie, which is an account of what might happen in the future if a television channel without the standards that exist at the broadcast networks decided to carry a live execution on pay-per-view television.
NBC said the movie has no scenes of violence at all, other than a brief glimpse of this fictionalized execution, and that it is meant to provoke thought and discussion, and not to get people to think they are really seeing an execution.


Unions Set New Offer For United
Reviving an employee buyout effort that appeared dead just a month ago, advisers to United Airlines and its pilots' and machinists' unions agreed yesterday on a proposal valued at more than $5 billion to present to the airline's board today.
The proposal would give employees at least 53 percent of the company's stock, a stake that could rise to 63 percent if the stock price rose to certain targets within a year after a deal was completed.


CHRONICLE
Oh, the curses of celebrity: CAROL THATCHER was in the spotlight for all the years that her mum, Margaret Thatcher, was in public life, and now she says she feels well rid of it.
Writing in the January issue of Tatler, the British magazine, Ms.
Thatcher, a freelance journalist, said: "My mother has been out of mainstream politics for three years and I am a willing escapee from life in the goldfish bowl.Yes, I now have to spell Thatcher when I make table reservations in restaurants, but I can live with that."


Review/Dance; A Company Tribute to Ailey
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater honored its founder on Tuesday night at City Center with a panorama of works choreographed by Ailey between 1958 and 1988.
The program, called "Ailey Classics," featured excerpts from longer compositions, arranged to emphasize Ailey's stylistic diversity.
The evening opened with a scene from "Memoria," which Ailey created in 1979 as an elegy for another choreographer, Joyce Trisler.
But the way dancers kept entering and leaving the stage made it clear that this was a commentary on the transitoriness of all human life.
The performance looked slightly stilted.
Fortunately, the company soon loosened up and danced its way through one fine piece after another.


2 Youths Wounded Outside Queens School
Two teen-agers were slightly wounded yesterday in a shooting outside a Queens high school involving a gunman who opened fire after arguing with the two, the police said.
Officer Merri Pearsall, a police spokesman, said one youth was grazed by a bullet and the other was wounded in the leg in the 2 P.M. shooting at Andrew Jackson High School.
Both youths, who were 17 years old but who were not identified, were taken to Long Island Jewish Medical Center.


Rabbi Maurice Davis, A Cult Authority, 72
Rabbi Maurice Davis, the retired senior rabbi of the Jewish Community Center of White Plains and an authority on religious cults in the United States, died Tuesday at his home in Palm Coast, Fla.
He was 72.
The cause of death was complications from a stroke, said Jane Friedberg of the Jewish Community Center.


The Talk of London; Tension Lifts in London Over Orchestra Funds
After all the talking, the furious newspaper columns and anguished letters to the editor, and months of behind-the-scenes lobbying and whispered vilifications, nothing much happened after all.
Late this afternoon, the Arts Council of Great Britain, which had threatened to eliminate public financing of two London orchestras, announced that it would modify only slightly its pattern of support.


Lintas London Shop Names 2 Executives
Still Price Lintas Ltd., the London agency of Lintas Worldwide, said yesterday that it had named two executives to top positions.


Events: Cherubs and Tigers in Trees
Three Trees  American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street, (212) 769-5100.
Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street, (212) 879-5500.


Sports of The Times; No-Shows, No Noise, No Crutch
AS the Jets awaited Saturday's showdown with the Cowboys at Giants Stadium, Boomer Esiason issued a call to arms and lungs.
"We can't have 31,000 no-shows again," the quarterback said.
"We need everybody there this time. It's our last home game."
No-shows.
No noise.
No home of their own.
In the Jets' 10th season in Giants Stadium, those issues have created almost as much conversation as the team's struggle.


Private Thoughts, Public Revelations
DEAR DIARISTS,
Before you jot down your personal thoughts today, you may want to consider this: Are you really sure you want to divulge some of your deepest, darkest secrets, knowing full well they may someday come back to haunt you?


THE WORLD TRADE AGREEMENT: The View in Washington; Clinton and Some in Congress See Less Trouble This Time
President Clinton kicked off his campaign today to get the new world trade agreement approved by Congress, saying it would foster an American export boom and that it "cements our position of leadership in the new global economy."
At a hastily called news conference at the White House, within minutes of the approval of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade accord in Geneva, Mr.
Clinton said he was formally notifying Congress of his intention to sign the accord.
Asked if he thought this accord would have as much trouble being approved by Congress as the North American Free Trade Agreement, Mr.
Clinton responded categorically: "No."


Topps Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Sprint's Big U.S. Award Is Studied in Congress
Congressional investigators are looking into charges that the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory improperly awarded a $50 million contract to the Sprint Corporation to build an important link in the information superhighway championed by the Clinton Administration, Congressional aides said today.
The House Subcommittee on Environment, Energy and Natural Resources is investigating the contracting practices of the Livermore laboratory, Livermore, Calif., which is operated by the University of California for the Department of Energy.


Giuliani Challenges E.M.S. at Accident
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani found himself hailed as a hero and assailed as a meddler yesterday over his actions -- and his choice of language -- during an angry confrontation with a lieutenant of the New York City Emergency Medical Service at the scene of a car accident on Tuesday morning.
The confrontation occurred when Mr.
Giuliani intervened in a dispute between paramedics and the mother of a teen-age boy who had been hit by a taxi over whether to take the injured boy to Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, as the woman wanted, or to New York Hospital, which was closer.


Giants Won't Start Contract Talks Until After the Current Season Ends
The Giants, hoping to avoid any team discord, have decided not to start negotiations now with any players whose contracts will be up after this season.
It might be a smart move, but it is not a popular one with some players.
Cornerback Mark Collins, for example, says he is offended because he wants to resolve his contract situation as soon as possible.
"I'm going to explore the market; I'd be a fool not to," Collins said.
"But like I said earlier in the year, I'd like to stay here. But when they say they don't want to sign me early, they're saying you're not a person they want to keep around. I don't like it, especially when you see other teams in the league signing their defensive backs."


New Designs To Sleep By
THESE are the days of whines and noses in childrens' room design.
William Wegman, the artist who portrays his beloved dogs in photographs and books, has now captured Fay and her offspring in border wallpaper, envisioning Weimaraners as letters of the alphabet.
"I did the alphabet with the four dogs, and the letters needed to be seen altogether, around the perimeter of a room," Mr.
Wegman said.


Executive Changes
BROOKS BROTHERS, New York, a division of Marks &amp; Spencer P.L.C., named Edward Turco executive vice president and director of stores.
DILLON, READ &amp; CO., New York, named Franklin Hobbs, president and chief operating officer, to the additional position of chief executive, effective Jan. 1.
Mr.
Hobbs succeeds John P. Birkelund, who will continue as chairman and chairman of the holding company, Dillon, Reed Holding Inc.
Francois de Saint Phalle, vice chairman, will take over Mr.
Hobbs's responsibilities as chief operating officer.


Job for Reiter
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani is expected today to name Fran Reiter, the chairwoman of the state Liberal Party, Deputy Mayor for health and social services, an adviser said yesterday.
Ms.
Reiter, 39, was a key aide to the Giuliani campaign and during the transition.
She has often represented Mr.
Giuliani on issues of concern to women and homosexuals.


Mideast Impasse; In the Israeli-Palestinian Agreement, The Devil Is in the Absence of Details
Its formal name is a mouthful: Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements.
Most people know it better as the agreement that shook the world, the one that Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization signed at the White House on Sept. 13.
The marvel of this document is its language.
It was flexible enough for Israeli and P.L.O. negotiators, who had met secretly for months in Norway, to strike a deal last summer even though it meant leaving key details to be filled in later.
Back then, the important thing was to get an agreement, thus showing that Israelis and Palestinians were finally ready to come to terms after blood-soaked decades.


Shopko Stores Inc.  reports earnings for 12wks to Dec 4


IN THE STUDIO WITH: Manuel Alvarez Bravo; Mexican Myth, Master of Images
IN the span of a long block, the narrow little street where the celebrated Mexican photographer Manuel Alvarez Bravo works darts away and cuts back, opens and nearly closes half a dozen times.
And wherever there is enough space, people are busy at something: two stubby legs stick out from beneath a parked pickup truck; a housekeeper and her daughter shift their grocery bags on the paving stones preparing for the next lurch forward; a beer-delivery van squirms out of a tight spot, waved on in various directions by an assortment of neighborhood volunteers.


New York Critics Honor 'Schindler's List'
"Schindler's List," the three-hour black-and-white story of Holocaust heroism directed by Steven Spielberg, was voted the best film of 1993 by the New York Film Critics' Circle.
Voting yesterday at the offices of the Newspaper Guild of New York, the 27-member group also cited "Schindler's List" for Ralph Fiennes's supporting performance as a Nazi labor camp commandant and for Janusz Kaminski's cinematography.
"The Piano" received a best-director award for Jane Campion and a best-actress award for Holly Hunter, who plays the film's mute heroine.
The group named Mr.
Spielberg a close runner-up as best director, just as "The Piano" was a close runner-up in the best-picture category.


Review/Violin; Nina Beilina, Exponent of Russian School
Since immigrating to the United States in 1976, the violinist Nina Beilina has led a stop-and-start career, somehow failing to build upon the considerable acclaim that greeted her New York debut.
A recital on Saturday night at Alice Tully Hall demonstrated her strengths and weaknesses in equal measure.
An accomplished technician, she preserves the dark, emotive forcefulness of the Russian school of violin playing, but with one notable exception, her interpretations were not compellingly focused the whole way through.
The exception was Bach's Partita No. 2 in D minor, which Ms.
Beilina presented as an ever-flowing lyric-tragic current.
The concluding Chaconne unfolded with a masterly linear control.
The same assurance of phrasing appeared in the first two movements of the Brahms Sonata No. 3 in D minor, gracefully augmented by portamento.
But in the Brahms's later movements, and through much of the Schubert Fantasy in C, there were moments of hurried articulation and spells of interpretive uncertainty.


Wounded in Policy Wars
Les Aspin had studied all his life for the job.
But he failed to master some key lessons, and instead of providing the capstone for his career, his service as Secretary of Defense lasted only a year and ended in ambiguity, with a decidedly equivocal record.
To move across the Potomac to the Pentagon, Mr.
Aspin had to abandon a safe Congressional seat and his post as chairman of the House Armed Services Committee.
He did not do so lightly, because he knew it would be difficult if not impossible to restart an elective career in his late 50's.
But after some hesitation, he decided this would probably be his only chance at the secretary's job, and he took it.


New Form For Old Gala For Prizes In Voice
This year, the Richard Tucker Music Foundation Gala seemed determined to depart from the gala norm.
In place of overly familiar arias belted out by superannuated stars, Sunday evening's event at Avery Fisher Hall offered weightier or lesser-known repertory sung by some of the indisputable major talents of the day.
James Morris, Samuel Ramey, Renee Fleming and Florence Quivar sang in a sizable excerpt from "Don Carlo," Thomas Hampson revived Ambroise Thomas, and the Tucker winner of the evening was the flawless soprano voice of Ruth Ann Swenson.
It wasn't what it might have been.
Mr.
Morris defied the baritonal bias of his voice and sang bass throughout the evening; his renditions of Philip II and Boris Godunov (the whole of the Coronation Scene) showed weakness at the lower end.
Jerry Hadley forced the upper range of his usually dependable tenor in some Gounod, and Miss Fleming sought in vain a compelling lyric line in John Kander's "Letter From Sullivan Ballou," a bland bit of note-spinning commissioned for the occasion.
Ms.
Swenson drew ovations for her pristine renderings of Bellini and Donizetti, but I found her delivery on this occasion to be a shade too sugary and facile.
Daniel Oren drew jumpy, rough-edged performances from members of the Met orchestra and the New York Choral Society.


Does Crime Pay? Victim Sues to Take Mugger's Millions
Saying that he wants to prevent the man who mugged him from collecting a $4.8 million court judgment, an elderly man sued the mugger yesterday and pledged to use any money he reaps to hire more police officers for the region's mass transit system.
The mugger, Bernard McCummings, won the money in a lawsuit against the New York City Transit Authority after he was shot in the back by a transit police officer, leaving him paralyzed.
He was shot while fleeing the site where he and two others robbed and beat Jerome Sandusky in 1984, in the subway station at Central Park West and 96th Street in Manhattan.


Theater in Review
Greetings!
John Houseman Theater 450 West 42d Street Clinton By Tom Dudzick; directed by Dennis Zacek; set and costumes by Bruce Goodrich; lighting by Deborah Constantine; sound by One Dream; general manager, Laura Heller; production stage manager, Tom Aberger.
Presented by Arthur Cantor and Carol Ostrow.
WITH: Gregg Edelman, Aaron Goodwin, Lenore Loveman, Darren McGavin and Toby Poser.
One presumes the creators of "Greetings!" are hoping to capitalize on Republic Pictures' decision to limit the number of television broadcasts of "It's a Wonderful Life" during the holiday season.
Like the beloved Frank Capra film, Tom Dudzick's comedy, which received a popular Off Off Broadway production in 1991, is a Christmastime fable of an unhappy family brought into calculatedly heartwarming harmony by angelic intervention.


Burning With the Old Fire, A Hungry Bowe Set to Fight
There was the extra weight, the paraglider, his pregnant wife who fainted at ringside and an ailing 82-year-old trainer.
"I'm not making excuses," Riddick Bowe said yesterday after offering some explanations of why he lost his heavyweight title to Evander Holyfield on Nov. 6.
Then again, his manager, Rock Newman, refuses to call Riddick Bowe the former heavyweight champion.
According to Newman, two judges made a mistake when they gave the edge to Holyfield, outweighing the one judge who believed Bowe had kept his title.


Azerbaijan Suffers Armenian Aggression
To the Editor:
In "Armenia Once Again Needs World Support" (letter, Dec. 2), Rouben Shugarian, Armenian ambassador, states Armenia seeks a peaceful solution to the conflict between Azerbaijan and Armenian forces.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
A FRIEND recently told me of her 5-year-old son's look of grave concern after they had said goodbye to a relative who was returning to Philadelphia.
The visitor had asked the boy what he wanted for Christmas, and had promised to send something that was on his list.
As soon as the relative left, the boy looked up and asked, "Mom, do they make anything in Pennsylvania besides pencils?"
Holiday wish lists can tell parents much more than the toys their children want.
The items on these lists offer insight into their stages of development and perceptions of their roles within the family.
Parents' reactions, especially their emotional responses, often reflect how they view themselves as well as the desired toys.


THE WORLD TRADE AGREEMENT: The Hollywood Reaction; Clinton Spared Blame By Hollywood Officials
For weeks, Hollywood executives had insisted that President Clinton had assured them that American-made movies and television programs were, in the words of leaders here, "a defining issue" and "make or break" in world trade negotiations.
Today, a day after the entertainment industry emerged as a big loser in the agreement, industry leaders and others who agreed to speak publicly voiced disappointment but carefully avoided blaming the President for failing to abolish European protections that could potentially hold back the growth of American movies and television programs.
Avoiding Short-Sightedness
Several executives graciously said it would been financially, politically and diplomatically short-sighted for the Clinton Administration to sacrifice the overall agreement for the sake of Hollywood studios.
After all, American studios are making more and more money overseas.


Review/Film; Floating in Limbo in London's Streets
"Naked" was shown as part of the 1993 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 15.
The film opened yesterday.
Meet Johnny (David Thewlis), the 27-year-old Manchester lad who is the central figure in Mike Leigh's "Naked," a brilliant somersault of a movie that lands this fine English director in dark new cinematic territory.


The Looks Don't Count With Equipment
Tamara McKinney, the 1989 World Cup skiing champion, still moves with power and precision on the slopes.
But at 5 feet 3 inches, she is a relatively small racer who has always chosen skis and boots that are more flexible than bigger ski competitors require.
Stiff skis and boots are more responsive for edging than softer ones, but they also tend to be uncomfortable and unnecessary for skiers who do not have trophies on the mind.
When it comes to advice for women who are shopping for recreational equipment, McKinney, 31 years old and a competitor in an annual Tournament of Champions league, advises, "Look out for the impostors."


The Accord's Approval Process
Under legislation passed this summer, President Clinton had until Dec. 15 to notify Congress that his negotiators had reached a world trade agreement that he intended to sign.
The President plans to sign the accord by April 15; on the same day Mickey Kantor, his trade representative, will sign the pact in a ceremony in Marrakesh, Morocco.


MILITARY MARRIAGE SEEN AS NO THREAT
An exhaustive high-level Pentagon report ordered last summer by Defense Secretary Les Aspin after the Marine Corps tried to ban married recruits has reached this conclusion: marriage is not a threat to national security.
Since August, scores of generals and admirals and their top aides have been poring over reams of reports on military pay, housing, child care and demographics to determine whether married recruits hurt combat readiness and, in general, are bad risks for the armed forces.


How Much Is That Saberhagen On Sale?
He wore an elf's cap at Shea Stadium, a blinking bulb hanging at the end of it.
It might as well have been flashing "For Sale" atop Bret Saberhagen's head.
"It's the time of year to shop, isn't it?" the right-hander for the Mets asked with a smile.
"I know I'm doing mine."


Coach for Missouri
LARRY SMITH returned to the head-coaching ranks yesterday when he was hired by Missouri.


Review/Music; Rattle Leads the Philadelphia In Mahler's Ninth Symphony
Gustav Mahler played an interesting trick on the orchestra world.
Symphonists before and after him wrote works that might be the centerpieces of concert programs but that nevertheless must share the spotlight.
With a couple of exceptions -- the First and Fourth Symphonies -- Mahler's symphonies are so expansive as to require evenings to themselves.
It's a good thing, because these works are as emotionally draining as they are long, and they require an involvement that would render the side dishes on the traditional concert menu irrelevant, even irritating.
What Mahler painted on these vast sonic canvases are visions of mortality and the vain struggle to defeat it.
These are not visions of heaven (although in the finale of the Fourth, Mahler suggests one view of it), but of life and death in the here and now, with extremes of elation and despair transformed into musical topography.
It is music that lends itself to peculiar exegeses: read enough Mahler essays and you encounter theories, advanced seriously, suggesting that Mahler's symphonies embody predictions of both world wars, racial strife and other calamities that have befallen the world since Mahler's death in 1911.
It is as if the music's tragic scope is too great to be merely autobiographical.


Turgeon, a Gentleman, Fighting to End Slump
With the team on a three-game undefeated streak, the problem isn't a crisis.
But the statistical facts are troubling for the Islanders: Pierre Turgeon is in another slump.
He has gone nine games without a goal.
In Tuesday night's 4-1 victory over the Devils at the Coliseum, he didn't have an assist or even a shot on net.
This was against a team playing without three injured centers.


Kings Eye New Arena
The Los Angeles Kings' owner, BRUCE McNALL, announced an agreement yesterday to sell a large stake in his team and become a partner in a group building a new arena for the National Hockey League franchise.
McNall said he would retain controlling interest in the Kings while selling a "significant and substantial" portion of the team to two IDB Communications executives, JEFFREY SUDIKOFFand JOE COHEN.


Janos Scholz Tribute
A musical tribute to Janos Scholz, the cellist and scholar, is to be held on Monday at 5:30 P.M. at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola, Park Avenue at 83d Street.
The performers scheduled to perform are Mary Louise Boehm, pianist; Kees Kooper, violinist, and Susan Salm, cellist, who will play Dvorak's "Dumky" Trio; and choir members of St.
Ignatius Loyola.
Mr.
Scholz, who was also a benefactor of the Pierpont Morgan Library, died on June 3 at 89.


Getty Petroleum Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


The Outlook May Be Better Because His Outerwear Will Be Better


U.S. Proposes to Divert Fresh Water To Restore Damaged California Delta
In a concerted action without parallel, four Federal agencies moved today to reverse the long-term environmental destruction of San Francisco Bay and the Sacramento Delta, the vast estuary that is the lifeblood of California.
The agencies, which rarely cooperate, entered one of the most politically charged issues in California by proposing new water quality standards for the estuary.
If adopted, they would require that substantial amounts of fresh water be diverted away from cities and farms, particularly in dry years.


Planning for Desegregation: 22 Guides to Lead 11 Forums
It was the last day of training for the 22 people selected to help local officials and parents draft plans for integrating public schools, as a new Connecticut law requires.
What, they were asked, could state officials say to help them, in introducing them to the public forums that convene next month?
"Tell them it's not our fault," someone quickly said.


Amid a revamping at Young &amp; Rubicam, the emergence of the next generation of managers.
YOUNG &amp; RUBICAM INC., hoping to capitalize on recent account gains after a prolonged drought, announced yesterday another revamping of top management.
The reorganization at Y.&amp; R., ranked by Advertising Age as the world's sixth-largest agency company, with billings of $7.9 billion, involves seven executives, mixing planned successions with shake-ups.
And two shifts seem to signal the designation of a potential next generation of leadership for the agency, which lists among its blue-chip clients Colgate-Palmolive, Eastman Kodak, Ford and Philip Morris.


Kakuei Tanaka Dies at 75; Was Japan's Prime Minister
Mr.
Tanaka was until his convicton Japan's most potent political figure by virtue of his role as leader of the most powerful faction in the dominant Liberal Democratic Party, a conservative group that has dominated Japanese politics for decades.
In 1983, Mr.
Tanaka, a shrewd political tactician, a skilled fund raiser and a deft dispenser of patronage, was convicted of having taken the equivalent of $2.1 million in bribes from the Lockheed Corporation while he was Prime Minister.


Accountant at Drug Program Is Shot to Death in the Bronx
The killing of a 52-year-old accountant outside the Bronx drug treatment program whose books she was auditing appeared to have been a well-planned execution, the police said yesterday.
The woman, Lillian DeJesus, had been hired by the drug treatment agency, Promesa, just five months before to look into nearly $300,000 in operating expenses that have been challenged by the state, officials said yesterday.


Whitman Nominates New Attorney General


DISTRICT RETURNS IN RUSSIA ELECTION LIFT YELTSIN BLOC
The initial wave of anxiety over Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky's strong showing in Sunday's election abated today as tallies of candidates elected from single-member districts reportedly showed that reformers would still form the largest single bloc in the new Parliament.
"The Liberal Democratic Party is celebrating victory prematurely," a senior aide to President Boris N. Yeltsin, Nikolai Medvedev, was quoted by Interfax as saying about the ultranationalist party of Mr.
Zhirinovsky, which won a stunning 24 percent in the party-preference voting for the new Parliament.
The party-preference vote is used to apportion half of the 450 seats in Parliament; the other half are filled in the district elections.


A Bill That Hurts the Poor
The New York State Assembly is scheduled to vote as early as today on a bill that threatens housing construction for New York's poor.
The bill, which has already passed the Senate, would require contractors to pay so-called prevailing wages -- which means high union wage rates -- on "public works." But public works doesn't refer just to bridges, schools and other public projects.
It also includes private projects that rely on government grants and tax subsidies.
Most low-income housing projects rely on tax subsidies to attract private capital.
So the bill would catch the small, often minority contractors who build and renovate housing with non-union labor.
By forcing them to pay union wages, the bill would double labor costs -- raising, for example, the cost of fixing an apartment from $8,000 to $13,000 and forcing up rents by about $40 a month.
Many projects would not survive the impact.


Giuliani Panels Weigh Merging Some Agencies
Transition advisers to Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani have embarked on a broad review of the municipal government to identify agencies that can be abolished or merged and services that can be handed over to the state or put out to private contract.
The effort, by senior aides to Mr.
Giuliani and by 40 committees and subcommittees, is driven by Mr.
Giuliani's campaign pledge to cut the size of government, as well as his need to address a budget gap that has been estimated to reach to $2 billion in the next fiscal year.


Hasidic School District Case Concerns Education, Not Religion
To the Editor:
"Keeping the Church-State Wall" (editorial, Dec. 1), on the Kiryas Joel School District in Monroe, N.Y., fails to explore the full rationale for its formation.
You suggest that the Hasidim simply desired to segregate their handicapped children from learning alongside non-Hasidic handicapped children in the public school system.
This view is not valid.


U.S. Accuses 12 Capital Officers Of Protecting a Cocaine Racket
In one of the largest police corruption cases in Washington's history, a dozen officers have been indicted on charges that they took bribes to protect Federal undercover agents who they thought were drug dealers and to help transport cocaine.
The indictment was returned by a Federal grand jury on Tuesday, when the defendants were taken into custody.
Today all 12 pleaded not guilty and were then taken from the courtroom to a local jail, where they will be held for the next few days, until hearings on whether they should be granted bail.


Report Assails Board of Elections on School Vote in May
Announcing the results of a 10-month inquiry yesterday, the New York City school system's top investigator accused the Board of Elections of "gross mismanagement" of the city's community school board elections in May and called for a sweeping overhaul of the process.
Edward F. Stancik, special commissioner of investigation for the New York City school district, detailed several instances of petition fraud, political coercion exercised by school officials, and other campaign and Election Day wrongdoing, as well as one case of outright ballot-stuffing in the Bronx.


Calderesque Toys
"ALL my life I've liked and noticed toys," said Bob Braczyk, a 47-year-old sculptor and art teacher.
He designed his first 10 years ago, and tried the kinetic results on his daughters and on the children of friends.
Mr.
Braczyk, who lives in Manhattan, studied Calder's "Circus" at the Whitney Museum of American Art for ideas on style.
He came up with three colorful toys, which he makes out of wood in his Upper West Side studio.
"The Tumbler" is 11 inches high, "The Trapeze Artist" (below left), is 22 inches and "The Balancing Equestrian" (right), is 18 1/2 inches.
"The three-dimensional figures are carefully drawn to evoke the maximum sense of life," he said.


Just Ban All Guns
To the Editor:
Why cannot we abolish all guns?
In Japan it is a crime to own a gun, and the murder rate is spectacularly low.
There is no reason for owning a gun, not even by the police.


Children's Art 101
WHILE artists frequently recapture their childhoods on canvas, children have had a tougher time making sense of adult artistic expression.
Now, they (and parents who slept through Art Appreciation 101) will have some help from a variety of new books.
"A Weekend With Winslow Homer" (Rizzoli, $19.95) by Ann Keay Beneduce is part of a series exploring the painter's point of view.
"What Makes a Bruegel a Bruegel?" (Metropolitan Museum of Art and Viking, $8.95 at the museum; $9.95 elsewhere) by Richard Muhlberger explores the artist's best works.
There are also books on artists like van Gogh and Monet.
And Leslie Sills, an artist and teacher, has filled a gender void with "Visions: Stories About Women Artists" (Albert Whitman &amp; Company, $18.95).
Mary Cassatt and Betye Saar are featured.
"First Impressions: Michelangelo" (Abrams, $19.95) by Richard McLanathan is from a series of biographies on artists.


In Last Days, Kelly Urges Moves To Diminish Police Corruption
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly, trying to have a final say in the direction of the Police Department before his tenure ends, announced several legislative proposals yesterday that were intended to thwart corruption.
One proposal calls for raising the minimum age for a rookie officer from 20 to 22.
Another would allow the department to have access to the medical records of officers who have sought treatment for alcohol or drug problems.


I.R.S. Outlines New Rules To Govern Executives' Pay
The Internal Revenue Service proposed executive-pay rules today that are likely to induce companies to emphasize stock options and to minimize cash compensation.
The eagerly awaited regulations will put into effect the provision of the budget legislation enacted last summer that limits tax deductions for companies that pay any individual more than $1 million in a year.
The rules issued today would limit who may sit on the committees that fashion pay packages and describe the specific conditions under which an exception can be invoked.


Theater in Review
Tancredi and Erminia  La Mama Annex Theater 74A East Fourth Street East Village Through Sunday Lyrics, music for the lyrics and direction by Ellen Stewart; based on "Gerusalemme Liberatta," by Torquato Tasso; choreography by Masahiro Kunii; music and arrangements by David Sawyer; additional music and arrangements by Genji Ito, Sheila Dabney and Kate Dezina; sets by Jun Maeda and Mark Tambella; lighting by David Adams; sound by Tim Schellenbaum; production manager, Osvaldo Rodriguez.
Presented by La Mama E.T.C.
WITH: Paul Beauvais, Erika Bilder, Sheila Dabney, Kate Dezina, Jonathan Hart Makwaia, Andrea Paciotto and Markus Scarabai.
Ellen Stewart fills the large performance space of the La Mama Annex with singing 11th-century kings and nobles battling over Jerusalem in her "Tancredi and Erminia," and they make a spectacular uproar.
Ms.
Stewart calls the work a "city opera," with no hint of what she means by that.


Jeff Lukas Is Injured Seriously by Runaway
Jeff Lukas, the 36-year-old son of the trainer D. Wayne Lukas and his father's chief assistant throughout their illustrious 15-year thoroughbred career, suffered severe head injuries yesterday when he was knocked down by a runaway horse in the stable area of Santa Anita in California.
Lukas, whose head slammed to the ground when he was bowled over by the runaway after a morning workout, was taken by helicopter to Huntington Memorial Hospital in Pasadena, where he was later reported in critical condition with multiple fractures at the base of the skull.


School Work Falls, New Report Shows
A report released yesterday by the New York City Board of Education showed a decline in school performance, and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines vowed to increase efforts to rebuild schools that have repeatedly been identified as educational failures.
Mr.
Cortines said that improving failing schools may require the removal of failing principals, negotiations with unions representing teachers and administrations, expanded staff training, and developing more innovative schools.


Theater in Review
Top Girls  Harold Clurman Theater 412 West 42d Street Clinton Through Sunday By Caryl Churchill; directed by April Shawhan; set by Andrea Bechert; lighting by Kay A. Albright; technical director, Phil Gebhardt; stage manager, Kyle McMurry.
Presented by Magical Eye Incorporated, in association with the Flock Theater Company.
WITH: Maureen Beitler, Kelly Clark, Joanie Coyote, Irene Glezos, Susan Jon, Victoria Stern and Jeannie Zusy.
Every revolution has its price, and the final bill for the women's movement will not be known for generations.
But some preliminary cost estimates have been ventured in works of variable humor and acerbity by writers like Wendy Wasserstein and Caryl Churchill, whose brilliantly imaginative play "Top Girls" is being given a first-rate revival by the Flock Theater Company.


The Jets' Master Builder of Defense
A couple of years ago, the Jets' defensive coordinator, Pete Carroll, was one of the hottest of the hot young coaching prospects.
Whenever a head coaching job around the National Football League opened up, Carroll's name was always on the short list.
In 1991, he was right up there with Bill Cowher, the defensive Wunderkind from Kansas City, for the Pittsburgh job.
Cowher got the gig.
Last season, Carroll was interviewed in Chicago, but the job went to Dave Wannstedt, another precocious defensive coordinator who helped guide the Cowboys to the Super Bowl.
Now, Mike Nolan, the Giants' 34-year-old defensive coordinator, is being touted as a hot prospect, showing up on the short list of candidates for the coaching job with the Carolina Panthers, the expansion team that will begin play in 1995.


Where The Boys Are: Home Ec
GRAHAM McMAMEE stood at a counter in a classroom kitchen at his school preparing lunch for a group of hungry toddlers.
"Hopefully, I will work with children, maybe in day care, after I graduate," said Mr.
McMamee, an 18-year-old senior at Robinson Secondary School in Fairfax, Va., a suburb of Washington.


Nationalist's Big Appeal: Promise of a Better Life
To discover something of the Zhirinovsky phenomenon, one need look no farther than two cold, filthy men, one old and one young, shoveling wet concrete today outside the Moskvich car factory.
Both of them voted for Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, the 47-year-old right-wing nationalist whose showing in Russia's parliamentary elections has sent a shiver through the Russian Government and most of the world.
The pro-Government Russia's Choice party, led by First Deputy Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar, ran a poor second to Mr.
Zhirinovsky's Liberal Democratic Party in the party-preference section of Sunday's balloting.


Theater in Review
Out Is In  Perry Street Theater 31 Perry Street Greenwich Village  A one-woman show with Kate Clinton.
Lighting by Traci Renee Klainer; stage manager, Tigre McMullan.
Presented by Virginia Giordano.
In her one-woman show, "Out Is In," Kate Clinton says talk about lesbians in the mainstream makes her nervous.
"If we're at the table of power," she asks, "where's my knife?"


Bucks Win as Kings Pay Tribute to Hurley
Bucks 96, Kings 95
Eric Murdock scored 10 of his 32 points in the fourth quarter last night, as Milwaukee beat the Kings in Sacramento, 96-95, spoiling the Kings' effort to win for their injured guard, Bobby Hurley.
The Kings, who lost their sixth straight game at home and for the 10th time in 11 games, had two shots to go ahead in the final seconds, but jumpers by Mitch Richmond and Wayman Tisdale were off the mark.
The loss came in Sacramento's first game since Hurley was critically injured in a car crash after a loss Sunday to the Los Angeles Clippers.


Nynex Seeks To Revamp Some Fees
Seeking a potentially far-reaching change in telephone industry pricing, the Nynex Corporation asked regulators yesterday to reallocate nearly $2 billion in fees that Nynex charges long-distance carriers.
The proposed changes may result in higher fees for A.T.&amp; T., which is likely to oppose the plan, but could mean lower costs for MCI and Sprint.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The World Trade Agreement
Seven years of world trade negotiations were completed under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.  [ Page D1. ]  Hollywood executives expressed disappointment that a clause ending export restrictions to Europe was not included.  [ D1. ]
The trade pact is the product of an unusual friendship between the chief European and U.S. negotiators.  [ D8. ]  President Clinton immediately began pushing for Congressional approval.  [ D8. ]


Makers of Anti-Personnel Mines Are Urged by U.S. to Ban Exports
The Clinton Administration has asked more than 40 countries that produce land mines to ban exports of anti-personnel mines for three to five years, senior American officials said today.
The Administration, which wrote to the governments on Dec. 7, has also told them that it wants a new agreement to stop the spread of mines.
The accord would be based on an existing agreement, the Missile Technology Control Regime, intended to limit the spread of missile technology.


Store Chain Fails to Pay Suppliers
Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc., the once-hot-now-not operator of specialty stores, said yesterday that it had missed payments to many of its suppliers that were due last Friday, leading factoring companies and analysts to believe it may file for bankruptcy protection.
Because of the missed payments and other concerns, virtually all the major factoring companies, including Heller Financial Inc., the C.I.T.
Group/Factoring and Rosenthal &amp; Rosenthal, have stopped approving shipments to the company for the second time in a month.
Factoring companies guarantee payment for shipments in exchange for a small percentage of the payment.
In addition, many credit agencies have taken Merry-Go-Round off their approved lists.
Outlining Plans
Michael Sullivan, president of Merry-Go-Round, said in a telephone interview yesterday that bankruptcy was not in the company's plans.


Supermarket Worker Slain
A man shot and killed a supermarket employee during a robbery in Queens about 8:30 P.M. yesterday when the man hesitated in obeying an order to lie on the floor, the police said.
The victim was not immediately identified.
A suspect, Luis Perez, 21, was arrested two blocks from the store, the Pioneer Supermarket on Seneca Avenue in Ridgewood, by police officers who saw him leaving the scene, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman.
Three other suspects escaped.
Mr.
Perez, of 328 Starr Avenue in Brooklyn, faces chrages of murder, robbery, burglary, menacing and criminal weapon possession, the police said.


A Piranha Returns to the Big Pond
Back when he was cutting a wide swath across the golf landscape, when his hair was darker and his putting stroke steadier, they had a name for Curtis Strange.
They called him Piranha, and he was everything the name implied: relentless, voracious and deadly when finishing off opponents.
He entered through the front door in those days; he was the 1988 and 1989 United States Open champion, winner of 17 PGA Tour events, a millionaire several times over.
And he wore it well.
With just the right combination of confidence, arrogance and competitiveness, Strange was the man who had the audacity to say, "Move over, Ben," (as in Hogan) after he matched Hogan's feat by winning a second straight Open in 1989 at Oak Hill in Rochester.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday about the building of a Nativity scene at a church in lower Manhattan misspelled the name of the parishioner at the rear.
He is Frank Colorio.


Frenzy Is Back As Huskies Run and Gun On Their Court
At the point of the season when roles are defined and flaws are addressed, Connecticut's Gampel Pavilion was filled with the type of frenzy that has been missing for the past several years.
Students waited for hours for the best seats.
A 96-86 victory over Texas, and UConn alumnus Tom Penders, gave the Huskies a nationally televised showcase for their running and pressing style.
"When I first went to Texas," the coach of the Longhorns said of his alma mater, "they thought it was in Alaska."


After I.B.M., A Downturn In Fortune
She was hired as an office assistant at I.B.M. in 1970, when she was 23 years old, and for the next two decades her identity and sense of self worth were bound up in her job.
"It was like a big camp where everyone had something in common," said the woman, a Queens resident who spoke on the condition that her name not be used.
"We were all I.B.M.'ers; we were all Big Blue."


Court Nominee Questioned on Abortion Case
Anti-abortion groups called on the New York State Senate to reject the nomination of Carmen Beauchamp Ciparick to the Court of Appeals today because of her landmark ruling that said the State Constitution protects the right to have an abortion.
Aides to the Republican-controlled committee said it was unlikely that the objections would jeopardize Justice Ciparick's nomination.
The committee is to vote on her nomination on Thursday, after which the full Senate will cast a final vote.


BRITISH-IRISH PLAN GIVES I.R.A. ALLIES TERMS FOR TALKS
Britain and Ireland produced a set of principles today to encourage peace negotiations on Northern Ireland, and Britain pledged to start talks with political representatives of the Irish Republican Army within three months if the I.R.A. renounced violence in the province.
The declaration of principles, signed by Prime Minister John Major of Britain and Prime Minister Albert Reynolds of Ireland, came after two years of diplomacy and weeks of intensive negotiations aimed at ending 25 years of sectarian violence that has taken more than 3,100 lives.
A Familiar Ring
The document repeated long-held principles, including a commitment that Northern Ireland could remain a province of Britain for as long as most of its people want to.
This is a variation of a principle already embraced by Dublin but stated more forcefully than in the past.  [ Excerpts from the document, page A9. ]


Give Jonathan Pollard Equal Justice
To the Editor:
The headline on "No Special Deal for Mr. Pollard" (editorial, Dec. 10), on the case of Jonathan Pollard is appropriate.
I couldn't agree more.


Sweet Victory for Balladur
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur savored political victory today, winning strong legislative approval for his advocacy of French interests in the world trade negotiations and gaining new momentum for a possible run for the French Presidency in 1995.
Addressing the National Assembly, the 64-year-old Gaullist said the nation had everything to gain from the trade-liberalization package concluded today under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
"Does the agreement conform with France's long-term interests?" he asked.
"In all conscience, my reply is yes."


Report Says U.S. Inspectors Miss Atom Plants' Problems
Inspectors for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission often fail to notice problems at nuclear power plants that industry teams from other utilities find when they visit, according to a report made public today by a watchdog organization.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission "has abandoned tough regulations," Bill Magavern, director of Public Citizen's Critical Mass project, said in releasing the report.


Baby Elephant Born at National Zoo


THE WORLD TRADE AGREEMENT: The Overview; GATT Talks End in Joy and Relief
A small wooden gavel came down on a table here today, signaling, with a sharp tap, the completion of the long-contested world trade agreement intended to provide the basis for global economic growth and cohesion into the 21st century.
As he lowered his hammer like an auctioneer completing a sale, Peter Sutherland, the Irish lawyer who oversaw the last phase of the seven-year trade negotiations as GATT's Director General, declared, "I gavel the Uruguay Round as concluded."


At City Hall, a Menorah Lighting Marks Hanukkah's End


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  PEACE PLAN FOR NORTHERN IRELAND  Britain and Ireland produced a set of principles to encourage peace negotiations on Northern Ireland, and Britain pledged to start talks with the I.R.A. within three months if it renounces violence.
A1  RUSSIAN ANXIETY ABATES  Anxiety over Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky's strong showing in Sunday's elections abated as tallies of district voting reportedly showed that reformers would form the largest bloc in the new Parliament.
A1


Dr. Kevorkian's Legal Victory
Naggingly, disagreeably, insistently, Jack Kevorkian is forcing a showdown on the claimed right to commit suicide with a doctor's help -- and the corresponding right of a physician to provide that help.
Michigan authorities, goaded by his defiance of conventions and of law, have moved erratically to shut down his suicide operations with criminal prosecutions.
Now a Michigan trial judge, dismissing one of several cases against the doctor, rules that the state may prevent some but not all physician-assisted suicides.
The prosecution is seeking a prompt appeal to the state's highest court, and the U.S.
Supreme Court may have to make the final decision.
Meanwhile, the opinion of Chief Judge Richard Kaufman of the circuit court in Detroit points the way to sensible regulation in this troubled area.


4 People Infected With H.I.V. In Doctor's Office in Australia
The virus that causes AIDS has been transmitted from one patient to four others in a surgeon's office in Australia because of a breakdown in standard infection-control practices, Australian health officials reported today.
All five patients had minor surgery for removal of skin lesions on the same day in November 1989, officials from the New South Wales Health Department announced.
They said one patient, a gay man who has since died of AIDS, was the source of the infection to the other patients, all women with no known risk factors for AIDS.


Blast Prosecutors Play Tape of Defendant Seeking Refund
The prosecution in the World Trade Center bombing trial played a tape recording yesterday of a conversation between an undercover F.B.I. agent and the lead defendant in the case, Mohammed A. Salameh, that, Mr.
Salameh's defense lawyers are expected to argue, indicates the innocence of their client.
The conversation took place on March 4 at a Ryder rental agency in Jersey City, only minutes before Mr.
Salameh was arrested by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Several days earlier, on Feb. 25, Mr.
Salameh had rented a van from the agency.
This, investigators have testified, was the yellow Ryder rental van whose twisted pieces were found in the rubble of the Feb. 26 trade center explosion.


Municipal Prices Slip; Treasuries Up
A rush of new issues kept prices in the municipal bond market subdued yesterday, but helped lift Treasury prices, ending a three-day slide.
As has been the case recently, Treasury trading was light and directionless, as prices and yields remained in their recent trading ranges.


The Call For Peace In Ulster
Following are excerpts from a declaration of principles intended to bring about peace talks on Northern Ireland, issued today by John Major, the Prime Minister of Britain, and Albert Reynolds, the Prime Minister, or Taoiseach (pronounced THEE-shakh), of Ireland:
The Taoiseach, Mr.
Albert Reynolds T.D., and the Prime Minister, the Rt.
Hon.
John Major M.P., acknowledge that the most urgent and important issue facing the people of Ireland, North and South, and the British and Irish Governments together, is to remove the causes of conflict, to overcome the legacy of history and to heal the divisions which have resulted, recognizing that the absence of a lasting and satisfactory settlement of relationships between the peoples of both islands has contributed to continuing tragedy and suffering.


Myrna Loy, Model of Urbanity in 'Thin Man' Films, Is Dead at 88
Myrna Loy, the urbane actress who personified a liberated wife of intelligence and wry good humor in some of the best American movie comedies of the 1930's and 40's, died on Tuesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 88.
She died in surgery after a long illness, said Sherlee Lantz, a longtime friend of Miss Loy.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.95
3.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.03
3.19
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.24
3.32
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.33
5.35
6.40
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.28
6.29
7.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.31
7.34
8.43
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.56
5.55
6.42
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corning to Buy Northern Telecom Assets
Corning Inc. announced yesterday that it would expand its optical fiber business with a Canadian acquisition and end a joint venture with a Mexican company in the consumer glass business.
The company also said it planned to sell 6.7 million shares of common stock to help finance the transactions.


Corning to Buy Northern Telecom Assets
Corning Inc. announced yesterday that it would expand its optical fiber business with a Canadian acquisition and end a joint venture with a Mexican company in the consumer glass business.
The company also said it planned to sell 6.7 million shares of common stock to help finance the transactions.


Books of The Times; Gathering Objects to Fill In That Empty Feeling
Collecting  An Unruly Passion: Psychological Perspectives  By Werner Muensterberger  Illustrated. 295 pages.
Princeton University Press. $24.95.
What lies at the root of the human passion for collecting, which Werner Muensterberger, a psychoanalyst, defines as "the selecting, gathering and keeping of objects of subjective value"?


INSIDE
117 Nations Complete A World Trade Agreement
The long-contested world trade agreement among 117 nations was completed, providing a basis for global economic growth into the 21st century and ending seven years of negotiation on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Page D1.
Former Japan Premier Dies
Kakuei Tanaka, the architect of Japan's dominant political system of the last 20 years, was 75.
Page B16.
Marriage and the Military
The Pentagon concluded in a study that marriage in the military is not a threat to national security.
Page A23.


HEALTH PLAN LEANS ON THE EMPLOYERS
President Clinton today gave Congress new details of his health plan, including proposals to finance it by requiring employers to pay for the care of millions of poor people and elderly people now enrolled in Federal health programs.
In a report to Congress, the President described how the Federal budget would be affected by his proposal to guarantee health insurance for all Americans while imposing strict limits on health spending.


Cookie Monsters Are Rejoicing
MADELINE LANCIANI has a cookie sidekick: her 7 1/2-year-old daughter, Olivia Rotondi.
"She tells me not to put feet, say, on a gingerbread person," said Ms.
Lanciani, who owns Duane Park Patisserie, a bakery and tearoom that opened about two months ago in TriBeCa.
Ms.
Lanciani prepares luscious brownies, cheesecakes and tarts (samples are always available).
But it is her vividly decorated holiday cookies -- designer cookies, you could say -- that make people break out in a sugar sweat.
"We offer two types of Christmas cookies," Ms.
Lanciani said.
"One cookie is sable, a shortbread from which we make Christmas trees, angel wings, gold-tipped stars and snowmen." The second type is made of gingerbread dough, from which she shapes ginger people, reindeer and snowflakes.
All of the cookies are iced with colored chocolate icing or with royal icing, a concoction of sugar and egg whites that gives the treats a glazed effect.
Ms.
Lanciani, who has been in the baking business for 22 years, acquired the basics from her mother, who was born in Portugal.


Russian Star Hurt
The Russian star SERGEI CHERBAKOV was said to be in a life-threatening situation after a predawn auto accident yesterday in Lisbon.


Frederick L. Zimmerman, Professor, 87
Frederick L. Zimmerman, a political science teacher at Hunter College for more than 30 years, died on Tuesday at the Highgate Manor Nursing Home in Troy, N.Y.
He was 87.
He had a long illness, said his son, Lloyd K. Zimmerman of Coxsackie, N.Y.


Wounded in Policy Wars
Les Aspin had studied all his life for the job.
But he failed to master some key lessons, and instead of providing the capstone for his career, his service as Secretary of Defense lasted only a year and ended in ambiguity, with a decidedly equivocal record.
To move across the Potomac to the Pentagon, Mr.
Aspin had to abandon a safe Congressional seat and his post as chairman of the House Armed Services Committee.
He did not do so lightly, because he knew it would be difficult if not impossible to restart an elective career in his late 50's.
But after some hesitation, he decided this would probably be his only chance at the secretary's job, and he took it.


THE WORLD TRADE AGREEMENT: The Turning Point; A Call From Clinton, and Then a Deal
It was early dawn on the day before the deadline for a world trade agreement when, after another night of fruitless haggling with European officials over trade in movies, the United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, called President Clinton.
"As in any negotiation, every tough issue had been reserved until last," Mr.
Kantor recalled in an interview today.
"I gave the President my advice on the movie issue, based on the last European offer; the President thought about it a while and called me back. The answer was firm -- we could not buy into something that compromised on free expression."


Art in Review
Katie Merz
Jack Tilton Gallery  49 Greene Street  SoHo  Through Thursday
Of all the artists operating these days in the gap between art and cartooning, Katie Merz comes closest to the latter.
Her paintings, seen here in her fairly impressive first one-woman show, are full of roughly drawn truculent beings that seem fresh from a drawing board in an unusually misanthropic greeting card company. (They resemble the figures that Julie Wachtel once appropriated into her paintings, and may also remind some viewers of Tom Hachtman's "Gertrude Follies" comic strip.)


At Blast Trial, Hints of Testimony to Come
A pair of shoes was held aloft for the jury to look at in the World Trade Center trial yesterday.
There was no explanation of the significance of the shoes, only that they were found in an F.B.I. search of the Newark apartment of one of the defendants, Mahmud Abouhalima.
The casual black shoes, which were inside a plastic evidence bag, were entered into evidence by a Government prosecutor.
Though nondescript, the shoes are seen by the Government as a significant piece of evidence against Mr.
Abouhalima, who prosecutors believe to be a pivotal figure in the bombing of the World Trade Center on Feb. 26, but against whom the weight of evidence presented so far seems far from crushing.


Penaia Ganilau, 75, Fiji Leader Who Became the First President
Ratu Sir Penaia Ganilau, President of Fiji, died on Wednesday at the Walter Reed Medical Center in Washington.
He was 75.
He had been treated for leukemia and died of a blood disorder, said Peter Halder, a presidential aide.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.97
3.06
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.01
3.02
3.18
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.21
3.22
3.35
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.34
5.33
6.39
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.29
6.28
7.42
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.34
7.31
8.42
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.58
5.56
6.42
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bill Robinson, 45, Pioneering Designer Of Fashions for Men
Bill Robinson, an innovative men's fashion designer who was known for his pioneering soft-shouldered jackets with slim waists, arresting combinations of just-off colors, and zippers going up the fronts of his vests, died yesterday at his home in Greenwich Village.
Besides his Manhattan home, Mr.
Robinson had a weekend home in Bucks County, Pa.
He was 45.
He died after a long illness, said his companion, Leo Chiu.


Question With No Answer: How Army Voted
In the rush of attention surrounding Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, whose platform of empire and crime-busting attracted nearly a quarter of Russian voters on Sunday, there is considerable speculation about how soldiers cast their ballots.
Given the unhappy state of the military and its crucial role in the last two attempted coups, most recently in October, the assumption has been that Mr.
Zhirinovsky's call for harsh discipline and restoration of the Russian empire would bring him significant backing from soldiers and officers.


Art in Review
Siobhan Liddell
Thread Waxing Space  476 Broadway (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through Thursday
Siobhan Liddell can make art out of almost nothing.
She fashions shy, nearly invisible wall pieces and sculptures from thread, string, cut-out paper, clumps of papier-mache and plastic straws strung end to end.
"Give me a piece of string and I'll build you a wall," she writes in the catalogue to this exhibition, and indeed, one piece in this show of more than 20 works is a few hundred feet of red thread that loops its way across the gallery, ending in a pile in one corner.


Dinkins Begins an Offensive Against Toy Guns


Toys 'R' Us Stops Selling a Violent Video Game
Amid growing public complaints about the display of blood and guts in video games, Toys 'R' Us, the nation's largest seller of toys and games, said yesterday that it had stopped selling the Sega Genesis home video game Night Trap because it is too violent for children.
But the company, which has 581 retail stores across the country, will continue to sell Mortal Kombat, a much more widely available game that has also generated protests by parents over its violence and sexual content.


Treasury Securities Mark Time
The bond market did not do very much of anything yesterday except prove how tightly it was locked into an aimless trading range as the end of the year approaches.
Early yesterday, Treasury prices fell and yields rose after a report by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia showing a sharp jump in the bank's index of regional business conditions.
In December, the index leaped to 42.4. from 22.4 in November.
This jump seems to indicate that the closely watched purchasing managers index could move up to 60, which would indicate another good month for manufacturing.


INSIDE
Giuliani Adds Social Services To a Deputy Mayor's Duties
Shuffling his aides' powers even before taking office, Rudolph W. Giuliani said he would broaden the duties of Ninfa Segarra as Deputy Mayor, putting her in charge of health agencies and social services.
Page B1.
Packwood's Diaries Seized
A Federal judge confiscated some diaries of Senator Bob Packwood after hearing evidence that the Senator had altered entries.
Page A26.
Israeli Army to Curb Settlers
The Israeli Army has been ordered to take "strong action" against settlers who break laws in the territories, including possible arrests.
Page A18.
Russian to Fly in Shuttle
The United States and Russia became partners on a space station and said a Russian would fly in the space shuttle in six weeks.
Page A12.
Integration Case Is Halted
A Connecticut judge halted a trial over integration of Hartford-area schools to see whether a new law had pre-empted court action.
Page B5.
Retailer Drops Video Game
Toys 'R' Us said it had stopped selling the video game Night Trap because it is too violent.
Page B1.


Secret Nuclear Research on People Comes to Light
For three decades after World War II, top medical scientists in the nation's nuclear weapons industry undertook an extensive program of experiments in which civilians were exposed to radiation in concentrations far above what is considered safe today.
The experiments, at Government laboratories and prominent medical research centers, involved injecting patients with dangerous radioactive substances like plutonium or exposing them to powerful beams of radiation.


Market Place; 3DO postpones a stock offering after a sobering fall from grace.
THE market for shares of the 3DO Company, the video game start-up whose initial public offering in May was one of the hottest of the year, has cooled considerably.
Yesterday, the company postponed a proposed secondary stock offering, noting unfavorable stock market conditions. 3DO, which has seen its shares fall from a high of $48.25 on Oct. 15 to less than half that now, said it would reconsider a new offering after the first of the year.
Shares of 3DO rose 25 cents, to $23.75, in Nasdaq trading yesterday; its initial public offering price was $12.


CHANGE AT THE PENTAGON: Man in the News -- Bobby Ray Inman; An Operator for the Pentagon
More than a decade ago Bobby Ray Inman left Washington in a huff, vowing never to return.
The city was too mean, the bureaucratic infighting too enervating, the backbiting too intense, he told intimates after serving 16 uncomfortable months as deputy to William J. Casey, who was then Director of Central Intelligence.
Shucking a long Government career, Mr.
Inman went home and set up a business in Austin, Tex.
But his heart never left the Potomac.
Using the tools he had acquired as a four-star admiral and a spy master -- stealth and discipline -- he managed to keep his finger on the pulse of power.


Barneys Says It's Healthy; Vendors Fret
Barneys New York, concerned that reports of slow payments to vendors were raising questions about its liquidity, insisted yesterday that its business was in good health.
But some retail analysts and factoring companies remained skeptical.
Complaints by suppliers who contended that Barneys was far behind in paying bills began to emerge publicly last month in a report in The New York Times.
Those suppliers say they have stopped shipping goods to Barneys, which could limit its inventory levels.


Inside Art
Warhols on Sale
At the same time the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts is battling in Surrogate's Court in Manhattan to determine the value of the artist's work and the fee for Edward Hayes, the former lawyer for the estate, the foundation is also selling important works in its holdings at significantly reduced prices to museums across the country.
By offering attractive deals, the foundation says, it hopes to increase public awareness of Warhol's work.
The museum purchase program was offered to 65 American museums.
"We invited the museums to tell us what Warhols they had, which ones they wanted and why," said Archibald L. Gillies, the foundation's president.
"We've heard from all 65 and are having active conversations with 50. I think between 30 and 40 will probably end up making purchases at favorable terms."


Commercial Metals Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Review/Film; Harris As an Aging Macho Man
"Wrestling Ernest Hemingway" begins with the camera looking down at Richard Harris, as a man in his 70's, naked on the floor doing push-ups.
This is not the most flattering angle from which the actor has ever been shot, which is very much the point.
The film, which follows the growing friendship of two aging men who have nothing in common but loneliness, means to do something radical, at least by Hollywood standards: it tells the demographically unpopular tale of old people.
But the self-conscious bravado of the opening scene also suggests the film's overwhelming weakness.
Instead of simply assuming that the old have interesting lives, the film never stops congratulating itself for being daring enough to focus on them.
It shows the terrible strain of trying too hard.


Protesters in Romania Demand the Resignation of the Government





Accord in Albany In Bid to Cut Costs On Worker Injuries
After months of fitful negotiations, legislative leaders and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo reached agreement tonight on a bill aimed at controlling a bruising series of increases in workers' compensation insurance rates that have affected businesses across the state.
The bill is expected to reduce the price of workers' compensation insurance modestly next year, perhaps eliminating about a third of a 14.4 percent rate increase that took effect in October.
But its sponsors are hopeful that it will reverse a trend of steep annual increases in rates, which have more than doubled overall since 1988.


Let's Help Stamp Out Millennium Pedantry
To the Editor:
We will no doubt be plagued for the next seven years with lectures such as that from Stanton Vollman in "The Millennium Doesn't Start Until 2001" (letter, Dec. 4), insisting that the next millennium officially begins Jan. 1, 2001, because "there is no zero year in our calendar." True enough, but what exactly is the significance of this "millennium"?


Critic's Choice/Dance; Indians Portray Spirits From Winter's Safety
The American Indian Dance Theater has returned to the Joyce Theater, where it performs through Jan. 2, with a program of rarely seen dances for winter, when the spirits are asleep and can be portrayed without offense.
It is touches like that that make these performers so compelling.
Their songs and dances add to one's sense of American history and culture.
It is intriguing to see the differences between the older, generally plainer dances and the newer ones filled with bravura dancing designed to capture interest at powwows across the nation.
But in the end, the audience is being given a privileged, often exciting look at a way of life in which beliefs and art forms are an inseparable part of daily living.


Judge Asks if Law Blocks Race Bias Case
Final arguments in a school-desegregation lawsuit involving Hartford and its suburbs were suspended today when the trial judge questioned whether a new state law promoting regional integration plans effectively barred him from issuing an order of his own.
The law, proposed last winter while testimony in the desegregation case, known as Sheff v.
O'Neill, was being heard, requires every town and city in Connecticut to take part in discussions on drafting regional school integration plans.
But it sets no goals and provides no penalties for towns that refuse to cooperate, and thus is far weaker than a court order.


Review/Photography; The Italy That's Beyond The Museums and Cafes
Despite the recent rush of interest in photography, notable blank spots remain on the map of the medium.
Mario Giacomelli, for example, is probably the best-known figure in contemporary Italian photography, at least in this country.
But a marvelous show at the James Danziger Gallery demonstrates just how limited an awareness American audiences have had of his varied career.
Outside Italy, Mr.
Giacomelli's reputation is based primarily on two groups of pictures: startling, high-contrast landscapes and photos of priests frolicking in snow.
But in addition to extensive selections from these projects, this show presents other examples of Mr.
Giacomelli's work since the 1950's, including studies of Italian village life, shots of pilgrims at Lourdes and abstract renderings of beach scenes.


Abroad at Home; When You Appease Fascism
A specter is haunting Europe the specter of extreme nationalism.
When it appeared two years ago, in Serbia, the United States and Western Europe decided not to treat it as a serious threat.
They followed a policy of appeasement, a wheedling diplomacy that rewarded Serbian aggression.


Best Buy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


The Season's Glow Cannot Warm Chilly Winds


Patent Office to Review A Controversial Award
In an abrupt and unusual move, the Patent and Trademark Office said today that it would re-examine a controversial patent issued to a small San Diego-area software company, which many computer industry executives have contended would stifle the developing "multimedia" industry.
Compton's New Media, which won the patent in August, had recently declared that the patent covered a wide swath of multimedia applications combining computer sound, video and data -- like Compton's Multimedia Encyclopedia -- on computer compact disk.
The company had suggested that the patent would be worth hundreds of millions of dollars in royalties from other software and computer companies.


Review/Architecture; Isozaki's Designs for an Insecure Postwar World
"Arata Isozaki: Works in Architecture," now on view at the Brooklyn Museum, may put you in mind of Nietzsche's warning against looking too long into the abyss lest the abyss look back into you.
A show that begins with a glimpse into the cultural void of postwar Japan gives way to the queasy sensation that the West has also been swallowed up by a nuclear-age vacuum.
This is a beautiful show, and it looks terrific in the great big blond galleries Mr.
Isozaki has designed with James Stewart Polshek for the Brooklyn Museum's newly renovated West Wing.
But a profound malaise lurks beneath the beauty.
Born in 1931 in Oita, Japan, Mr.
Isozaki came of age in a country that was not only physically and economically in tatters but had also been torn from its cultural moorings.
With its emperor demoted from a god to a figurehead and many of its ancient social customs outlawed by a new constitution, Japan veered toward the condition of a blank cultural slate.
It is apt that the country later cornered the market in cameras, tape recorders and VCR's.
With its own culture in a state of partial erasure, it is as if Japan had no choice but to fill the vacuum by recording the sights and sounds of the world beyond its borders.


Why Should We Believe Britain on Irish Peace?; Ulster and Nationalism
To the Editor:
You write in The Week in Review (Dec. 5) of "25 years of sectarian warfare in the six provinces of Ulster." The Northern Ireland conflict is no more sectarian than that in the West Bank, which you would not call sectarian.
The six counties of Northern Ireland do not form the whole province of Ulster, which has three counties in the Republic of Ireland.


Costas Remains With NBC As His Role Is Diversified
After considering a very serious offer from CBS for a late-night program to follow David Letterman's, Bob Costas agreed yesterday to a new contract with NBC that will keep him as that network's most prominent sports announcer while adding new assignments for NBC's news and entertainment divisions.
Mr.
Costas's new contract with NBC is to last through 1996; the financial details were not revealed.
Under the contract's terms, he will again become the network's primary announcer for baseball, which will return to NBC next year, and will for the second time serve as NBC's prime-time Olympics host, when the network covers the 1996 Summer Games in Atlanta.


Jets' Washington Emerges As Defensive Stalwart
He lacks the flair of Jeff Lageman, the Jets' other defensive end.
He lacks the two Super Bowl rings of Leonard Marshall, who played on the same front four until a broken arm ended his season.
But Marvin Washington will be one of the key players for the Jets (8-5) on Saturday when they play the Dallas Cowboys (9-4) at Giants Stadium.
While he leads the Jets with 20 quarterback pressures and has batted down 5 passes, an unusually high number, Washington is also strong against the run.
With Emmitt Smith, the Cowboys can destroy a defense by running, and with Troy Aikman they can destroy it by passing.


Stopping Missiles Launched by Accident
To the Editor:
"U.S. Is Considering Aiming Its Missiles Away From Russia" (front page, Dec. 6) reports a useful step to reduce the effects of an accidental launch of nuclear armed ballistic missiles.
But the Pentagon still refuses to face unauthorized launch:


10 Freelance Writers Sue Over Electronic Rights
Ten freelance writers filed a Federal suit against major news organizations yesterday over who controls the rights to reproduce their articles in new electronic media.
The writers sued The New York Times Company, the Time Inc.
Magazine Company and Newsday, which is owned by the Times Mirror Company.
They also sued the Mead Data Central Corporation, which runs Nexis, a data service that provides the archives of many news organizations via computer, and University Microfilms International, a division of Bell &amp; Howell, which for many years has provided the archives of The New York Times and many other newspapers on microfilm.


Spy Trader Is Ordered Held In East German Tax Inquiry
Wolfgang Vogel, the Berlin lawyer who became famous in the cold war as a trader of spies and political prisoners, must remain in jail while under investigation for suspected evasion of taxes to the former Communist Government of East Germany, according to a court decision made public this week.
Dr.
Vogel, 68, has been under arrest since last July on this and other charges made against him by prosecutors on the basis of investigations begun after some former clients accused him of making them give up homes and property in East Germany in exchange for permission to leave for the West.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Lindros Returns and the Flyers Get Well  Eric Lindros, playing for the first time since missing 14 games because of a knee injury, set up the go-ahead goal last night at the Spectrum that led the Philadelphia Flyers past the Quebec Nordiques, 3-2.
Philadelphia snapped a four-game losing streak.
The Flyers started out the season 12-6 with Lindros, but went only 5-8-1 after he partially tore a ligament in his right knee on Nov. 11.
Lindros, in his second season with Philadelphia, was leading the team in scoring when he was injured.
The score was tied, 2-2, when Lindros scooped up the puck behind the net and fed it to Mark Recchi, who scored at 14 minutes 29 seconds of the second period. (AP) Penguins 2, Sabres 1: Joe Mullen scored with 2:07 left in the third period last night, lifting Pittsburgh over visiting Buffalo.
Mullen has goals in 5 consecutive games and 15 on the season.
Dominik Hasek has allowed only 13 goals in his last 11 games.
He shut out the Penguins until 11:16 of the third period, when Doug Brown scored his eighth goal. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL  No. 25 Louisiana State Remains Unbeaten  Ronnie Henderson scored 22 points and Jamie Brandon had 21 as No. 25 Louisiana State coasted past cross-state rival McNeese State, 93-72, last night in Baton Rouge.
L.S.U. (4-0) led by 11 points at halftime and was never in serious trouble. (AP) BOXING  Padilla Retains Junior Welterweight Title  Zack Padilla won by unanimous decision over Ray Oliveira to retain his World Boxing Organization junior welterweight title last night at the Foxwoods High Stakes Bingo &amp; Casino in Ledyard, Conn.
Padilla, of Azusa, Calif., relentlessly pursued Oliveira, of New Bedford, Mass., the entire fight.
Padilla improved his record to 19-1-1, while Oliveira fell to 21-4. (AP) OLYMPIC HOCKEY  Ferraros Leave Finland Seeing Double  The Ferraro twins, Peter and Chris, led Team USA to a 6-2 victory over Finland in the Izvestia Cup tournament yesterday in Moscow.
The Ferraros and Brian Roston scored three successive goals within three minutes at the beginning of the second period to highlight the United States victory.
Chris Ferraro wound up with two goals and Peter had one.
The other American scorers were Peter Clavaglia and Darby Hendrickson.
Both of Finland's goals were scored by Rauli Raitanen.
"We had a good night's sleep, and today we played much better than yesterday," said the United States coach, Tim Taylor, referring to Wednesday's 5-1 loss to Russia's No. 1 team. (AP) HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL  Lopez (28) Leads Rice Past Chaminade  Felipe Lopez, who is considered to be one of the top schoolboy players in the nation, scored 28 points and pulled down 13 rebounds yesterday as Rice (5-0) routed Chaminade, 71-38, in the Rice High School Christmas tournament.
Chaminade (2-2) was led by Mike Wall, who scored 18 points.
Javal Nesmith's 22 points and 14 assists helped Brandeis (3-2) defeat St.
Peter's (4-2), 61-56, in the second game.
St.
Peter's Sean Elliott led all scorers with 25 points.
Brandeis will face Rice tonight in the championship game.


No. 4 Temple Wins Its Ratings Sweep
Temple's mettle was supposed to be tested tonight at McGonigle Hall by Cincinnati.
But the Owls, ranked No. 4 in the Associated Press poll, easily met the Bearcats' challenge.
On a night dominated by Temple's guards and 3-point shooting, the Owls made 11 of 20 3-pointers, held Cincinnati to under 40 percent of its shots from the field and cruised to an 88-72 victory.
The Bearcats are ranked No. 17 in the A.P. standing.


Brazilian Court Reaffirms Ban on the Ex-President
Fernando Collor de Mello's hopes of rising from the political dead were dashed today when the Supreme Court upheld a decision barring the former President from holding elected office through 2000.
A year ago Mr.
Collor, the first elected President in 30 years, was forced to resign after he was charged with profiting from a multi-million dollar influence-peddling ring.


Compaq Will Get Out Of Printers
The Compaq Computer Corporation said today that it would leave the printer business as part of its strategy to focus on the most profitable parts of the personal computer industry.
Compaq's departure will give the dominant printer maker, the Hewlett-Packard Company, room to widen its lead in the market, analysts said.
"Compaq was the biggest threat to Hewlett-Packard; now that threat is gone," said Marco Boer of the International Data Corporation, a market research firm in Framingham, Mass.


South Africa: Rival Camps Rattle Swords
Black and white South Africans observed a day of separate and opposing anniversaries today, with an outpouring of scornful and combative oratory that made clear how difficult it will be to engineer a peaceful transition to black rule after elections in April.
The commemorations began on Wednesday night at the foot of the Voortrekker Monument, a hilltop shrine on the outskirts of town that commemorates a victory in Natal on this day in 1838 by a few hundred white settlers over a Zulu force of several thousand.
Afrikaners took their victory as confirmation of their worth as God's chosen people, and the Battle of Blood River, as it is called, has since become a public holiday.  'If Mandela Wants War'
"If Mandela wants war, he'll get it," said Eugene TerreBlanche, leader of the neo-Nazi Afrikaner Resistance Movement, referring to the African National Congress president, Nelson Mandela.
He spoke before about 3,000 cheering supporters, many dressed in khaki uniforms, wearing pistols tucked into their belts or carrying riot sticks.
Black-uniformed members of a private militia called the Iron Guard stirred up the crowd with a martial arts display and quick-draw practice with automatic pistols.


Review/Art; Lucian Freud: The Self Exposed
SIX years ago, when the organizers of a Lucian Freud retrospective bound for London, Paris, Berlin and Washington were shopping for a Manhattan site, no museum here showed the slightest interest.
Better late than never.
The Freud exhibition now at the Metropolitan Museum of Art is startling, moving and unforgettable, and it leaves no doubt that, at 71, Mr.
Freud is the greatest living figure painter.
What has changed in six years?
About Mr.
Freud, nothing really, except that his work has become progressively bolder and more astonishing as he has undertaken a series of mural-size nudes whose fleshiness and strange humanity have no real parallel.
Appropriately, he calls these images of mostly unnamed family members, friends and associates "naked portraits." They have virtually nothing to do with the idealized nudes of art history and everything to do with the swollen, lumpy, pasty reality of the human body, simulated inch by painstaking inch in paint.
Oliver Cromwell famously asked the portraitist Peter Lely to depict him "warts and all." With Mr.
Freud, warts are the least of it.


Fed Rebutted by Bentsen On Bank Regulatory Plan
Responding to sharp criticism from the Federal Reserve Board, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen yesterday defended the Clinton Administration's plan to create a single banking regulatory agency and contended that the Fed was merely trying to protect its turf.
"There is no question our proposal will result in the reduction of jobs, saving the taxpayers money," Mr.
Bentsen said at a news conference in Manhattan.
"Change can be painful for those that want to keep the status quo."


CHRONICLE
JANE ROSENTHAL, president of the TriBeCa Film Center and TriBeCa Productions, looked out at an audience of 1,400 at a holiday luncheon yesterday of New York Women in Film and Television and said: "This has been called 'The Year of the Woman.' Well, ladies, that means there are just 16 days left. I refuse to accept that. Our years are just beginning."
The awards ceremony at the New York Marriott Marquis was a litany of accomplishment.
The winners of awards from the organization were JANE ALEXANDER, the actress and chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts; PAT FILI-KRUSHEL, president of ABC Daytime Television; HOLLY HUNTER, the actress who is being talked about for an Academy Award nomination for her role in "The Piano"; CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT, a national correspondent for the "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour," and Ms.
Rosenthal and Robert De Niro.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about a political science professor at Hunter College misspelled his last name in some copies.
He was Frederick L. Zimmerman.


Review/Art; Agleam With Devotional Fire
"Spanish Polychrome Sculpture (1500-1800) in United States Collections" is a hidden-away gem of a show.
Modest in size -- a mere 36 smallish works, in wood and terra cotta -- and straightforwardly displayed in the basement gallery of the Spanish Institute, it projects a devotional fervor of surprising power.
Surprising because many of the images gathered here seem far removed from 20th-century Western taste.
This isn't art with the Neoplatonic reserve of the Italian Renaissance or with the courtly sweep of the Northern Baroque.
Vivacious, minutely detailed and personal, these painted wooden sculptures have folk art in their blood and rapture and torment on their mind.
The wounds of a lacerated Christ gleam with simulated blood; St.
Anthony's blissful smile reveals a set of tiny, inlaid ivory teeth, and an ecstatic St.
Teresa of Avila has a carved pink wooden heart concealed within her breast.


Negotiations to Restore Everglades Collapse
After five months of negotiations, what had been called a pathbreaking agreement between the Federal Government, Florida and local farmers to help clean up the Everglades collapsed tonight.
As a result, a tentative accord that had promised to end years of litigation appeared likely to lead nowhere but back into court, officials involved in the negotiations said.


United Bid Prompts A Selloff
Investors reacted skeptically yesterday to the few details that emerged from a proposed deal by the employees of United Airlines to gain majority control of the carrier.
Wall Street battered the stock of the UAL Corporation, United's parent company, as investors showed their disappointment over a proposal that was lower than expected.
Shares of UAL fell $4.375, to $144.25, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


Inman, Ex-Admiral, Is Defense Nominee
Trying to strengthen his national security team and to blunt criticism of his military policies, President Clinton announced today that he was replacing Defense Secretary Les Aspin with Bobby Ray Inman, a retired four-star admiral who has held top intelligence posts in Republican and Democratic Administrations alike.
Mr.
Clinton announced the selection of Mr.
Inman less than 24 hours after the Defense Secretary tendered his resignation.
The White House presented Mr.
Inman as the answer to Mr.
Aspin, a former member of Congress whose 11 months in office ended amid widespread criticism of his ability to run the Pentagon and manage its increasingly fractious services.
Reluctant Appointee
The swiftness of the announcement was an indication that the White House had been planning the move for weeks, most likely before Mr.
Aspin was even aware of how far out of favor he had fallen.
White House officials said Mr.
Clinton and his aides began meeting with Mr.
Inman three weeks ago.


Boat Gets Sponsor
The boat once entered in the Whitbread Round the World Race as NANCE FRANK's U.S.
Women's Challenge received a new sponsor and a new name yesterday.
Heineken, the Dutch brewery, announced that it was going to the aid of the financially troubled women's team with enough support for it to continue the 32,000-mile race.
The boat is now called Heineken.
The team of 10 women arrived safely last Monday in Fremantle, Australia, the second stopover in the six-stage competition.
They are seventh over all among the 10 boats competing in the 60-foot class.


Two Quarterbacks Passing in the Afternoon: Brown No. 2, Graham No. 3
Kent Graham said all the right things today.
He didn't want to make a big deal out of this.
No controversy.
No headlines.
His face, however, told a different story.
He was biting his lip because something might slip.
He was frustrated by the fact that for at least this week, Dave Brown was moving ahead of him to become the Giants' No. 2 quarterback.
Normally, stories about backup quarterbacks rank right up there with stories about Bigfoot chasing picnickers.
This time, though, the backup quarterbacks are on a team that has a shot at the Super Bowl.
The Giants may be one tough hit on Phil Simms away from not reaching that goal, so the backup quarterbacks are important.


Tokyo Panel Calls for Wide Economic Reform
An advisory commission to Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa called today for wide-ranging reform of the Japanese economy, including lifting of regulations, increased spending on public works, development of an information superhighway, a cut in income taxes and renewed efforts to reduce Japan's towering trade surplus.
A basic theme of the commission's report, which is supposed to serve as a blueprint for Japan's economic development over the next few years, is that Japan must rely less on exports for future growth and more on greater spending within Japan to improve people's living standards.
Many of the measures recommended by the commission have long been advocated by the United States and Japan's other trading partners.


South Korea Changes Premiers Over Rice Protest
Accelerating a drive for reform that has shaken the Government, President Kim Young Sam dismissed his Prime Minister today and replaced him with a former Supreme Court justice.
The reform efforts, in which Mr.
Kim has taken on some of the country's most powerful institutions, have been little noticed outside South Korea, largely because they have been overshadowed by the showdown with North Korea over its nuclear program.


Sounds Around Town
A Noise on Houston Street
Elliott Sharp's Carbon, Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
One of the great noise bands to come out of the Lower East Side experimental tradition, Carbon grinds and rolls away.
There is pleasure to be taken from the rawness of its textures, the toughness of its rhythms and the sheer volume of it all.
It's modern trance music, urban and informed.
This version of the band features Zeena Parkins and David Weinstein, among others.
Shows are tomorrow night at 9 and 12.
Tickets: $10.
PETER WATROUS Hargrove's Horn
Roy Hargrove, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
He's a naturally gifted musician, a trumpeter who can make difficult ideas fall like water from a glass.
The blues is his inclination, and everything he plays is redolent of it.
His band, tightly arranged, usually features well-conceived arrangements and will boast a new pianist, Cyrus Chestnut.
Mr.
Chestnut's a powerhouse, a deeply bluesy, hard-swinging pianist who won't let Mr.
Hargrove relax for a minute.
Shows are tonight through Sunday at 9:30, 11 and 1, with no third set on Sunday.
There is a $15 cover and an $8 minimum.
P.
W.
A Touch of Memphis
Charles Thomas, Bradley's, 70 University Place, at 10th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
Mr.
Thomas, a pianist who lives in Memphis, is venerated by the Memphis clan of musicians who live in New York; they'll corner you to sing his praises.
If he's half as good as they say he is (and there's no reason to doubt it), it's more proof that creative life can exist outside of New York.
And it's hard to imagine a better setting for him than backed by the bassist Ray Drummond and the drummer Alan Dawson in the most intimate club in New York.
Sets tonight and Saturday night are at 10, 12, and 2.
There is a $15 cover and a $8 minimum.
P.
W.


Healing Quickly, Hurley Faces a Stiff New Hurdle: Knee Surgery
After making what his doctors described yesterday as an astounding recovery from a severe lung injury suffered in an automobile accident just four days earlier, Bobby Hurley now faces one of the dreaded medical hurdles in the world of sport: major reconstructive knee surgery.
As a result, Hurley, who is expected to be fully recovered from his pulmonary problems in a matter of weeks, may not be able to return to the Sacramento Kings until next December.


Duplex Products reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Review/Film; Johnny Depp as a Soulful Outsider
It's hard to describe the many eccentricities of "What's Eating Gilbert Grape" without making the film sound as if it had a case of terminal whimsy.
Better to say that this is the work of Lasse Hallstrom, the Swedish director of "My Life as a Dog," whose gentle, rueful style can accommodate vast amounts of quirkiness in enchanting ways.
Mr.
Hallstrom is also adept at viewing the world from the perspective of troubled young characters.
And Gilbert Grape, the hero and narrator of this story, has troubles to spare.
Gilbert lives in Endora, Iowa, a town so flat and featureless that all of its energy seems to have turned inward, particularly where the Grape family is concerned.
The Grape household is dominated by 500-pound Momma (Darlene Cates), who hasn't ventured outside in so long that local children sneak up to the Grape windows to stare at her.
Gilbert helps them.


Winnebago Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Barneys Says It's Healthy; Vendors Fret
Barneys New York, concerned that reports of slow payments to vendors were raising questions about its liquidity, insisted yesterday that its business was in good health.
But some retail analysts and factoring companies remained skeptical.
Complaints by suppliers who contended that Barneys was far behind in paying bills began to emerge publicly last month in a report in The New York Times.
Those suppliers say they have stopped shipping goods to Barneys, which could limit its inventory levels.


CON ED IS ACCUSED OF 1989 COVER-UP IN ASBESTOS BLAST
Consolidated Edison and two retired officials of the utility have been indicted on charges they concealed knowledge that a huge 1989 explosion of a steam pipe had released large amounts of asbestos into the Gramercy Park area of Manhattan.
The Federal indictment, announced yesterday, alleges that the company and the officials did not tell Government officials for four days that the blast caused the release of 200 pounds of asbestos.
It said the information was withheld in an attempt to save the company the cost of a cleanup.


Agency Chosen For Cutty Sark
Hiram Walker &amp; Sons Inc. in Detroit said yesterday that it had chosen Scaros &amp; Casselman in Stamford, Conn., as the marketing agency for its Cutty Sark Scotch whisky brand.
Scaros &amp; Casselman will handle the brand's creative advertising assignment as well as integrated communications programs like promotions and public relations.


United Way Threatens To Cut Aid to Boy Scouts
A Connecticut United Way group yesterday threatened to cut off financial support for a local Boy Scout council unless the organization signed a pledge that it would no longer discriminate against gay people.
The new policy by the United Way of Greater New Haven was believed to be among the first of its kind in the Northeast.
The United Way in San Francisco cut off support to the Boy Scouts in its area two years ago because of the organization's national policy barring membership to homosexuals.


Breaking the Rules: Abuses at a Brokerage -- A special report.; New Cloud Over Prudential Branches
When Prudential Securities agreed with regulators in October to pay $371 million to settle charges of securities law violations, it acknowleged a raft of accusations that painted a troubling picture: the firm had misrepresented investments to clients, executives had poorly supervised branches and brokers had abused customers' accounts.
The problems could scarcely have seemed worse.
But it appears they were.
Abuses at Prudential over the last decade extended far beyond those described at nine branches in the settlement, documents and interviews show, with 10 additional branches significantly violating securities rules as recently as last year.


Executive Changes
MEDQUIST INC., Gibbsboro, N.J., promoted Paul E. Weitzel Jr., its vice president of corporate development and chief financial officer, to senior vice president and chief operating officer.
MITCHELL ENERGY AND DEVELOPMENT CORP., the Woodlands, Tex., named William D. Stevens, former president of Exxon Co.
U.S.A., president and chief operating officer.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-23  DEEP SUSPICIONS IN ULSTER  A day after Britain and Ireland announced a framework for peace in Ulster, British troops still patrolled Belfast and there was no sign that suspicions were easing.
A3  RETALIATION FOR SERB SHELLING  Bosnian Army shells hit Serb-held neighborhoods in Sarajevo, two days after a Serbian bombardment that killed 11 civilians here.
A6


Trenton Requires All 'Street Money' to Be Paid by Check
Against the wishes of Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman, both houses of the Republican-controlled Legislature passed a bill today that would ban the cash distribution of campaign "street money" and require such payments to be made by check.
Sponsors of the bill, including the Assembly Speaker, Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian, said a paper trail was needed to guard against possible abuse that could flow from the widespread use of cash to pay workers on Election Day.
Mrs.
Whitman's campaign manager, Edward J. Rollins Jr., set off an inquiry and a bitter dispute after the election when he said money had been spent to suppress the vote in urban areas -- an allegation he subsequently recanted.


ISRAEL TELLS ARMY TO CURB SETTLERS
Under attack by some political leaders for dealing far less firmly with Jews who commit acts of violence than with Palestinians, the Israeli Army has ordered soldiers to take "strong action" against law-breaking settlers in the occupied territories, including possible arrests and curfews.
The army instructions, delivered Sunday and made public today, were swiftly denounced by settler leaders as "psychological warfare" -- part of a Government attempt, they said, to "delegitimize" them in the movement toward Palestinian self-rule in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Art in Review
Paula Cooper Gallery  149 Wooster Street (at Houston Street)  SoHo  Through Thursday
Robert Wilson's videotapes are more than simple transcriptions of his theater works, employing a distinctive vocabulary of video devices to produce a similarly reduced esthetic.
The 1981 video version of "Deafman Glance," an adaptation of a climactic murder scene from the 1970 stage piece, has a remarkable stylistic concision and emotional resonance.


Art in Review
R. Crumb
Alexander Gallery  980 Madison Avenue (near 76th Street)  Through Jan. 15 (closed Dec. 24 to Jan. 4)
This exhibition confirms the influential, obsessive, self-flagellating and highly productive talent of R. Crumb, one of the grandfathers of underground cartooning.
It is not definitive, but with nearly 200 works -- ranging from the early 1960's, when Mr.
Crumb was a talented teen-age malcontent in Cleveland, to the present -- it will give most people interested in his work more than enough to look at.


CHRONICLE
Is this a coronation?
RONALD WINSTON, president and chief executive of Harry Winston, was struck with inspiration when he heard that DONALD TRUMP, his friend of 18 years, would marry MARLA MAPLES on Monday.
He offered them a diamond tiara.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CON ED INDICTED IN ASBESTOS CASE
Consolidated Edison and two retired officials of the utility have been indicted on charges that they concealed their knowledge that the explosion of a steam pipe in 1989 had released 200 pounds of asbestos into the Gramercy Park area.
The indictment said the information was withheld in an attempt to save the company the cost of a cleanup.
A1.


Nets Start A Trend By Winning Two Straight
For the first time since the first weekend of the season, the Nets have put two consecutive victories together.
Even more impressive was the way they made it two straight tonight while scoring a 111-95 victory over the Charlotte Hornets at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Nets, now 8-14, got a combined 36 points from two players who did not even start -- Chris Morris and Armon Gilliam -- with Morris scoring a team-high 19.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the seizure of 424 pounds of heroin in Manhattan misstated the street address and the unit number of the apartment where the raid occurred.
It is 301 West 57th Street, apartment 27G, not 201 West 57th Street, apartment 26G.


Yanks Come Calling, but Henderson Says No
It would have been the baseball marriage of the winter.
It would have put Rickey Henderson back in a Yankee uniform.
It would have given the Yankees the left fielder and leadoff hitter they need and some headaches they do not need.
It was a signature away from happening yesterday when Henderson rejected an undisclosed offer.
Apparently, Rickey did not like the numbers.


Statements by President Clinton and His Nominee to Head the Pentagon
Following is a transcript of President Clinton's announcement yesterday of the appointment of Bobby Ray Inman as Secretary of Defense and Mr.
Inman's acceptance of that appointment, as recorded and transcribed by The New York Times: By PRESIDENT CLINTON
Ladies and gentlemen, yesterday I announced that Secretary Aspin would be stepping down as Secretary of Defense next month after a year of devoted service.
I want to stress again how deeply grateful I am on behalf of all Americans for his hard work and his many unique contributions to the Pentagon and to our national defense.


Preparations Almost as Grand as the Show Itself


In Belfast, Life Returns to Tension and Suspicion
The stores were crowded today with Christmas shoppers.
Families filed in to see "Jack and the Beanstalk" at the Belfast Opera House, which reopened this week after being devastated in July by an Irish Republican Army bomb.
But a day after the British and Irish Prime Ministers announced a framework for peace in Northern Ireland, British Army soldiers in combat dress continued to patrol the Belfast area.
And in the two neighborhoods -- one Catholic, one Protestant -- where this province's urban guerrilla war has been the most intense, there was no sign of a relaxation of the deep suspicions nurtured by 3,111 killings since 1969.


Mortimer Goodman, A Retired Lawyer, 83
Mortimer Goodman, a retired lawyer who was long active in Jewish causes in New York, died on Wednesday.
He was 83 and lived in Queens.
He had a heart attack near his home in Flushing, his family said.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the debate in Sweden about joining the European Community referred incorrectly to the last year Sweden fought in a war.
It was 1814, not 1914.


Restaurants
When I was a waitress I had two recurring nightmares.
One was about the customer who keeps calling, "Miss! Oh, miss!," waving wildly.
"In a minute," I say over and over, but somehow I never make it to the table.
The other dream was about fish.


Baby Is Thrown From Car
A woman threw her 6-week-old baby out the window of a slow-moving car as it traveled over the Williamsburg Bridge about 3:45 P.M. yesterday, the police said.
The baby girl was not seriously injured, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.
It was not immediately clear, Officer McInnis said, what prompted the woman suddenly to want to be rid of her child.
At the time, two social workers from the Urban Strategies Maternity Shelter were in the car with the woman, Janice Soto, 38.
Officer McInnis said the social workers were apparently taking the mother and her child from her home, in Brooklyn, to the shelter in Manhattan.
The baby was taken to St.
Vincent's Hospital to be examined.
Her mother was also taken to St.
Vincent's, for a psychiatric evaluation, Officer McInnis said.


Armco Selects a Steel Veteran to Be Chief
James F. Will, president and chief operating officer of Armco Inc., was named president and chief executive yesterday.
Mr.
Will, 55, is a longtime steel-industry executive who has run both old-line mills and high-efficiency specialty metal operations.
He will succeed Robert L. Purdum, 58, on Jan. 1.
Mr.
Purdum will remain as chairman of the company, now based in Parsippany, N.J.


Pressure Builds Over Return of Boat People to Haiti
With efforts to reinstate the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide to the Haitian presidency no closer to succeeding today than they were a year ago, President Clinton's policy of summarily returning Haitian boat people is drawing increased anger from outside the Administration.
Some critics also say that the policy is causing some acute embarrassment at the highest levels of the Administration, though officials deny that.


CANADIAN CHANGES TOP MILITARY MAN
Prime Minister Jean Chretien has replaced Canada's top military officer with Ottawa's current ambassador to Washington and named his nephew, a senior career diplomat, to the Washington job.
The appointments broaden the Chretien stamp on the seven-week-old Liberal Government and settle a few old scores.
Mr.
Chretien has expressed little sympathy for Adm.
John Anderson, who is being shunted from Chief of the Defense Staff in Ottawa to a posting in Brussels.


Hawks Spiral To Earth
Pacers 99, Hawks 81
Atlanta's 14-game winning streak came to an end last night as Dale Davis had 19 points and 18 rebounds and the Indiana Pacers overcame a 17-point second-quarter deficit to beat the Hawks, 99-81, at the Omni.


ADC Telecommunications Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Myrna Loy Services
A private funeral for the family and friends of the actress Myrna Loy, who died on Tuesday, will be held at noon tomorrow at the Frank E. Campbell Funeral Chapel, 1076 Madison Avenue, at 81st Street.
A public memorial service may be held later, a family spokesman said.


Mets Give Sabo the Once-Over
The Mets, more aggressive now that some clubs have removed the issue of compensation for certain free agents, brought third baseman Chris Sabo to New York yesterday for a physical.
According to a person involved in the negotiations, the Mets were satisfied that Sabo's troubled back was not an obstacle to signing the third baseman.
The Mets aren't the only team interested in Sabo.
He traveled later in the day to Baltimore, where he will be examined by Orioles' physicians.
And Sabo has a standing offer from a third team.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  ROBERT LONGO, Joan Prats Gallery, 568 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo.
Collages.
Closes today.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 219-0510.
"THE RETURN OF THE CADAVRE EXQUIS," Drawing Center, 35 Wooster Street, SoHo.
Hundreds of drawings in which three or more contemporary artists collaborated to produce a single drawing.
Closes tomorrow.
Hours: Today, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 219-2166.


Adding Police on Streets Will Reduce Arrests
To the Editor:
What Prof.
Todd R. Clear stresses most in " 'Tougher' Is Dumber" (Op-Ed, Dec. 4) is the ineffectiveness of prison sentences in deterring crime.
But Professor Clear also objects to adding thousands of police officers, as the President and Congress have urged.
He sees extra officers only in the light of more arrests, and thus confinement of more prisoners.
He ignores increased police presence as a crime deterrent, with the hoped-for result of fewer arrests.


Texas Lawyers to Vote on How Far Their Ads Can Go
In his most talked-about television advertisement, Brian Loncar is sitting at what appears to be his office desk.
"If you've been injured in a car accident, do what hundreds of people have already done: bring your troubles to me," Mr.
Loncar declares.
An "800" number flashes on the screen.
Then a car comes crashing through the ceiling above Mr.
Loncar, smashing his balsa wood desk to smithereens.
"I'm attorney Brian Loncar and I can help," he continues, reaching under the wreckage for a telephone.
"Hurt in a car accident? Haven't gotten your check yet? Call me."


TV Weekend; Troubled Young People Get Another View of Law
Juvenile crime and violence may not be the most appropriate subject for holiday viewing, but given the headlines these days, its urgency cannot be denied.
It can also make for compelling television, as is evident in "Good Cop . . . Bad Kid?," an hourlong documentary on NBC Sunday.
The writer and director is Lee Stanley, the winner of several Emmys for programs like "Drug Watch L.A." The producer is Linda Stanley.
NBC describes the Stanleys as "known to the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department for their volunteer work with kids in jail." This documentary focuses on two teen-agers who, as part of a special project, are put into the temporary custody of police officers and their understandably wary families.


What We Must Ask On Assisted Suicide
To the Editor:
In "Kevorkian's Crusade" (Op-Ed, Dec. 3), Geoffrey Nels Fieger, Jack Kevorkian's lawyer, describes his client's sincerity, courage and zest for life.
He writes, "Society has a choice now: Dr. Kevorkian's life or Michigan's assisted suicide ban." By personalizing the great question of physician-assisted suicide, he diminishes the debate on an issue with enormous medical and social consequences.


Books of The Times; Contradicted by Events, a Pundit Plows Ahead
Democracy Against Itself
The Future of the Democratic Impulse
By Jean-Francois Revel
Translated by Roger Kaplan. 278 pages. The Free Press. $24.95.


The Truth Rebuked on Haiti
John Shattuck is the State Department's highest human rights official.
He is also an honest man.
After a firsthand look at the deteriorating situation in Haiti, Mr.
Shattuck concluded that the collapse of efforts to restore President Jean-Bertrand Aristide had intensified repression, and that a new wave of refugees would soon be on the way.
He urged the Clinton Administration to review its policy of turning back every boat that attempts to flee Haiti.
He wanted to assure that those with a legitimate claim to asylum get a fair chance to present their cases.
What he got was an official rebuke.
So continues the cruel charade that has gone on since the Bush Administration started pretending that all those fleeing the terror unleashed by Haiti's September 1991 coup were economic refugees.
That pretense was used to justify indiscriminate return, a policy that mocks American principles of asylum and one that is applied to Haitians alone.


Blount Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


New York Times to Begin On-Line Computer Service
The New York Times will begin offering an interactive version of the newspaper over the computer network of America Online early next year, The Times and America Online Inc. announced yesterday.
In addition to the top articles from The Times that are carried by The New York Times News Service each day, subscribers will be able to read arts and entertainment reviews that have appeared in the newspaper, as well as listings of cultural events and leisure activities in the New York area.
News, sports and business articles will be available for only 24 hours beginning shortly after midnight on the day of publication; the reviews will be available for longer periods, which will be determined by editors.


No Cut by B.P. In North Sea Oil
David Simon, the chief executive of British Petroleum, said yesterday that the company would not reduce its production of oil in the North Sea, which OPEC has identified as a primary reason for lower oil prices.
Instead, Mr.
Simon predicted that the flow from the North Sea would increase slightly as rigs that had cut back during a recent equipment upgrade returned to full production.


Gordon Griswold, 83, Utility Executive, Dies
Gordon C. Griswold Sr., who rose from a cadet engineer to board chairman in his 42 years at the Brooklyn Union Gas Company, died on Tuesday at a retirement community in Kalamazoo, Mich.
He was 83 and had moved there from Westfield, N.J., in 1987.
The cause of death was congestive heart failure, his family said.


BELL ATLANTIC PLANS TELEVISION TRANSMISSION IN 1994
The Bell Atlantic Corporation said yesterday that it would offer television service over its telephone lines to about 250,000 homes in Maryland and Virginia by the end of 1994.
The service would be the first time a telephone company has gone beyond a limited market trial in TV programming, but it would not be a full substitute for cable television.
Using a new digital compression technology, the company plans to transmit one channel of programming at a time over the ordinary copper telephone wires that serve most homes.
Customers could order from a selection of movies or other programs stored on a computer.
But the system will not transmit live programming, like news or sports.


Agriculture Department Employees Bring Land's Bounty to the Homeless


Corrections
An article in the Chronicle column on Dec. 9 about the Washington premiere of the film "Hot on the Trail, the Search for Sex and Romance in the Old West and the New" misstated the position of Catherine Wyler.
She is the film's executive producer, not its producer.
Aviva Slesin is its producer and director.


Long Days, a Produce Manager, a Pistol and Death in Queens
After working another 12-hour day as produce manager of a Queens supermarket, Chul Ho Park was taking a break, sitting on a milk crate in the back of the store, when a man with a gun appeared in front of him and ordered him to lie down on the floor.
Mr.
Park, whose English was poor, probably did not understand and may not have obeyed quickly enough for the gunman, the police said.
As Mr.
Park, a 37-year-old father of two teen-agers, was getting down, the gunman fired a bullet from his Tech-9 semiautomatic pistol into the back of Mr.
Park's head.


Taxed Judge Scolds I.R.S.
The presiding judge in the World Trade Center case, Kevin T. Duffy, spoke from the bench yesterday to scold the Internal Revenue Service for, as he put it, getting an A plus in tax law but having difficulty with the United States Constitution.
"It would appear," he said, after the jury had left on its mid-morning break in the trial, "because of a backward ruling about which I knew absolutely nothing, I will be getting what the revenue service contends is a raise in compensation. All right?"


People
*
Michael Bungey, the president and chief operating officer of Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, New York, was named chief executive, as expected, effective on Jan. 1.
He will succeed Carl Spielvogel, who will continue as chairman and chairman of the executive committee. *
Richard E. Rotman was named to the new position of senior vice president and managing director of Kerbel Communications Inc., Toronto.
He was previously group manager of health care at Burson-Marsteller Ltd., Toronto.


As Aspin Goes, So Go the Kringles
For years, one of Washington's peculiar annual rituals had been the arrival of the Kringle, a Danish coffeecake baked in Racine, Wis.
It was Representative Les Aspin's holiday offering to the high and mighty.
Today, Secretary of Defense Les Aspin's Christmas cards arrived, sporting a picture of the Kringle.


Review/Film; Presenting Nancy Drew For the 90's
MILLIONS of people have already seen "The Pelican Brief," though it is only now opening at neighborhood theaters.
That's because John Grisham's novel is written as instant movie material.
It has a big secret; it has a big explosion; it has a conspiracy plot that leads all the way to the top.
It has a heroine who sounds exactly like Julia Roberts, if Julia Roberts were going to law school.
Mr.
Grisham has even incorporated lots of New Orleans and Washington scenery, thus giving his intrigue plot some extra tourist appeal.
Mr.
Grisham, a fixture at the top of the best-seller list and the most cinematic popular author this side of Michael Crichton, habitually writes half-books.
The opening setups are what sell his stories, even if they disintegrate into empty skullduggery and endings that are conspicuously weak.
It helps that his prose is crisp and streamlined enough to persuade the reader that something substantial is afoot, even when there are strong indications to the contrary.
At best, a Grisham book offers a veneer of seriousness and a strong jolt of clever escapism.
Food for thought it's not.


Gladden and Deer To Play in Japan
ROB DEER and DAN GLADDEN agreed to leave the major leagues for Japan yesterday, and three players eligible for salary arbitration -- Atlanta's MARK LEMKE, Florida's JOE KLINK and Minnesota's SCOTT LEIUS -- agreed to contracts with their major league teams.
Deer, who played for the Detroit Tigers and Boston Red Sox in 1993, agreed to a one-year contract with the Hanshin Tigers.
Gladden, who played for Detroit, agreed to a one-year contract with the Tokyo Yomiuri Giants.


Drug-Resistant Strains of H.I.V. Triple Likelihood of AIDS Death
People infected with drug-resistant strains of the virus that causes AIDS are up to three times as likely to die in a given period than those with other strains, scientists said at a meeting here today.
In recent years, scientists have detected the emergence of strains of the virus, H.I.V., that are resistant to AZT, the main drug used against the virus.
But they had been uncertain about the significance of the phenomenon.
Many scientists suspected that resistance was important for clinical care of patients, but they lacked proof.


Review/Theater: The Red Shoes; Ambition vs. Romance in a Pas de Trois
FOR a musical that wants to celebrate the urge to dance -- a compulsion, apparently, as strong as life itself -- "The Red Shoes" is confoundingly inert.
Throughout most of its two acts it lies there on the stage of the Gershwin Theater, where it opened last night, making grandiose pronouncements on the artist's calling, looking pretty and going no place slowly.
The composer Jule Styne, the playwright Marsha Norman and her co-lyricist Bob Merrill (working under the pseudonym Paul Stryker) may once have experienced a burning desire to tell the story of Victoria Page, rising ballerina, caught between the demands of love and stardom.
But months of troubled rehearsals and previews, during which the original director, the leading man and two supporting players all got their walking papers, seem to have robbed the creators of their passion.
Except for the toe shoes of the women in the corps de ballet, the show is pointless.


Charles Moore, Innovative Post-Modern Architect, Is Dead at 68
Charles Moore, whose exuberant and eclectic architecture made him one of the most influential and prolific practitioners of post-modern design, died yesterday at his home in Austin, Tex.
He was 68.
The cause was a heart attack, his office said.


At the Bar; A firm with mostly seafaring clients dispenses counsel, and something else, for ports of call.
Jay Lawrence Friedheim and Joe Moss, a pair of admiralty lawyers in Honolulu, have never vied for the American Bar Association's annual "dignity in advertising" award.
But if the bar group offered a prize for originality or ingenuity or outrageousness, they would probably win hands down.
Their firm, which caters primarily to sailors and fishermen, is surely the only one that hands out customized condoms.
They come in packages of one, shaped like oversized matchbooks.
"Friedheim &amp; Moss," each package declares.
"Saving Seamen the Old-Fashioned Way."


The Spoken Word
JOHN S. HALL, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
The lead singer of the band King Missile reads his poetry, followed by an "All-Star Reading" featuring such poets as Paul Beatty, Dana Bryant and Reg E. Gaines.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $10.
Information: (212) 505-8183.
"THE NIGHT BEFORE CHRISTMAS," St.
Peter's Episcopal Church, 346 West 20th Street, Chelsea.
John Elliott Jr. will read and discuss the poem; with a display of 2,000 first-edition Christmas books and poems.
Sunday at 4 P.M.
Tickets: $15; free for children.
Information: (212) 929-2390.


On My Mind; Russia: Who's to Blame?
For days phone calls have been coming in from Russian friends, explaining to me and themselves how in their homeland a fascist nationalist could have become a strong contender for power.
In their explanations, and much of the American intellectual and political reaction, ran a theme of Western failure or guilt:


Dividend at Prudential
The Prudential Insurance Company of America said this week that its profits in 1993 were good enough that it would keep its dividend payments to customers at the same rate it projected earlier in the year.
The dividends to the company's 15 million life insurance customers vary with the type and age of the policies, and the company said it could not identify an average rate or range.
Because many other mutual life insurance companies have recently announced cuts in their 1994 dividends, Prudential may have an advantage in selling new policies.
Mutual insurance companies like Prudential pay dividends to policy holders depending on the amount of money left after premiums and investment earnings are used to pay claims and expenses and to add funds to surplus or capital.


Three Picassos Recovered
The police have recovered three of the six works by Picasso that were stolen last month in Sweden's biggest art robbery, investigators here said today.
The recovered works, all paintings, are "Woman with Blue Collar" (1941), "Dragonfly" (1929) and "The Painter" (1930).
Their recovery followed the arrest this week of two suspects, identified only as Polish men in their early 20's.
Sven-Erik Alhem, a prosecutor, said the paintings were found in Stockholm, but declined to give further details on the recovery.
The suspects remained in custody today and had not been charged, he said.


Roles Shifted For Deputies By Giuliani
Shuffling his deputies' powers even before he becomes Mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday that he would broaden the duties of Ninfa Segarra, now a member of the Board of Education, putting her in charge of New York City's vast array of health agencies and social services.
The announcement of Ms.
Segarra's expanded portfolio as a deputy mayor came as Mr.
Giuliani appointed Fran Reiter to be the third of what will ultimately be four deputy mayors.
He said Ms.
Reiter, the chairwoman of the state's Liberal Party, would be in charge of planning and community relations, assuming some of the duties that Mr.
Giuliani had assigned to Ms.
Segarra only two weeks ago.


For Children
'The Wind in the Willows'  The Theater at 224 Waverly Place  Greenwich Village (212) 279-4200 Recommended ages: 6 and up Tonight, tomorrow and Sunday, and through Jan. 9
Most New Yorkers would be hard pressed to find any kind of rat charming.
But then again, they probably haven't seen "The Wind in the Willows." The children's classic by Kenneth Grahame has been adapted for the stage by Douglas Post, whose music and lyrics will go a long way toward reconciling us to rodents.


Puerto Ricans Are Citizens, Not Immigrants
To the Editor:
We are pleased by your informative article about Ninfa Segarra on her appointment as deputy mayor of New York City (Woman in the News, Dec. 2), but troubled by the term "immigrant" to describe her lineage and family's status.
In this context, the word "immigrant" (one who leaves one's country to settle permanently in another) is incorrect, in that Puerto Rico was ceded to the United States in 1898 at the end of the Spanish-American War under the Treaty of Paris.
Furthermore, the Jones Act of 1917 granted citizenship to all Puerto Ricans, whether they are born on Puerto Rico or in the mainland United States.


Reform Leader Sees Russia At 'Crossroads' for Yeltsin
With neither reformers nor nationalists appearing to have a clear majority in the next Parliament, Russia is at a "dramatic crossroads" that only President Boris N. Yeltsin, with his new constitutional powers, can resolve, First Deputy Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar said today.
Mr.
Gaidar, leader of the main reform party, Russia's Choice, said he hoped Mr.
Yeltsin would break his long silence on Sunday's elections and use his increased presidential powers of appointment, decree and veto to continue reform.


Review/Art; Surgical Sculpture: The Body as Costume
The French performance artist Orlan is proving that there's more than one way to suffer in the name of art, and make a spectacle of yourself in the process.
Her material is her own body and skin.
Her medium is plastic surgery, usually performed on her on camera.
Her work represents a small step for Conceptual art, and a big step for feminism -- both in the backward direction.
So far, Orlan has endured seven operations in an effort to make her face resemble a composite likeness of five mythic women, ranging from the goddess Diana, as painted by an unknown Fontainebleau artist, to Leonardo da Vinci's "Mona Lisa." Each operation has been videotaped for posterity: at its center is the artist herself, who always stays awake throughout these procedures, accompanied by costumed assistants and sundry props.


Review/Film; 4 Kids, a Custody Battle And Canines in Love
Anyone making a dog movie could do much worse than to borrow the plot of "101 Dalmatians." "Beethoven's 2d" may be the sequel to last year's hit about a lovable, sloppy St.
Bernard adopted by a suburban family, but it is also a lively and sweetly told story of puppy-napping.
Now a beloved member of the Newton family, Beethoven sows a few wild oats with another St.
Bernard named Missy.
She's the one with the pink bow between her ears.
Missy is also a pawn in an ugly divorce.
The wife, Regina, takes her away from her kindly owner, and threatens to hold her until she gets money.
And when she discovers the four puppies born to Missy and Beethoven, she threatens to take them as well.
Fortunately, the younger Newton children, 13-year-old Ted and 9-year-old Emily, escape with the pups and hide them in the basement.
They remember how long it took their father, Charles Grodin, to learn to love Beethoven in the original movie.


Mullin Ready to Play
CHRIS MULLIN was activated yesterday by the Golden State Warriors and is expected to play tonight at Sacramento.
Mullin, a five-time National Basketball Association All-Star, went on the injured list on Nov. 2, three days after tearing a ligament at the base of the little finger on his right (non-shooting) hand during an exhibition game against Seattle.
His recovery was complicated in recent weeks by acute tendinitis in his right shin. (AP)


Hockey Is in Details for Fedorov
In terms of bachelor life, Sergei Fedorov isn't going to challenge the legends of Joe Namath or Wilt Chamberlain or, even, Darius Kasparaitis.
Fedorov, who is chasing Wayne Gretzky for the National Hockey League scoring lead, is a modest man who lives in a modest house in a modest suburb of a modest city.
His roommate is his mother, who came over from Russia last summer.


Boston U. Agrees to New Policies on Top Officers
After nine months of negotiations with the Massachusetts Attorney General's Office, Boston University has agreed to change its conflict-of-interest policy and the rules that govern how its board of trustees is chosen and how its president and top officers are paid.
"In light of this agreement, which is enforceable by the Attorney General, the university will not be run as a closed shop," said Tom Green, the First Assistant Attorney General.


3Com Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Florio to Be Partner in New York Law Firm
Gov.
Jim Florio will become a partner in the law firm of Mudge, Rose, Guthrie, Alexander &amp; Ferdon after he leaves office next month, the firm and the Governor's office announced today.
The executive partner and chief executive of the law firm, Donald J. Zoeller, said that Mr.
Florio would represent the partnership in areas like transportation, environmental issues, health care and world trade.


Transformation on 168th Street
One day last spring, two men in suits and ties stood on the debris-strewn balcony of the Fort Washington Armory and looked down at an urban nightmare: below, the great floor was completely covered with nearly 1,000 beds that composed the living quarters for homeless men, some of whom sat or lay on those beds or walked aimlessly around.
"It was desperate, like the heart of darkness," recalled one of the men on the balcony, Dr.
Norbert Sander Jr., one who possessed a dream in which the armory was transformed into one of the world's most exciting sports facilities.
"And the smell of the place, the smell of the place could kill you."


Review/Music; Cycle With Origins in India
On Saturday evening at La Mama Galleria in the East Village, Elodie Lauten presented her "Gaia Cycle." The circle is the music's operative design.
For just as the traditional cycle of fifths once circumnavigated the world of sharps and flats, Ms.
Lauten has presented a cycle of 12 keys whose fundamental origin is the tonic note of Indian music (our low C-sharp at 136 cycles per second, not the concert hall's A = 440).
The scales moreover are not major or minor but mutations of European and Asian modes.


GC Companies reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Motorola Selects Its Top Executives
Motorola Inc. said today that Gary Tooker, acting chief executive since the sudden departure of George Fisher for the Eastman Kodak Company on Oct. 27, had been named to the job permanently and given the added title of vice chairman.
The company, which makes microchips and communications equipment and is based in suburban Schaumburg, also said that Christopher Galvin would continue as the junior member of a two-person office of the chief executive with the new titles of president and chief operating officer.
And William J. Weisz, a retired Motorola executive who has been acting chairman of the board since Oct. 27, will become the permanent chairman.
He lives in Phoenix but maintains a company office.


No Headline
"I kept on reading about so many youngsters with knives and revolvers and threatening the lives of teachers and that began to upset me. I felt I had to drop a bomb on the situation to show the public what needs to be done. WALTER H. ANNENBERG.  [ A1:2. ]


Third World Markets Gain Favor
Looking for big returns and encouraged by the move by many developing nations toward free markets, investors from the industrial world are sending record amounts of capital to lands listed among the world's developing countries -- some of which are no longer underdeveloped.
A World Bank report released this week shows that the net flow of private loans and investments to countries the bank lists as developing soared two-and-a-half times in 1990-92, to more than $100 billion.


Bad Grades for School Elections
A special investigator has now concluded that New York City's community board elections last May were marred by mismanagement, political coercion and fraud.
In addition, the investigator, Edward Stancik, says that many local boards are less concerned about educating children than they are about handing out jobs to their friends.
Law enforcement officials should quickly investigate the fraud charges.
But the system will stay broken unless the State Legislature in Albany takes action to fix it.
The 32 community boards are composed of nine members elected every three years.
The idea is to give residents a voice in their schools.
But in many districts, the elections and the boards have become playgrounds for special political interests.


Profits Rise On Property Insurance
Sharply lower losses from disasters have helped property and casualty insurance companies, which protect against accidents to buildings, cars and people, earn nearly $16 billion after taxes this year, more than double last year's $7.4 billion, the Insurance Information Institute said yesterday.
"The most notable event for insurers in 1993 was actually a nonevent: the much feared son or daughter of Andrew did not appear," said Sean Mooney, senior vice president at the institute, a trade group that is financed by the industry but does not lobby on its behalf.
Hurricane Andrew caused about $16.5 billion of losses in Florida last year, making it the most costly disaster ever for insurers.


Art in Review
'Foreign Ferns'
Julie Saul Gallery  560 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Jan. 22
Plants have long been a prime subject for photographers, whether considered as flowers or botanical specimens.
Beginning with the work of Victorian amateurs like William Henry Fox Talbot, one of photography's inventors, and Anna Atkins, whose title for an album of blue prints from the 1850's provides the show with its title, this exhibition presents a wide range of historical and contemporary botanical photographs.


New York Job For Kinsley?
Michael Kinsley, a senior editor of The New Republic and co-host of CNN's "Crossfire," has emerged as a leading candidate to replace Edward Kosner as editor of New York magazine, industry executives said yesterday.
Neither Mr.
Kinsley nor officials at K-III Magazines, New York's parent company, would comment on the matter.
Another top contender is Peter Herbst, the acting editor.


Viacom Said to Be Seeking Investments for a Higher Bid
Viacom Inc. is seeking additional investments from the Nynex Corporation and the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation in an effort to increase its bid for Paramount Communications Inc., an executive close to the negotiations said yesterday.
Executives of both Nynex and Blockbuster are on the board of Viacom, which held its regular meeting yesterday.


MCA and Hearst Seen in Book Deal
MCA Inc. is close to signing a deal to acquire Avon Books and Morrow Books from the Hearst Corporation, executives close to the negotiations said late yesterday.
A deal could be announced as early as next week, one of the executives said.
The price of the deal would be $150 million to $200 million, said the executives, who added that the finances of the deal were complex.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The proposed employee buyout of United Airlines was greeted skeptically by investors, who beat down the company's stock by $4.375 a share, to $144.25.
The deal, valued at $173 a share, came in lower than the $200 that many analysts say the company will be worth in a year under the current management.  [ Page D1. ]


Kakuei Tanaka, 75, Ex-Premier and Political Force in Japan, Dies
Kakuei Tanaka, a gravel-voiced politician who dominated Japanese politics for two decades, even after being convicted of accepting a multibillion-dollar bribe from the Lockheed Corporation, died today after a long illness.
He was 75.
Doctors at the Keio University Hospital here, where the former Prime Minister had been staying since September, said he died at 2:04 P.M. from a thyroid condition.
Mr.
Tanaka had also been suffering from diabetes.


Art in Review
Josef Albers  Sidney Janis Gallery 110 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Thursday
It would be easy to dismiss the paintings of Josef Albers (1888-1976) as modernist artifacts.
The 11 late examples from his "Homage to the Square" series at Sidney Janis, dating from 1962 through 1969, seem at a glance to be entirely about measurement and chromatic inflection.
They are each 48 inches square, and their precisely nested interior squares are for the most part tonal modulations of a single color.


Sports of The Times; No Air, No Burden, Much Fun
IN the Chicago Bulls' locker room, Scottie Pippen was in uniform but wearing wire-framed glasses, the kind Charles Oakley and Anthony Mason would love to knock off and crush with their feet.
Pippen was speaking in his trademark soft monotone, which makes him seem shy, even timid.
"Are you looking forward to playing the Knicks Friday night?" the reporter from New York asked.


10 Doctors' Groups Endorse Clinton's Health Plan
Leaders of 10 doctors' organizations appeared on stage with President Clinton today to express support for his health care plan and underline their differences with the American Medical Association, which has objected to many elements of it.
Obstetricians, pediatricians, family doctors, internists, specialists in preventive medicine and spokesmen for groups representing black doctors and Hispanic doctors said they endorsed Mr.
Clinton's plan, including one of its most hotly debated features: a requirement that employers buy health insurance for their workers.


2 Different Countries For Just One Coach
Olympic coaches cross national lines all the time: Americans coach other nations' basketball teams, Croats coach foreign water polo squads.
But Natalya Dubova is in a unique situation.
She is in Lake Placid, N.Y., these days coaching American and Russian ice dancers, who could wind up competing against each other in the 1994 Lillehammer Games.


Why Should We Believe Britain on Irish Peace?
To the Editor:
The ballyhooed Dec. 15 British-Irish declaration (front page, Dec. 16) is not a step toward peace but a disappointing recipe for more bloodshed in Ireland.
The British seem to be hyping the same time-worn policies that have cost so many Irish lives, in the hopes of escaping blame.


Home Video
A Row Over Ratings
On the subject of violence in video games, the game makers generally agree on a few points.
Yes, some games are too violent for children.
Yes, there should be a ratings system to warn parents of violent content.
No, the government should not have a hand in regulating or censoring games because of violence or any other reason.


The C.I.A.'s El Salvador
These are two versions of the first page of a C.I.A. report, "El Salvador: Dealing with Death Squads," dated Jan. 20, 1984.
The agency released the first version in 1987, amid Congressional debate over aid to El Salvador.
The second version, which contradicts the first, was declassified by the C.I.A. last month, as part of a general release of documents ordered by President Clinton after a report by the United Nations Truth Commission on human rights abuses in El Salvador. (Both documents were obtained by the National Security Archive, a private foundation in Washington.)


Report Says Filming Is Up By a Third
New York City's film and television production industry, which was devastated in 1990 by a Hollywood boycott, appears to have revived this year, the Dinkins administration said in a report yesterday.
The report largely credited the swath of wage reductions and other concessions the craft union accepted after a bitter conflict with Hollywood film makers three years ago.


2 Pogorelich Winners
Edith Chen, an American pianist, and Michael Harvey, a pianist from Australia, are the grand-prize winners of the first Ivo Pogorelich International Solo Piano Competition.
The competition, which was founded by Mr.
Pogorelich, the Yugoslav pianist, was held at the Ambassador Auditorium in Pasadena, Calif.
Ms.
Chen and Mr.
Harvey will each receive $75,000.
Second prizes of $5,000 were awarded to two Russian pianists, Yevgeny Zarafiants and Irina Plotnikova.


Ford to Build New Compacts At U.S. and Mexican Plants
Eager to expand its production capacity and exploit the favorable regulations under the North American Free Trade Agreement, the Ford Motor Company said today that it would build its new compact cars in Mexico, as well as the United States, and greatly increase its exports to Mexico.
Ford's plans will touch off a series of production shifts in Mexican, Canadian and American factories, the company said, resulting in the creation of the equivalent of 550 jobs in the United States and Canada, and 300 jobs in Mexico.
Ford projected that the total number of jobs, or "job equivalents," could climb to 6,000 when additional work at its suppliers' plants in the United States and Canada was taken into account, as well as overtime work.


On Stage, and Off
Broadway on the Box
Great musicals haven't often made great or even commercially successful movies.
"West Side Story" comes to mind as an exception, as do "Cabaret" and "My Fair Lady." But lately, what?
"The Wiz"?
"A Chorus Line"?
Sunday's televised extravaganza, "Gypsy," starring Bette Midler, may have made the future a little brighter for the Broadway-goes-to-Hollywood genre.
The film, shown on CBS, reached 17.5 million homes and finished fourth in the weekly Nielsen ratings, and two of the executive producers, Craig Zadan and Neil Meron (the others were Robert Halmi Sr. and Bonnie Bruckheimer), said this week that their company, Storyline Productions in Los Angeles, was, suddenly and unexpectedly, in the driver's seat.


Injury to Rivers the Cloud in Ewing's Silver Lining
A potentially serious knee injury to Doc Rivers turned a milestone night for Patrick Ewing into a night of concern for the Knicks.
Rivers suffered a severely sprained left knee, with possible ligament damage, during New York's 108-85 victory over the Los Angeles Lakers last night at Madison Square Garden.
Rivers, the starting point guard, was scheduled for a magnetic resonance imaging test this morning to determine what ligament damage, if any, exists.


Others Tottered Earlier, but Aspin Fell
Les Aspin was not the first senior member of President Clinton's national security team to offer his resignation.
With the Administration's foreign policy under fire in Congress and from the Allies, White House officials said said Anthony Lake, the professorial national security adviser, offered to resign after the policy setbacks in Somalia and Haiti but was dissuaded by the President.
Mr.
Lake's aide, Samuel R. Berger, was approached about taking over as deputy White House chief of staff, which would have taken him out of the national security arena, but he managed to fight that off.


Sounds Around Town
Sultans of Swing
Panama Francis and the Savoy Sultans, the Arcade at Park Avenue, 55 East 52d Street, (212) 308-0688.
The annual tradition of holiday dancing in the halls of the Park Avenue Plaza with tea and shortbread on Saturday afternoons in December is continuing this year, with music provided by Panama Francis and the Savoy Sultans.
The original Sultans were the house band at the Savoy Ballroom in Harlem when it was known as "The Home of Happy Feet." Although never a member of the Sultans, Mr.
Francis absorbed a keen knowledge of their style while he was the drummer in Lucky Millinder's band when it shared the Savoy bandstand with the Sultans in the 1940's.
He revived the band in 1979 and since then it has played the rhythmic, swinging music that kept the Lindy Hoppers packing the Savoy dance floor.
Tomorrow the band plays from 3 P.M. to 6 P.M. and everything is free: the music is sponsored by Chartwell Booksellers and other stores in the arcade; tea is to be provided by Tetley and the shortbread by Walker's.
In addition, Mr.
Francis will celebrate his 75th birthday on Tuesday.
JOHN S. WILSON Jazz Generations
John Pizzarelli Trio, Down Beat, 70 Grove Street, at Seventh Avenue, Greenwich Village, (212) 620-4000.
The newest jazz club in Greenwich Village opened this week with a group featuring the second generation of Pizzarellis, one of the best known names in jazz of the last 40 years.
The guitarist John Pizzarelli follows in the footsteps of his father, Bucky Pizzarelli, who was a big-band guitarist in the 1940's and leader of notable duos and trios since then.
John, who plays a custom-made seven-string guitar and also sings, is joined by his brother Martin, who plays bass, and Ray Kennedy on piano.
John actually represents the third musical generation in the family -- he was taught by his banjo-playing great-uncles, Peter and Bobby Dominick, who also taught Bucky Pizzarelli.
The trio plays tonight through Sunday at 9 and 11 P.M.
There is a music charge of $12 and a one-drink minimum at the tables, or a $7 music charge at the bar.
J.
S.
W.
By Request, Scott Hamilton
Scott Hamilton Quintet, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, (212) 533-7900.
The tenor saxophonist Scott Hamilton has hit on an unusual way to emphasize his international appeal.
Although he is usually thought of as a specialist in Swing Era jazz styles, his latest album, "East of the Sun," reaches out in two world-splitting directions.
It is based on requests by Japanese fans in a poll conducted by the Japanese jazz magazine "Swing Journale" and it was recorded in England with a group of British musicians.
But this weekend he is back with his regular American quintet at Fat Tuesday's: John Bunch, piano; Chris Flory, guitar; John Weber, bass, and Chuck Riggs, drums.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 8, 10 and midnight, and on Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M.
There is a $20 music charge and a $10 minimum each night.
J.
S.
W.


Packwood Yields Diaries; Judge Is Told of Revisions
A Federal judge took 24 years of Senator Bob Packwood's diaries into his personal custody today, hours after hearing evidence that the Senator, who knew that they might soon be subpoenaed for a Congressional investigation, altered some diaries this fall.
The diaries, consisting of the Senator's tape recordings and typewritten transcriptions, were handed over in response to an order issued earlier in the day by the judge, Thomas P. Jackson of the Federal District Court here.
Senate ethics committee had asked Judge Jackson to force Mr.
Packwood to turn over the material, which it subpoenaed on Oct. 20.


American Team Leads in Bridge Match
An international contract bridge challenge match between teams representing the United States and Europe began quietly in Manhattan yesterday.
With $50,000 at stake, there was furious concentration and considerable tension.
In the first set of deals the play was virtually even, with very few imps exchanged.
The Americans led 9-3, then the lead grew to 26 imps after a 38-18 session.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 25 about the authentication of a painting by the Baroque master Caravaggio at the National Gallery in Dublin misstated the circumstances of the artist's death.
Although he was attacked and badly injured by assassins in 1610, Caravaggio's death that year, at the age of 39, was caused by a fever.


Gore Signs Pacts in Moscow on Joint Shuttle Crews and Oil and Gas
Insisting that they would not be deterred by political uncertainty, the United States and Russia formally joined as partners today on an international space station and announced that the first Russian astronaut would fly in the space shuttle Discovery in six weeks.
While both sides had agreed to the basic space accord, the agreement today formally ended decades of rivalry between Moscow and Washington.


New York Seeks to Bar Sale Of Real-Looking Toy Guns
Invoking an obscure provision of the New York City administrative code, city lawyers went to court yesterday seeking an injunction barring the sale of two toy guns that are replicas of semiautomatic weapons.
Mayor David N. Dinkins, in announcing the legal action, said in a news conference that more than 200 serious crimes had been committed last year in the city by people using toy guns.
He also said that "there have been far too many sad stories in recent years of children who were shot because others believed the toy weapons they were brandishing were real."


Review/Art; Lucian Freud: The Self Exposed
SIX years ago, when the organizers of a Lucian Freud retrospective bound for London, Paris, Berlin and Washington were shopping for a Manhattan site, no museum here showed the slightest interest.
Better late than never.
The Freud exhibition now at the Metropolitan Museum of Art is startling, moving and unforgettable, and it leaves no doubt that, at 71, Mr.
Freud is the greatest living figure painter.
What has changed in six years?
About Mr.
Freud, nothing really, except that his work has become progressively bolder and more astonishing as he has undertaken a series of mural-size nudes whose fleshiness and strange humanity have no real parallel.
Appropriately, he calls these images of mostly unnamed family members, friends and associates "naked portraits." They have virtually nothing to do with the idealized nudes of art history and everything to do with the swollen, lumpy, pasty reality of the human body, simulated inch by painstaking inch in paint.
Oliver Cromwell famously asked the portraitist Peter Lely to depict him "warts and all." With Mr.
Freud, warts are the least of it.


With Aid From Fund, A Victory
One of the biggest victories in Pierre Richard Anozier's troubled life came when he not only found a job at a hardware store in Woodhaven, Queens, last year, but was able to hold it and even look forward to it.
"Just the fact that when you wake up in the morning you have a place to go is fantastic," Mr.
Anozier said.
"And to get paid, too!"


COMPANY BRIEFS
GRUPO TRIBASA, Mexico, said a consortium it had formed including the Mexican construction company GMD; Bombardier Inc. of Montreal, a manufacturer of mass transit rail cars and supporting electric equipment, and Rioboo, a Mexican engineering firm, had been awarded a $640 million contract to build and run an electric rail system near Mexico City.
MERIDIAN BANCORP INC., Reading, Pa., signed a definitive agreement to buy the investment advisory firm McGlinn Capital Management Inc., also of Reading, which has $2.8 billion in assets under direct management, for stock warrants and an undisclosed amount of cash.


Egypt Executes 3 in a Plot to Kill Mubarak
The Government hanged three Muslim militants today for plotting to assassinate President Hosni Mubarak and trying to topple the Government.
The men, who were silent and wearing the red training suits for prisoners on death row, were executed starting at 8 A.M., according to a spokesman for the military prosecution.


California Pension Fund To Join in Suing Utility
The California Public Employees Retirement System said yesterday that it would join other large shareholders who sued the Citizens Utilities Company and its directors last June for granting an unusually generous pay package to the company's chairman, Leonard Tow.
Calpers, as the giant pension fund is known, owns 762,000 shares of the company's stock worth $15 million at recent prices.


Koppell Named Interim Attorney General
Fulfilling what he called a lifelong dream, Assemblyman G. Oliver Koppell was named the interim Attorney General by the state Legislature today.
Mr.
Koppell, a Democrat, will complete the final year in the fourth term of his friend and fellow Bronx native, Robert Abrams, who resigned to join a Manhattan law firm.
In a special session driven by impending deadlines on several important issues, the Legislature also approved two major health initiatives: one that will divert savings from state psychiatric hospitals that have been closed to community meantal health services and another that will require most insurance policies to cover preventive health services for people under the age of 20.
Both are expected to be signed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


Stage Level, Please


4 Finalists Selected In Philips Review
The Philips Consumer Electronics Company in Knoxville, Tenn., has narrowed the review on its estimated $20 million to $30 million account to four agencies, executives who spoke on the condition of anonymity said yesterday, confirming a report in the Advertising Age daily fax edition.
The account, for brands including Magnavox, has been at Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. in New York for the last seven years; Philips and Backer Spielvogel mutually decided to part ways in October.


Quick Fix at Defense
President Clinton has made a safe and smart choice in nominating retired Adm.
Bobby Ray Inman to be his second Secretary of Defense.
The national security establishment is already singing the nominee's praises.
That has to be music to the ears of a President who may feel vulnerable about his own weak national security credentials.
Admiral Inman would bring a sharp mind, government experience and bipartisan respect to the Pentagon post.
A retired four-star admiral and formerly Director of the National Security Agency, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence and chief executive of a private-sector computer consortium, Mr.
Inman is known for the kind of management skills the incumbent Secretary, Les Aspin, is said to lack.


Blue-Chip Rally Fades; Dow Climbs 9.22 Points
Blue-chip stocks closed slightly higher yesterday but below their highs for the day.
Early gains touched off by strong overseas markets and bargain hunting were undermined by a weak bond market that cut the rally short.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 9.22 points, to 3,726.14.
The Dow had risen 17.89 points shortly after the opening, but turned lower around noon, languishing in negative territory until rising near the close.


Drug Spotlight Falls on an Unblinking Cali Cartel
When radio bulletins flashed the news of Pablo Escobar's death, residents of this city celebrated with caravans of horn-tooting cars.
White flags flew from pharmacies owned by a prominent Cali cocaine-trafficking family.
Indeed, there is little doubt that the Cali cartel aided the Government in its drive against Mr.
Escobar, leader of the rival Medellin trafficking ring, who was killed by the police on Dec. 2.


Big Grocery Chain Reaches Landmark Sex-Bias Accord
In a sex discrimination settlement that could alter personnel practices throughout the grocery industry, Lucky Stores Inc. has agreed to pay nearly $75 million in damages to women in Northern California who were denied promotion opportunities and to invest $20 million in affirmative action programs for female employees.
The class-action settlement was one of the largest ever in a sex discrimination case.
It brings to a close a decadelong battle between the grocery chain, which has 188 stores in its Northern California division, and a group of female employees who were denied desirable assignments, management training and movement into full-time positions that would have improved their chances for promotion.


Restraining Property Seizures
Property seizures can be valuable supplements to law enforcement.
By confiscating drug dealers' houses, cars, yachts and other property, Federal agents can disable their enterprises and deprive them of ill-gotten gains.
But as the Supreme Court is beginning to suspect, such seizures can be abused to raise revenues.
Explaining the need for legal safeguards for seizures and forfeitures the other day, the high court cited a 1990 Justice Department memorandum to its far-flung agents.
"We must significantly increase production to reach our budget target," the memo said.
"Failure to achieve the $470 million projection would expose the Department's forfeiture program to criticism and undermine confidence in our budget projections."


Rowe Furniture
Shares of the Rowe Furniture Corporation rose yesterday after the company announced its third 3-for-2 stock split in the last year.
It has also increased its dividend three times this year.
And Rowe, a maker of upholstered furniture, raised its earnings estimate for the fourth quarter to 35 cents a share, compared with 19 cents a year earlier.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; MCI is expanding its ethnic marketing into long-distance business services.
AND now a word from MCI: hola!
The MCI Communications Corporation is making its initial foray into aiming advertising for long-distance business services at ethnic markets.
Its efforts, which could include hiring agencies that specialize in ethnic marketing, are intended to complement the ethnically oriented consumer campaigns it already runs as supplements to its general advertising.


Annenberg to Give Education $500 Million Over Five Years
The philanthropist Walter H. Annenberg, bestowing the largest single gift to public education in America, said yesterday that he would award grants totaling $500 million to several education groups involved in school reform.
He said he was making the grants because of the growing violence in schools.
"I kept on reading about so many youngsters with knives and revolvers and threatening the lives of teachers and that began to upset me," Mr.
Annenberg, who has made billions of dollars in publishing, said by telephone from the Annenberg Foundation's office in St.
Davids, Pa.
"I felt I had to drop a bomb on the situation to show the public what needs to be done." Details Still Vague
The gift is to be announced today by Mr.
Annenberg, President Clinton and Education Secretary Richard C. Riley in a White House ceremony.
It will be in the form of grants that will be paid out over five years and that will require matching contributions.
The structure of the challenge grants, in which the recipients are required to raise additional money, is still under discussion, Mr.
Annenberg said.


Janzen Perfects Climate Control
On the practice putting green at Tryall Golf Club today, Lee Janzen was calmly stroking putts.
The tropical sun was beating down and the humidity was wrapped around the island like a hot towel, but Janzen's unlined face showed no perspiration, his shirt was dry and he was smiling.
"This isn't hot," he said. "No sweat."


Harcourt General Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Measurex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Whitman Makes Peace With Editors
In her first meeting with the state's newspaper editors since her election on Nov. 2, Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman could not help taking a jab at the people whose newspapers' editorial pages overwhelmingly urged voters to oppose her and whose news pages consistently suggested she was an amateurish underdog headed for defeat.
"It's nice to be here," Mrs.
Whitman said, opening her remarks to the New Jersey Associated Press Managing Editors with a smile.
"I know many of you didn't expect me to be here."


Art in Review
Bob Rivera, Michelle Talibah and Nari Ward  'From the Studio: Artists in Residence, 1992-1993'
Studio Museum in Harlem  144 West 125th Street  Through Feb. 13
The Studio Museum in Harlem's artist-in-residence program, like the museum itself, is celebrating its 25th anniversary, and it has a lot to be proud of.
Its list of past participants is impressive -- they include David Hammons, Alison Saar, Tyrone Mitchell and Leonardo Drew -- and its consistent avoidance of stylistic or theoretical straitjacketing is a lesson to other museum programs of its kind.


Lukas Improves
The thoroughbred trainer JEFF LUKAS was upgraded to serious condition yesterday, a day after suffering head injuries when hit by a runaway horse in the stable area at Santa Anita.
Lukas, 36, the son of the Eclipse Award-winning trainer D. WAYNE LUkAS, was previously listed in critical condition at Huntington Memorial Hospital in Pasadena, Calif.


Review/Music; A Berg and Weill Bill By the Philharmonic And Angelina Reaux
Kurt Weill's composition "The Seven Deadly Sins," which was played by the New York Philharmonic on Wednesday night in Avery Fisher Hall, is subtitled "Ballet Chante" -- sung ballet.
It was choreographed by George Balanchine along with another Russian emigre, Boris Kochno, in 1933 when it was written.
And as conducted by Kurt Masur, its ballet character was clear: the score is full of dances gone awry, slightly twisted waltzes, marches and fox trots, hints of popular cabaret song styles and oblique invocations of classical repertory.
The piece is a distinctive original, fresh and unexpected despite its formulaic scorn for what George Bernard Shaw called "middle-class morality." Its eclecticism is still being imitated and so are its themes.
The problem, though, was the packaging.
It was part of a thematic program that went both too far and not far enough.
Titled "Brecht, Weill and Berlin, 1929-1935," and preceded by a lecture by Michael Steinberg (the San Francisco Symphony's program annotator), the program included only one work aside from the Weill: Berg's Symphonic Pieces from "Lulu."


Nantes Journal; Unhappily, a Port Confronts Its Past: Slave Trade
Along the quays of the Loire, fine mansions speak of the time when Nantes was a great port that loomed large in France's colonial history.
Behind the pilasters and wrought-iron balconies lived the shipbuilders and sea captains who, local lore has it, bravely crossed the Atlantic and returned with precious produce from French possessions in the Americas.
But few people here knew -- or chose to remember -- why exactly Nantes became so rich.


George Just Doesn't Look Like Himself Lately; But $1 Bills Printed by a New Process Are Authentic, the Treasury Department Says
Paul Diaz, the manager of a Bronx supermarket, began detecting the strange $1 bills last Monday.
Some tiny number-letter combinations on the face and back were missing or in the wrong place, George Washington's hairline was receding excessively and a white spot under his right eye should not have been there.
He took the bills to the bank.
Tellers thought they were counterfeit, so he stopped accepting them from customers.
Hundreds of odd $1 bills were turned away in the next few days.
The word spread.
Across the metropolitan area, other stores began spotting discrepancies and refusing to take the bills.
In the Miami area, merchants and consumers also began shying away from funny-looking $1 bills.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Purchased the contract of Mark Eichhorn, pitcher, from Rochester of the International League.
Designated Jeff Williams, pitcher, for assignment.


Diner's Journal
New Year's Eve
What are you doing New Year's Eve?
The Rainbow Room's 275 places at $375 each are already taken, but other choices are still available, from quiet little dinners to blowouts.
A cabaret at the Ballroom for $60, a Champagne dinner at CIII for $50, one at Park Avenue Cafe for $75, dinner and dancing at Tatou for $175 to $250, the same at the "21" Club for $275 and a dinner dance at the Waldorf-Astoria for $395 are a few.
When you make New Year's Eve reservations you may be asked for a credit card number.
"We take the credit card number to put in a person's mind that they will be charged if they don't show up," said Brad Reynolds, the director of operations at the "21" Club.
But the cardholder is under no obligation to pay a restaurant charge that was not authorized in writing.
Representatives of Visa and Mastercard said their companies had no system for recording restaurant charges made by telephone.


Metropolitan Told to Halt Its Bonuses
Florida insurance officials ordered the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company yesterday to set aside bonus payments to executives and sales bonuses to other employees until it settles charges that it improperly sold insurance policies.
In August, the Florida Department of Insurance charged Metropolitan Life with improper sales practices since 1989, contending that senior executives allowed the activities to continue even after a 1991 company audit uncovered the problems.
Five other states joined Florida to create a joint panel to investigate Metropolitan's selling practices.


Cowboys Have the Rings; Jets Have Their Dreams
The atmosphere at the Jets' practices this week was not one suggesting that lambs are being led to slaughter.
Practices have been spirited.
The players in the locker room have been loose, exuding confidence.
Nothing leading up to today's game against the Dallas Cowboys (9-4) at Giants Stadium has indicated that the Jets (8-5) think they are out of their league against the defending Super Bowl champions.
With victories over the Giants and the Redskins already this season, the Jets can complete a sweep of the last three Super Bowl winners with a victory ove the Cowboys.
But that triple isn't nearly as important as a sweep of their last three regular-season games, which will insure that the Jets make the playoffs.


Editors' Note
An article in some editions of Business Day yesterday reported that the management of Barneys New York, concerned about reports of slow payments to vendors, said that its business was in good health.
In discussing the company's financial condition, the article also reported suggestions by analysts that inventories might be limited and that sales were less than anticipated.
The article should have included Barneys' reaction to those suggestions.
In a formal statement on Thursday, Barneys said that inventories "are in line and gross margin is running higher than plan."


Keep Abortion Out of Health Care Reform; Inclusion Is Essential
To the Editor:
I share Anna Quindlen's fear that the Administration will sacrifice abortion coverage to win the health care reform fight in Congress (column, Dec. 2) and agree that this debate offers an ideal opportunity to include in the health care system the low-income women who have been forced to bear children they could not afford, in every sense of the word.
But it is not only low-income women who will lose if abortion is removed from the plan (or is left up to the individual states or health alliances).
As Ms.
Quindlen says, health care reform is meant to include people who are without services, not those who have them.
But since most private insurance plans include abortion, women who are now assured access will receive inferior coverage if the new system excludes abortion.
A new group of women -- not poor, not rich, just getting by -- will join those who must choose childbirth because they have no choice at all.


Religion Notes
New Attack on Birth Control
The Vatican yesterday reiterated its condemnaton of birth control with some updated arguments.
It said birth control encouraged promiscuity, tore families apart and enabled men to take advantage of women.


After Years of Ignoring AIDS Epidemic, Kenya Has Begun Facing Up to It
John Wainaina had heard about AIDS for years but never thought it was an illness that could touch him or his friends.
Life was good.
The 40-year-old construction worker was healthy and had a job, a family and, like many of his contemporaries, several girlfriends.
Today, 16 months after testing positive for H.I.V., Mr.
Wainaina, emaciated and weak, shares a bed with another patient in Kenyatta Hospital here, too ashamed and too frightened to tell his friends and relatives that he has AIDS.
At first, he did not even tell his doctor.


Summagraphics Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


On the Avenue
There are thousands of tourists in New York at the moment.
They are crowding the hotels, going to the theater and catching the Christmas show at Radio City Music Hall.
They are getting lost on the subway; daring to take buses that they hope will carry them to the World Trade Center towers; and discovering that Manhattan cabdrivers have an unexpected appetite for baroque music.
If they are parading along Fifth Avenue -- and of course they are -- they are also discovering that the best-dressed men in New York are the doorkeepers at Tiffany's (caped coat, top hat) and Trump Tower (cutaway and striped vest).
The best Salvation Army bell-ringers -- on Thursday, at any rate -- were two middle-aged men in front of General Motors Plaza harmonizing "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer" and "Santa Claus Is Coming to Town." The best music, though, came from Handel, one of whose concertos was sounding from a portable CD player outside Central Park.


Gay-Bashing, Democracy-Bashing
Most of the anti-gay-rights voter initiatives now circulating in a dozen states seek to drive a whole class of citizens, homosexuals, from access to political protection.
Though peddled as democratic measures, they are profoundly undemocratic.
They not only repeal existing gay rights laws; they ban the passage of any laws, state or local, that might somehow benefit homosexuals and lesbians.
Fortunately, courts are starting to pierce the majoritarian veneer.
In Denver, a judge has just made permanent an injunction against enforcing Colorado's 1992 referendum that carried the innocent title, "No protected status based on homosexual, lesbian or bisexual orientation." That amendment to the State Constitution not only repealed gay rights ordinances in three cities; it barred the state and every locality from enacting any law that might let homosexuals or lesbians claim discrimination.


Lakeland Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


No Good News for The Knicks, On or Off the Court
A bad day for the Knicks ended with another frustrating loss to the Chicago Bulls.
Making big plays at crucial moments, the Bulls sent a message to the Knicks by defeating them tonight, 98-86, before the usual noisy capacity crowd at Chicago Stadium.
The loss ended a five-game winning streak for the Knicks (15-5), who learned earlier in the day that they would be without point guard Doc Rivers for the rest of the season because of reconstructive surgery he must have on his left knee.


Doing Good but Not So Well
As mutual funds go, the Calvert Group is hardly typical.
It advertises in such left-wing publications as Mother Jones and the Utne Reader, and it traces its origins to a Buddhist gathering, where its founder reasoned that starting a mutual fund could be a path to enlightenment.
Yet as Calvert is discovering, enlightenment and superior returns may be marching on two different paths.
With $4.8 billion in assets, the Calvert Group is the largest mutual fund family in the expanding field of social investing -- a loose coalition of money managers, mutual funds and brokers dedicated to the goal of "doing well by doing good." This means investing only in companies with good social and ethical records and avoiding those with bad ones.


Franklin Quest Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Discount Auto Parts reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association  NBA -- Fined Shaquille O'Neal, Orlando Magic center, $5,000 for a flagrant foul against Shawn Kemp, Seattle SuperSonics forward, in a game on Dec. 14.


Islanders' First-Rate 2d Period Rips Leafs
It was still the second period when Felix Potvin slammed his stick on the ice in the Toronto goal crease, as if he wished to break the wretched thing.
To Potvin's great displeasure, this was not the right night for the Maple Leafs to visit Nassau Coliseum.
Ice-cold at the start of this season, the Islanders suddenly are a hot team.
Potvin found this out the hard way.


U.S. Disenchantment With Aristide Growing
In the latest public suggestion that they are growing disenchanted with Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Clinton Administration officials today expressed tepid support for the exiled Haitian leader and grumbled privately about their frustrations with him.
For now at least, they say, they will continue efforts to restore him to power.
But they are wringing their hands over what they call his inflexibility.


It's a Tough Time to Take The Helm at the Pentagon
When Bill Clinton was cheered by the hundreds of fatigue-clad soldiers at the Camp Casey marine base in South Korea in the summer, he was so thrilled by the warm reception that aides rushed home to the White House, enlarged the color photographs of the President being embraced by the troops to poster size and nailed them to the walls.
The pictures captured a rare moment of happy coexistence between the Commander in Chief and his military.
Mr.
Clinton, who never served in uniform and protested American involvement in Vietnam, has never been able to overcome the awkwardness of his relationship with the troops.


Holiday Shoppers Are Whipping Out the Plastic
Retailers and credit card companies say shoppers are charging more purchases this holiday season, a sign of improving consumer confidence.
The volume of retail sales cleared through Mastercard's network jumped almost 20 percent between the day after Thanksgiving and last Friday.
Over the last weekend, Visa processed about 850 transactions in its peak second, beating out 811 calls in last year's peak second, which fell on the Saturday before Christmas.


When Long-Term Care Upsets Estate Planning
HERE is a not-so-hypothetical situation: It becomes clearer each day that your mother or widowed aunt or husband should move to a nursing home.
Perhaps he or she is disoriented as well as disabled.
The need for long-term medical care may throw a wrench into even sophisticated retirement and estate plans.
But "all is not lost," said Peter Strauss of Epstein Becker &amp; Green in Manhattan.
"Don't give up on being able to do some planning."


'Red Shoes' Closing Tomorrow
Martin Starger, the producer of the musical "The Red Shoes," announced yesterday that the show would close after tomorrow's matinee performance at the Gershwin Theater, just three days after opening night.
The cost of the show, close to $8 million, makes it among the most expensive Broadway failures ever.
The show, based on the 1948 movie about the ballet and starring Margaret Illmann as a young ballerina torn between her love for dance and for a man, got largely negative reviews, although most of the critics singled out Ms.
Illmann as a praiseworthy dancer.


Chaparral Steel Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Dorothy Raedler, Stage Director, 76; Noted for Operetta
Dorothy Raedler, a stage director, choreographer and impresario who specialized in the works of Gilbert and Sullivan, died last Saturday at her home in St.
Croix in the United States Virgin Islands.
She was 76.
The cause was cancer, The Associated Press reported.


Accord on Health Care Reached in Albany
After eight months of tortuous negotiation over health care financing, the State Legislature and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo struck an agreement tonight to grant hospitals a modest increase in revenues and provide new incentives for improving preventive and family care.
Because the bill would leave New York's health care system largely intact, critics said it would fall far short of the blueprint for change once envisioned by Mr.
Cuomo.
The Governor abandoned proposals to grant no rise in financing to hospitals, to cap doctors' fees and to tighten the state's control over the proliferation of expensive medical equipment.


Review/Dance; Cotton Fields, Hazy Bars In an Early Ailey Classic
Alvin Ailey grew up in rural Texas towns where days and nights were punctuated by the sounds of trains that roared through, never stopping.
That sense of regret for life hurtling by and the lives left behind permeates "Blues Suite," an Ailey classic created in 1958 at the start of his career as a choreographer and company director.
For all the regret, however, "Blues Suite" brims with humor and with an earthy delight in those lives.
And Ailey's pleasure was as infectious as ever when the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater presented the piece on Wednesday night at City Center.
Lovers, loners and party-timers are depicted here in loving detail that softens their angry defiance -- but not too much.
Leonard Meek danced the first character to separate from the crowd with spidery-limbed tautness and a poignant reach.
He and a comically world-weary Nasha Thomas were perfection as the warring couple of the "Backwater Blues" duet, danced with an enjoyable directness.
A couple of quite another sort was brought to vivid life by Dudley Williams and Raquelle Chavis as two outsiders in "Sham," Mr.
Williams a puzzled innocent and Ms.
Chavis too hot to trot.


CHRONICLE
CHICK COREA, the Grammy Award-winning jazz pianist and composer, filed suit on Tuesday against the German state of Baden-Wurttemberg, charging that he was discriminated against because he belongs to the Church of Scientology.
Mr.
Corea was to have performed at the world track and field championships in Stuttgart in August 1994, but, said RON MOSS, Mr.
Corea's personal manager, the state cut off negotiations just as a contract was about to be signed.


Words of Patience to Treat Invisible Scars of Abuse
Walter R. walked into his family's apartment in East Harlem recently wearing the same sullen expression that his mother says has been a fixture for years.
But in his slender hand was something remarkable: a report card from his junior high school with a majority of the small red check marks in the "satisfactory" or "excellent" columns.
The marks represent the distance that Walter, now 11, has traveled since the troubled days, as recently as six months ago, when he was often not in class to receive his report card.


Bring Back Electric Bus
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 6 article on declining bus ridership appeared at the same time as a subway advertisement for the Transit Museum in Brooklyn, which depicts an electric bus, described as a "dinosaur . . . made extinct by better forms of transportation." On closer inspection, one finds that this quiet, nonpolluting, vintage vehicle had a double front door allowing riders to enter and leave simultaneously, as well as a rear door that could be used without so much push.
Perhaps some "Jurassic Park"-style cloning could return us to the good old days of mass transit.
DAVID H. FOX Linden Hill, Queens, Dec. 8, 1993


Werner Enterprises (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Running Injuries Don't Cripple for Life
To the Editor:
"Girls' Cross-Country Taking a Heavy Toll, Study Shows" (front page, Dec. 4) is misleading.
It is a major fallacy to rely on the statistical compilations of Dr.
Stephen G. Rice to conclude cross country takes a heavy toll.
Running injuries are not permanent.
You stop running and they go away.
Many injuries in other sports do not pass this test.
Football injuries, for instance, are frequently debilitating and permanent.
If you hurt your knee playing football, you have a knee problem for the rest of your life.


Jury Finds for Fetisov
VYACHESLAV FETISOV of the Devils, who challenged the Soviet sports system and won, emerged the winner over his former agent yesterday after a three-week challenge in court.
A Federal jury sitting it United States District Court in Newark deliberated for less than six hours over two days, then ruled that MARK MALKOVICH had violated his contract with Fetisov and that the Devils' defenseman legally ended the pact.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7  LOANS BY YELTSIN MAY HURT RUSSIA  In a move that could aggravate Russia's budget deficit and inflation, Boris Yeltsin granted subsidized loans for agriculture enterprises.  1  Al Gore was worried about starting "a diplomatic incident." 6  KENYA STARTS FIGHT ON AIDS  After years of passivity, Kenya's Government is taking a forceful role against AIDS amid estimates that 800,000 of the country's 22 million people are infected with H.I.V.  5  U.S.
HUNT BOLSTERED SOMALI  An American envoy to Somalia said the failed effort to capture Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid had bolstered him politically and militarily.  5  U.S.
FRUSTRATED WITH ARISTIDE  American officials expressed tepid support for the Rev.
Inman takes over as Defense Secretary, senior Administration officials said estimates of a $50 billion Pentagon shortfall had shrunk to $31 billion.  8  KEVORKIAN RELEASED FROM JAIL  Dr.
The bride wears white, le tout New York is invited, and if an iota of social opprobrium attaches to the event, no one seems to notice.
The Age of Innocence it's not.  1  Neediest Cases 26  Business Digest 37  Arts/Entertainment 13-19  Sports 30-34  Football: Fox outbids CBS for N.F.C. games.  1  Obituaries 24  Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  Tears enough in Northern Ireland.
Gay-bashing, democracy-bashing.
On the avenue.
Repeal the pol tax.
Letters  Russell Baker: One of the best.
Charles S. Maier: Is it 1933 all over again?
Liesl Schillinger: Down on the Christmas tree farm.
Lawrence J. White: G.M.'s bookkeeping game.
Bridge 19 Chronicle 29 Crossword 17


Holidays Are Indeed for the Children


Fox Network Outbids CBS For Rights to Pro Football
The tradition of watching Sunday afternoon pro football took a startling turn yesterday when the National Football League announced that Rupert Murdoch's Fox Network -- the network of Al Bundy and Bart Simpson -- had outbid CBS for the right to televise National Football Conference games, beginning next season.
The N.F.C. is the older and more established of the league's two conferences and includes many of the major television markets.
It features such longstanding N.F.L. franchises as the Giants, the Chicago Bears and the Detroit Lions, as well as last year's Super Bowl champion, the Dallas Cowboys, and the four-time champion San Francisco 49ers.
N.F.C. teams have won the last 10 Super Bowls.


The Invitation Should Be in the Mail


Kevorkian Is Freed After Pledging To Refrain From Aiding Suicides
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian was released from jail today and ordered placed under electronic surveillance after he promised to stop helping seriously ill people kill themselves until the constitutionality of Michigan's law banning physician-assisted suicide is resolved.
"I must and will pledge that I will not participate in the practice of what I call 'medicide' -- the physician-aided termination of human suffering -- until the matter is finally resolved by higher courts of this state or of a vote of the public," Dr.
Kevorkian told Judge Jessica R. Cooper of Oakland County Circuit Court in a packed courtroom.
He did not say what he would do if the decision went against him.


Pentagon's Budget Gap Is Narrowed to $31 Billion
Anxious to put to rest a public dispute between the Pentagon and the White House before Bobby Ray Inman takes over as Defense Secretary, senior Administration officials today produced more optimistic inflation estimates showing that a $50 billion Pentagon shortfall had shrunk to $31 billion.
A top White House official also told reporters that President Clinton was determined to maintain the Pentagon strategy of preparing to fight two regional wars virtually at once and to buy the aircraft carriers and maintain the Army divisions and Air Force wings necessary to carry out the strategy.


Edwards (A.G.) Inc. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Surgery for Rivers Puts Career in Doubt
Doc Rivers has suffered a season-ending, career-threatening knee injury, a crucial setback to the Knicks' championship aspirations.
A magnetic resonance imaging test this morning showed that Rivers has a torn anterior cruciate ligament and a torn medial meniscus in his left knee.
The point guard, who suffered the injury Thursday night against the Los Angeles Lakers, will have reconstructive surgery after the holidays.
Even in a best-case scenario, Rivers would not resume playing until late July or August.


Classical Music in Review
Ned Rorem Celebration  Symphony Space
In its quaint way, the program "Face the Music and Dance," presented on Thursday evening to commemorate Ned Rorem's recent 70th birthday, touched on a broad range of Mr.
Rorem's sensibilities: the literary and the theatrical, the lyrical and the symphonic.


An Anti-Fascist's Feet Still Follow His Mouth
MOISHE BRIER wondered if his body could take him to where his mouth said he should go, which at 82 years of age might be a reasonable concern.
But it was also a fitting question 56 years ago in Brownsville, where the "progressive Communist and trade unionist" inveighed against the dangers of creeping Fascism in Europe.
So when the Spanish Republic faced the attacks of Gen.
Francisco Franco and his Nazi and Fascist supporters, Mr.
Brier knew he could talk or he could act.


Without a Pension, but with a Retirement Plan
Because her employer does not offer a pension plan, Mary Ann Malinski must build her own retirement fund.
Like many Americans, she fears nor having enough money to live comfortably in her old age.
Mrs.
Malinski, 46, is an administrator for a labor union, and her husband, Julian, 52, is a warehouse manager.
They each hope to retire when they are 62.
They live in Prospect Park, N.J., and have six children.
To augment their savings, Mrs.
Malinski put $15,000 in a variable annuity in May.
She plans to add $2,000 a year.
This investment will use compounding and tax-free growth to her advantage.


Repeal the Pol Tax
A politician's favorite tax is one that spares the home folks; for example, taxing hotel rooms.
The victims are out-of-towners.
Supposedly.
But when the tax is so high that out-of-towners stay away, as is the case with New York City's tax, the victims are the home folks -- jobless hotel workers and every store, restaurant and pinball palace that does less business when visitors don't visit.
The tax in New York City averages 21.25 percent.
It is the world's highest hotel tax, a distinction that carries no honor.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo has the power to correct this -- the power of leadership.
He should call for a reduction in the tax in his budget next month, rather than leaving it to the Legislature, as he did last year.


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center Walter Reade Theater
On Monday night, in the second installment of its Music of Our Time series, the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center offered works from the eclectic mainstream, pieces that use (or at least allude to) classic structural forms, and that are neither abstruse nor trendy.


Skyline Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about competing anniversary demonstrations in South Africa misstated the location of the Battle of Blood River, a Zulu-Afrikaner clash in 1838, in some editions.
It was in Natal, a coastal province, not in the Transvaal, a province in the interior.


Keep Abortion Out of Health Care Reform; These Too Are Rights
To the Editor:
In answer to "Abortion Foes No Kin of Rights Activists" by Lucille Coleman (letter, Nov. 29):
During the 60's I went to Selma, Ala., to join the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. and those who supported him in standing up against the "right" of the white supremacist to violate the human rights of my African-American brothers and sisters.
In addition, I took a stand in Brooklyn against the more subtle racism found here in defense of justice for African-Americans and others who are subjected to systematic social exclusion.


Heroes of L.I.R.R. Shooting Are Honored


U.S. Scientist Says Superiors Stole Credit for Her Vaccine
A Government researcher has accused senior scientists at the National Institutes of Health of trying to steal credit for her discovery of an important new vaccine to prevent a type of meningitis.
The vaccine, which is being tested in humans, would prevent cryptococcal meningitis, a disease that kills 10 percent of all those who die of AIDS.
The vaccine is a technical breakthrough because it is the first one ever shown to work against a fungus.


Dow Has Gain of 25.43 Amid Heavy Trading
Stocks pushed higher yesterday, helped by trading of large blocks of shares and volatility associated with the quarterly "triple witching" day.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 25.43 points, to 3,751.57, giving it a gain of 10.90 points for the week.


There's No Substitute for Skill in Jamaica
Things took a slightly ironic turn in the second round of the $2.7 million Johnnie Walker World Championship at Tryall Club today.
In a tournament that prides itself on its difficult qualification process -- each competitor must have won designated events to get into the select field of 28 players -- the leaders at the halfway point are a pair of substitutes.
Larry Mize and Steve Elkington are tied for the lead at nine-under-par 133, three strokes ahead of Colin Montgomerie and four strokes ahead of Constantino Rocca.
Mize is replacing Greg Norman, while Elkington was selected by the tournament committee to fill one of the slots created by players who won more than one of the qualifying tournaments.


Corrections
The obituary yesterday of Kakuei Tanaka, a former Prime Minister of Japan, described a bribe he was convicted of taking incorrectly in some editions.
As explained elsewhere in the article, the amount was $4.5 million; it was not a multibillion-dollar bribe.


Heart Tests for Mills
Cleveland Cavaliers forward CHRIS MILLS underwent tests and was released from the hospital in Miami yesterday after he experienced an irregular heartbeat after the Cavaliers lost to the Miami Heat on Thursday night, 90-89.


New Pushcart Era Faces Old Threat; Weak Sales and Low Prices Add to Problem of Paying Rent
It has been more than 50 years since Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia banned pushcarts, those mobile symbols of entrepreneurial initiative, from New York City streets.
Now the city is seeing the second rise -- and perhaps the second fall -- of pushcarts, with an important change.
From bus and train terminals to the nooks and crannies of the World Trade Center to Citicorp office buildings in Manhattan and Queens to a Brooklyn shopping mall, the carts have gone inside.
And they are big business.
With access to thousands of scurrying commuters and shoppers in a good week, some post sales of more than $3,000.


Mass Transit Gets Billions From Albany
After seven months of partisan squabbling, the New York State Legislature and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo gave final approval today to a $9.5 billion rebuilding plan for the New York metropolitan area's bus, subway and commuter rail system.
The transit plan was part of a broader package of transportation agreements that will allocate $21 billion for road, bridge, airport and transit projects in the state over the next four years.


Trump Pledge: In This Plaza, I Thee Wed
The middle-aged master builder finally decides to marry the actress-model mother of his infant child, a week after she unveils her new line of maternity clothes, in a ceremony at the grand hotel formerly managed by his former wife.
The bride wears white, le tout New York is invited, and if an iota of social opprobrium attaches to the event, no one seems to notice.
The Age of Innocence it's not.
But when the bride is Marla Maples and the groom is Donald J. Trump, when the hotel is his (and his creditors') Plaza and the guest list features O. J. Simpson, Liza Minnelli, David N. Dinkins, Alfonse M. D'Amato and Howard Stern, blushing has long since ceased to be an issue for all but the roses on the five-tiered butter-cream cake.


Chip Fight Persisting With Japan
The American and European share of the Japanese computer-chip market is continuing to fall, making it likely that the United States will seek special trade talks with Japan early next year, American officials said today.
Preliminary estimates suggest that non-Japanese makers, most of those American, had 18 to 19 percent of the Japanese chip market in the third quarter, the lowest level in a year, a senior Administration trade official said today.


Foster Lost for Season
Steelers running back BARRY FOSTER , who broke nearly all of Pittsburgh's single-season rushing records last season, will miss the rest of the season with ligament damage in his left ankle.
Foster, out for four games since being injured Nov. 15 against Buffalo, learned yesterday after a re-examination that a ligament is detached from the ankle bone.
He will require surgery on Tuesday.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
3.03
2.73
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.01
3.13
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.21
3.30
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.29
5.34
6.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.27
6.30
7.42
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.33
7.34
8.42
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.58
5.58
6.42
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


In Memory of Mother Hale


Nigerians Prefer Military Rule to Chaos
To the Editor:
In response to your report on the new military Government in Nigeria (news article, Dec. 2):
A major objective of the Nigerian state is to develop stable and lasting democratic structures.
The country has gone through problems and difficulties necessitating several military interventions.


HARD LINE ON ARMS FROM NORTH KOREA
North Korea today denounced the Clinton Administration's latest offer of a "package deal" that would offer limited rewards to the North for allowing inspectors back into its nuclear sites, saying there is "nothing new in it" and asserting that Washington is "laying artificial obstacles" to a diplomatic solution.
The statement by North Korea's Foreign Ministry was the first response to the proposals made by the United States in a meeting with North Korean officials on Dec. 10.
While North Korea stopped short of rejecting the proposals outright, its response worried South Korean and American officials.


James B. Townsend, Professor, 75
Dr.
James B. Townsend, a retired professor of English literature at the State University of New York at Buffalo, died on Monday at his home in Buffalo.
He was 75.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Clarissa Townsend.


CHRONICLE
The revolving door keeps on spinning at Her New York, the once daily, now weekly newspaper published by Steven Hoffenberg.
MEME BLACK, the paper's fourth editor in chief in its 11-week history, was laid off yesterday after two weeks.
Next in line: LOIS ANZELOWITZ, another editor at the paper.
"It basically comes down to a philosophical difference," said GARY OSIUS, who is co-publisher with Mr.
Hoffenberg.
"Meme was put in to expand and broaden the appeal to more of a downtown audience. We just felt that the issue went too far downtown."


Sports of The Times; The Wise 'Old' Owl At Temple
TWO o'clock in the morning and John Chaney was still going strong.
He had already held court in his office with one wave of writers, and now he was winding down, sitting behind his desk while discussing an eclectic range of topics that ranged from making chili to the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
Three hours earlier, Chaney's Temple Owls had defeated Cincinnati in a tough but manageable game at McGonigle Hall.
Chaney reached over to show off the black knit sweater that his close friend, Bill Cosby, had given him before the game.
He looked admiringly at the sweater, then quipped, "We're trying to raise $13 million for a new arena and Cosby gives me a sweater."


Jennifer Howard Coleman, Painter and Actress, 68
Jennifer Howard Coleman, a painter and former actress, died on Tuesday at her home in Los Angeles.
She was 68.
The cause was lung cancer, her family said.


U.S. Envoy Says Crackdown Strengthened Aidid's Faction
The Clinton Administration's special envoy to Somalia said today that the failed effort to hunt down Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid during the summer actually strengthened the Somali faction leader politically and militarily.
In a speech to a group of reporters in Washington, Robert B. Oakley, who represented President Clinton in Somalia, said that General Aidid remains a "threat" to United Nations efforts to rebuild Somalia.


Mullin Stars In First Game Since Feb. 5
Warriors 109, Kings 94
Chris Mullin scored 23 points in his season debut last night, leading the Warriors to a 109-94 victory over the Kings in Sacramento.


Ex-Italian Premier Denies a Role in Scandal
In an unscheduled and sometimes dramatic courtroom appearance today, former Prime Minister Bettino Craxi strongly denied accusations of personal corruption in his country's huge bribery scandal, but acknowledged he had known of widespread, illicit political financing "since I was in short trousers."
Mr.
Craxi was appearing at the first major trial to emerge from the scandal, in which the financier Sergio Cusani is accused of managing some $94 million in bribes paid to politicians by the company he worked for, the Ferruzzi food-and-chemicals empire that ranked as Italy's second richest private corporation before a huge debt crisis earlier this year.


Clinton's Choice For Rights Chief Is Withdrawing
President Clinton's latest choice to be the Justice Department's civil rights chief withdrew from consideration today, apparently because of strong opposition from many black members of Congress.
The White House had been hoping to nominate John Payton, the corporation counsel for the District of Columbia, to be the new Assistant Attorney General for civil rights, and to have him rebuild and reinvigorate a division that had been greatly reduced in importance during 12 years of Republican Administrations.


Rifkin Unable To Heed Rights, Expert Testifies
A psychologist who examined Joel Rifkin, the unemployed landscaper who has confessed to killing 17 women, said today that at the time of his arrest, Mr.
Rifkin was "quite disturbed and incapable of understanding the Miranda warnings" that the state police read to him.
Dr.
Naftali G. Berrill, a clinical psychologist at the New York Forensic Health Group in Brooklyn, said that Mr.
Rifkin's judgment was "impaired" and his thinking "strained" on the morning of his arrest because he had not slept for three days and was suffering from depression.


Samaranch, Clinton Meet
The International Olympic Committee's president, JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH , invited PRESIDENT CLINTON yesterday to officially open the 1996 Olympic Games in Atlanta, as the two met for the first time, in Washington.


Asbestos No Secret, Con Ed Says
An executive of Consolidated Edison, which was indicted on Thursday on charges of covering up the release of asbestos in a 1989 explosion near Gramercy Park, said yesterday that the company had told New York City that it had found asbestos in test samples "within hours" after the blast.
But a former deputy mayor disputed that assertion, saying, "If someone had said that there was a problem, we'd have acted completely differently."


Bridge
The American team began yesterday's play with a substantial lead against their European opponents in a $50,000 challenge match in Manhattan.
At the midpoint of the 96-deal encounter, their lead was 28 imps, and they gained a further 22 yesterday to lead by 50 with 24 deals remaining.
Play was at the Town Club, 9 East 86th Street, and the American representatives were Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., Bob Goldman of Dallas and Paul Soloway of Mill Creek, Wash.
Their opponents are Leandro Burgay and Soldano De Falco of Italy, and Herve Mouiel and Alain Levy of France.
Every dealer receives a hand suitable for a strong no-trump opening and must make that bid.
Burgay is trying to prove the superiority of his bidding methods in this situation.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COMPLINK LTD., Great Neck, L.I., has acquired the assets of Technology Development Systems Inc., a communication system and consulting concern based in Chicago.
Terms were not disclosed.


Tektronix Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Texas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


New-Home Starts Are Up 3.9% As Buyers' Demand Turns Brisk
Spurred by eager buyers, the nation's builders broke ground on new homes at an annual rate of 1,432,000 last month, a pace 3.9 percent faster than in October and the highest rate since early 1990.
The increase in housing starts, the fourth straight, consisted entirely of single-family homes, reflecting what analysts say has become a sizable migration of apartment dwellers from rental units to their first houses.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday, with an article about the Compaq Computer Corporation's decision to leave the printer business omitted the time element.
The chart, showing the daily changes in the price of the company's stock, was for the period from July 1 through Dec. 16, divided into months.


Keep Abortion Out of Health Care Reform
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen expresses fear in "Trading Card" (column, Dec. 2) that President Clinton "will trade away" abortion coverage in health care reform.
For many years, Congress has enacted the Hyde amendment to deny public funds for abortion procedures.
To use the health care reform proposal to accomplish what could not be accomplished in the political process would be shocking and place an undue political burden on a proposal that needs all the support it can get.


Linebackers Scarce At Giants' Practice
The Giants' defense was missing two of its valuable parts at practice today.
One was Lawrence Taylor, who was excused for what team officials called personal reasons.
The other was outside linebacker Corey Miller, who was hospitalized with flu-like symptoms.
Taylor, within earshot of reporters, loudly told one team official that he was "going to court." No other details were available.
Taylor was not available for comment, and the team had no official comment.
The linebacker was expected to be available for Monday night's game in New Orleans.


Motor City Breakdowns Doom Rangers
The Rangers lost to the Red Wings by 6-4 tonight in a game that sent starting goalies fleeing to the bench and fight fans scrambling for spare tapes to jam into their VCR's.
"You are not going to see games of this intensity during the regular season that often," Ranger Coach Mike Keenan said after the rugged match between two torrid teams that left nearly 20,000 fans at Joe Louis Arena roaring and gasping.
"It is unreasonable to ask athletes to do that."


Review/Jazz; Two Ways to Proceed From a Be-Bop Start
Be-bop is such a complicated musical language, and so pliable, that it's no surprise the saxophonist James Moody and the trombonist J. J. Johnson, two early be-bop stars, have both taken their improvisational styles far from where they started in the late 1940's.
But it is surprising where they've arrived.
Mr.
Moody and Mr.
Johnson, who are performing at the Blue Note through tomorrow, have taken radically different paths to radically different destinations.
Mr.
Moody opened his first set on Tuesday night with a blues, and everything he knew seemed to pour out.
As with other be-bop saxophonists who have continued to progress -- Sonny Rollins, Johnny Griffin and Benny Golson are the obvious examples -- the language he employs allows for kaleidoscopic improvisations, where quotes, tonal manipulations, practice patterns and old lines converge with everything else he has spent a career learning.
Mr.
Moody's solo on the blues was dreamlike, brimming with overheard conversations, whispers, declarations and a modern esthetic, as much an exercise in memory as it was in emotion.


Chock Full O' Nuts Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Nubariya Journal; Bananas Become Fruit of Egypt-Israel Friendship
Not often associated with diplomacy, the banana would seem an unlikely ambassador.
But the ties between Israel and Egypt, established 14 yeas ago, owe much to the fruit that now grows on thousands of acres of sandy soil along the road between Cairo and Alexandria.


Continental Homes Holding Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


In the President's Audience, 'Not a Creature Was Stirring, Not Even . . .'


Israel May Postpone Lagging Talks
Israeli officials said today that their disagreements with Palestinian negotiators were so serious that they might call off a meeting planned for next week between Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Postponement of the meeting, a follow-up to a failed attempt by the two leaders last Sunday to settle their differences, would mean further delays in the start of Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip under the outline agreement signed in September by Israel and the P.L.O.


First City Bancorp in Plan To Settle Suit With F.D.I.C.
The First City Bancorporation of Texas and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation reached a tentative settlement of a $3 billion lawsuit today that could return $145 million to creditors and depositors and pave the way for First City to emerge from Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection next year.
First City had sued the F.D.I.C. in September, arguing that the agency had acted arbitrarily by declaring the banking company insolvent in October 1992 and seizing its assets, and that the agency would reap a windfall from the sale of those assets.


Classical Music in Review
Kalichstein-Laredo-Robinson Trio  92d Street Y
If all of Leon Kirchner's talk of Mahler had come before the performance of his 15-minute, one-movement piano trio on Tuesday evening, it might have seemed grandiose.
But coming afterward, it seemed wholly apt.


RESULTS PLUS
FIGURE SKATING  Witt Starts Comeback Bid in Good Form  With the confidence and experience of a two-time champion, Katarina Witt launched her Olympic comeback bid yesterday in Herne, Germany, with an encouraging performance.
Overcoming almost six years away from competition, Witt, 28 years old, finished second in the short program portion of the German national championships. (AP)


Golden Enterprises Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Del Electronics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


WNCN-FM Surprises Listeners With a Switch From Classical to Rock
WNCN-FM, which once billed itself as the "young classical-music station" and tried to build an audience with a breezy "top 100" approach to classical music, announced yesterday that it was changing to a rock format as of midnight and changing its call letters to WAXQ-FM.
The station, owned by the GAF Broadcasting Company, is billing itself as "Q-104.3 FM, New York's Pure Rock." It is specializing in mainstream current rock music, featuring the work of such groups as Aerosmith, AC/DC, Pearl Jam, Nirvana and Stone Temple Pilots.


Photronics Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a plan to launch a spacecraft to orbit the asteroid Eros misstated the planets reached by the Voyager spacecraft in some copies.
They were Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune, but not Mars.


Judges in Trenton Reject Sports Betting Plan
The two-year campaign by the 12 casinos in Atlantic City to legalize sports betting ended today when State Supreme Court ruled that such an extension of gambling would need voter approval under the State Constitution.
A bill to place the question before the voters on Nov. 2 cleared the State Senate but was blocked in the Assembly.
The Casino Association of New Jersey last month asked the Casino Control Commission, which regulates the industry, to approve sports betting through regulation.
The commission said it lacked such authority, and its position was upheld last week by an appeals court and today by the state's highest court.


Clinton Hails Annenberg's $500 Million Education Gift
President Clinton today applauded the philanthropist Walter H. Annenberg for his $500 million gift to public education and said that the money would help spread education innovations to more public schools.
In a White House ceremony in the Roosevelt Room, Mr.
Clinton said the money "couldn't have come at a better time." Although education analysts now know what innovative programs work in public schools, he said, "We can't seem to replicate them every place else. No one has unraveled this mystery."


Tears Enough in Northern Ireland
Much of what Northern Ireland calls "the Troubles" is rooted in words.
The search for the right phrases is what delayed the welcome joint declaration agreed upon Wednesday by the British and Irish Governments.
Its principles are not new, but in proposing a framework for peace, the declaration breaks fresh ground.
Words alone won't end a 25-year conflict that has taken 3,000 lives.
But now they can make the mutual slaughter harder to justify.
The Irish Republican Army has for years inveighed against British reluctance to use the words "self-determination" or to acknowledge that both parts of Ireland deserve a voice in any settlement.
Prime Minister John Major's formulation speaks reasonably to both objections:


Ault Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Micron Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2


Observer; One Of the Best
Santa Claus was a problem from the beginning, but I always liked him, and still do, and have no patience with people who don't.
He brings fantasy and good feeling into our lives.
These are valuable gifts these days when so few fantasies bring good feeling and so many take us down among the bleak and the monstrous.
From that early moment when reason first began to spoil for me the pure pleasures of existing, I tended toward skepticism about Santa Claus.
It was not until the fevers of youth had subsided and I had passed beyond middle age's desperate struggle to pass for a grown-up that I fully escaped this glum skepticism.


Inman as Donor
Bobby Ray Inman, chosen to succeed Les Aspin as Defense Secretary, has never been known as a big giver to political campaigns.
According to the computerized files of the Federal Election Commission, which date from 1987, Mr.
Inman, a Texan, gave mostly in the Southwest.
Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, received $1,000; Senator Phil Gramm, Republican of Texas, $500; Representative J. J. Pickle, Democrat of Texas, $250.


Former Head of Power Authority Is Chosen to Be a Deputy Mayor
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday named John S. Dyson, a former chairman of the State Power Authority, as his Deputy Mayor for finance and economic development, filling out the top tier of his administration.
Mr.
Dyson, who has also served as State Agriculture and Commerce Commissioner and pioneered the "I Love New York" promotional campaign, became the last of four deputy mayors to be appointed to City Hall, and the only one who has had significant government experience.
While their party affiliations vary, all the deputies were crucial campaign supporters of Mr.
Giuliani in either his first or second race for mayor.


Mets Make Sabo an Offer
The Mets, trying to end a long tradition of the revolving door at their third-base position, offered free agent Chris Sabo a contract yesterday.
Neither Joe McIlvaine, the Mets' general manager, nor Jim Bronner, the agent for Sabo, would reveal the length or terms of the offer.
But both described the negotiating process as now being in the preliminary stages.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DYSON NAMED A DEPUTY MAYOR
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani named John S. Dyson, a former chairman of the State Power Authority, as his deputy mayor for finance and economic development, filling out the top tier of his administration.
Page 1.


Inquiry Asked on King's Slaying
The Rev.
Joseph E. Lowery, president of the civil rights group that the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. headed until his assassination 25 years ago, called on the Justice Department today to investigate new assertions that the real killers have never been found.
Officials in Memphis have expressed skepticism about reports in a London newspaper and on the ABC Television program "Prime Time Live" by a retired Memphis businessman who said he had hired Dr.
King's assassin and that James Earl Ray, the man convicted of murder in the case, was not responsible for the crime.


Getting a Diversified Start in the Market
You're sitting with a little pot of money -- perhaps a year-end bonus, or an inheritance from your Aunt Edith.
And you've decided that it's finally time to venture beyond mutual funds into some individual stocks.
"What most novice investors do, as a practical matter, is to become enamored of some stock they've just read about," said Michael Stolper, president of Stolper &amp; Company, a San Diego firm that evaluates investment managers for wealthy individuals.
"If they enjoy the experience -- that is, if they make some money -- they'll keep at it. The problem is that they usually wind up with a collection of consumer stocks without any diversification at all."


Girl, 14, Is Fatally Stabbed in Her Home
A 14-year-old girl was found stabbed several times last night in the bedroom of the apartment she shared with her mother and brother in East New York, Brooklyn, the police said.
She died shortly afterward at The Brookdale Hospital Medical Center.
The girl Wonika C. Adams of 185 Wortman Avenue, was discovered by her 16-year-old brother about 9:45 P.M., the police said.
She was lying on the floor, fully clothed with "multiple" stab wounds, mostly in her torso, said Sgt.
Joseph Gallagher, a police spokesman.


Cruise America Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Dance; Timely Interpretation of Nijinsky's Mystery
Innumerable books and theatrical works have been devoted to Vaslav Nijinsky.
No wonder it is easy to think that writers and choreographers should avoid offering yet another study of this legendary early-20th-century dancer and choreographer whose career was cut short by mental illness.
But as Timothy Buckley revealed on Wednesday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater, Nijinsky can still be an enigmatic and fascinating figure.
Mr.
Buckley, who teaches at the University of Illinois at Chicago, wrote, directed, choreographed and starred in "A Letter to Diaghilev," and his many talents made this dance-theater piece compelling.


CHRONICLE
PAULA ZAHN, the co-anchor of "CBS This Morning," who gave birth to her second child, a boy, on Oct. 16, will return from maternity leave on Jan. 3.
But she does not intend to ease back in gradually.
On her first day back, she will be at her usual early-morning post -- and will also be the substitute anchor for Dan Rather and Connie Chung on the "CBS Evening News."


Yankees Can't Get Started As Jays' Taillights Vanish
They have missed out on signing Rickey Henderson, their plans have been pummeled and their hopes of becoming competitive with the Toronto Blue Jays are disintegrating.
Now the Yankees will abandon their search for a full-time left fielder and chase pitching.
One day after the Yankees offered Henderson a two-year, $8.25 million contract to be their leadoff hitter, he signed with the Oakland Athletics last night for about $375,000 more.


Tommy Wonder, 78, Ex-Ziegfeld Dancer
Tommy Wonder, a principal dancer in the "Ziegfeld Follies of 1943," died last Saturday at Cabrini Medical Center.
He was 78 and lived in Riverdale, the Bronx.
The cause was heart failure, said his business partner, Don Dellair.


United Inns Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


'Shock' Punishment, New Doubts: A special report.; As Boot Camps for Criminals Multiply, Skepticism Grows
At a time when Congress is preparing to spend hundreds of millions of dollars to open more military-style boot camps for young offenders across the country, the camp concept is getting a skeptical second look from many academics and corrections officials.
These experts say the camps, heralded as a crime-fighting and cost-saving alternative to prison when the first of them opened a decade ago, have so far achieved meager results belying their popularity among politicians and the public.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on Thursday about diaries misstated the circumstances in which Lois Gould wrote "Such Good Friends," a novel inspired by her discovery, after her husband's death, of affairs he had had.
She was not in therapy when she decided to write the book.
The article also misstated the cause of the death of her husband, Philip Benjamin, a reporter for The New York Times.
He died following surgery, not from a heart attack.


Holocaust Museum In Capital Suffices
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 12 article on the failed effort to build a New York City Holocaust museum leaves the impression that I do not recognize the importance of commemorating the Holocaust here.
This is not so.
The remembrance of the Holocaust is essential to our survival as a civilized society.
However, given the powerful, brilliantly conceived United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, I do not believe that millions of dollars should be spent for a similar institution in New York.
Many respected rabbis, educators and communal leaders in the New York Jewish community also question the wisdom of building a museum with a $30 million construction budget and annual operating budget of $4 million to $5 million.


In a Slumping Market, Value Stocks Can Shine
THE strength of the stock market this year leaves some investors weak at the knees.
How much longer can this bull market last, they wonder, and what happens if stocks decline?
Value investing, or buying stocks that are relatively cheap, may offer some comfort for the skittish.
These shares tend to rise when the economy is expanding -- as is projected next year -- and to hold up relatively well when stock prices fall.
"There are no great expectations with value stocks," said Lewis J. Altfest, a New York financial planner.
"Low price-earnings stocks tend to have lower declines in an extended market decline."
Value stocks are broadly defined as issues selling below book value with above-average dividends and the potential for much higher valuations in the near future.
"A value player is really going against conventional opinion," said David Dreman, chairman of Dreman Value Management.
In contrast, growth stocks have high price-earnings ratios and low dividend yields; they are bought by investors for the long term.
"Growth managers tend to buy things that are perceived as being cheap some years ahead," said Robert Moseson, president of Performance Analytics, a Chicago pension consulting firm.
Buying value stocks does not necessarily mean sacrificing returns.
Value stocks, especially the cyclical issues, have largely outperformed growth stocks for the last two years.
Among the Standard &amp; Poor's 500, value stocks rose 16.61 percent in the first 11 months of this year and 10.59 percent in 1992, according to the S.&amp; P./Barra value index.
The comparable index of growth stocks is up only 0.97 percent this year, and rose 5.14 percent last year.
The smaller stocks in the Russell 1000 followed a similar course.
Its value index advanced 18.4 percent in the first three quarters of 1993 and 13.8 percent in 1992, while its growth index fell 0.9 percent in the first three quarters and advanced just 5 percent last year.
Many stock experts believe this pattern will continue in 1994 as the economy picks up steam.
"Some people are saying that growth stocks are due for a liftoff, but I think it is premature," David Shulman, chief equity strategist for Salomon Brothers, said.
"I think value stocks will continue to outperform in 1994."
That is because companies that sell at low price-earnings ratios are generally sensitive to overall economic conditions.
Roger Hertog, president of Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, said, "If you look at the last period of time when the economy went through robust growth, 1983 to 1986, value stocks did extraordinarily well for a significant portion."
A prime candidate for some value stocks would be an investor who loaded up on small-company growth stocks over the last few years.
Although value stocks have generally been ahead of the pack, this subset of growth stocks has an exceptional three-year record.
The Wilshire small-company growth index rose 12.5 percent in the first 11 months this year, 13.2 percent in 1992 and 56.8 percent in 1991.
By chasing those high returns, many investors have assumed significant risk, for their stocks would probably be hit hard by a market reversal.
Some diversification now could lessen any blow.
Among the well-known names in the value category are American Express, Baxter, Cigna, Exxon, General Motors and Helene Curtis.
Peers on the growth side include Coca-Cola, Home Depot, Kellogg, Microsoft, Pfizer and Wal-Mart.
Stocks often move from one category to the other over time.
I.B.M., for example, reported superior earnings for decades and was considered a leading growth stock.
Then its price plummeted, making it a value stock.
Banking issues were perceived as value stocks in 1989 when Wall Street professionals were generally uninterested in their lackluster performance.
Two years later, lower interest rates ignited a prolonged rally in bank shares, which soon after were classified as growth stocks.
History indicates that neither growth nor value stocks will remain on top too long before being supplanted by the other.
In the three years before 1992, growth stocks surpassed value stocks.
For that reason, some money managers are beginning to shift toward growth.
Value stocks may already have peaked, these managers suggest, and growth stocks will soon reign supreme.
"I'm looking for companies with high earnings growth," said John H. Laporte, president of the T. Rowe Price New Horizons Fund.
"If I can find companies that are growing at 20 percent, I know I'm going to do well."
Cautious investors will want to make sure they have both growth and value issues in their portfolios.
Some advisers even suggest going for the best of both worlds.
John L. Manley Jr., a managing director of Smith Barney Shearson, suggested, "Try to find a stock with some natural growth that is cheaper than it once was."


TCI International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lukas Loses Ground
The condition of thoroughbred trainer JEFF LUKAS worsened yesterday, three days after he injured his head when hit by a runaway horse.
Lukas was in "very critical" condition at Huntington Memorial Hospital, in Pasadena, Calif., according to PEGGY YOST, business manager for the D. Wayne Lukas Racing Stables.


Officer Shot In Gunfight Over Jacket
An off-duty police officer who had just dropped off his daughter at a preschool program in Brooklyn was shot and seriously wounded yesterday morning in a gun battle with a man who wanted his sheepskin jacket, the police said.
The officer was attacked as he walked past a basketball court at a housing project in Brownsville.
Then, wounded in the right side and grazed in the left leg, he staggered back to the school, where he collapsed, still grasping his service revolver.


Q and A
Gifts to Minors  Q. I understand that an alternative to setting up a Unified Gifts to Minors Act account is to set up a 2503(c) trust.
Do you know how to set one up?
GERHARD LANG, Fair Lawn, N.J.
A.
The Uniform Gifts to Minors Act is a law in many states, including New York, that lets an adult make an irrevocable gift to a minor.
A U.G.M.A. account at a bank or brokerage firm is in the name of a custodian for the benefit of a child, with the funds held until the child reaches age 18 or, at the custodian's option, age 21.


INSIDE
Albany Deals on Transit And Hospital Financing
The Legislature approved a $9.5 billion plan for improvements in the New York City transit system and commuter rail lines.
Page 25.
Governor Cuomo and lawmakers struck a tentative deal to give hospitals more revenue and provide incentives for preventive and family care.
Page 29.
Military Confidence Gap
President Clinton's new Defense Secretary will have to be a liaison to officers who view the President with unease.
News Analysis, page 8.
Pentagon Budget Optimism
The White House used optimistic inflation estimates to assert that a $50 billion Pentagon shortfall had shrunk to $31 billion.
Page 8.
Dispute Over a Vaccine
A researcher says scientists at the National Institutes of Health tried to steal credit for her discovery of a meningitis vaccine.
Page 10.
WNCN Switches to Rock
WNCN-FM stunned classical-music listeners by announcing that it would change to an all-rock format as of midnight last night.
Page 13.


Reuters Is Buying Teknekron
Reuters Holdings P.L.C. said today that it had agreed to pay $125.1 million in cash for Teknekron Software Systems Inc., a private company that competes with Reuters in the market for computerized financial trading systems.
Teknekron, based in Palo Alto, Calif., south of here, has primarily served Wall Street trading firms, but has recently diversified into providing software services to large manufacturing companies.


Victim of L.I. Gunman Is Hailed for Life of Joy
Amy Federici, a 27-year-old widow shot to death in a Long Island commuter train rampage last week, was laid to rest in her hometown cemetery today as sobbing kin and friends hailed her as a most triumphant spirit and not merely a random victim of the gunman on the 5:33.
"Amy, a victim?" asked her friend, Bridget Fitz, in one of six brief eulogies delivered before an overflow crowd of hundreds of mourners at Hawthorne Gospel Church.


NEW YELTSIN MOVES MAY SIGNAL EASING IN ECONOMY REFORM
In what may be a sign of a weakening of economic resolve after his electoral rebuff on Sunday, President Boris N. Yeltsin today granted new heavily subsidized loans that could aggravate the budget deficit and inflation.
At the same time, after an extended debate, Mr.
Yeltsin's Government approved the draft of a weaker, less centralized privatization program over objections from well-known reformers, including First Deputy Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar and Privatization Minister Anatoly B. Chubais.


What New York City Really Did About Diplomatic Parking
To the Editor:
As co-author of New York City's diplomatic parking program, I must take issue with your portrayal of the program and the events leading up to its submission to the State Department (news article, Dec. 1).
With facts and figures outdated or omitted, you describe an aggressive "crackdown" by the city's traffic enforcement machinery.


New York Lawyer Declines Clinton's Offer of Health Post
Harold M. Ickes, a New York lawyer with close ties to the Clinton Administration, has decided against taking over the job of selling President Clinton's health care plan, and White House officials said today that he would be offered no other job.
Mr.
Ickes, 53, who was a member of Mr.
Clinton's transition team and had been close to accepting a position as deputy chief of staff last year, was offered the health post after he was cleared of accusations that his law firm represented a mob-influenced union.


No Headline
I am so ashamed.
I cannot even tell my brothers.
If I tell my friends, they will sneak away and they won't help.
And then what will happen to my children when we are gone? - JOHN WAINAINA, a Kenyan who has AIDS.  [ 5:1. ]


BASEBALL;
A few weeks ago, Sandy Alderson, the Oakland Athletics' president and general manager, was at a luncheon for prospective advertisers, and he was introduced to a man described to him as "the world's greatest salesman."
"Sell me Rickey Henderson," Alderson told the salesman.
Yesterday, Dennis Gilbert sold Henderson to Alderson.


Down on the Christmas Tree Farm
Last month, I went to Viola, Ill., population 550, to see my grandparents, who own a Christmas tree farm.
Years ago, they raised sheep, too -- I may be the only denizen of Manhattan's East Village who can say truthfully that my father was once a shepherd -- but my father abandoned the flock after he went off to college.
There were real excuses: one child, then two children, then three; all the dodges and moves of a low-paid and demanding university career.
And there were less real excuses.
But whatever the reason, this Thanksgiving was the first time we had all managed to get back to Viola in nine years.


A League, New Rules, But Perhaps No Pele
A new soccer league was proposed today amid a jumble of rule changes, intrigues over the draw and concern that Pele himself has been banned from the World Cup draw on Sunday.
This was not a very auspicious beginning for the Major Soccer League, a collectivist 12-team professional league that may be attempted in April 1995.
According to the plan, investors would put money into the league rather than in individual teams, in an attempt to control salaries.


National Data Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 11


NCI Building Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about a proposed lease for the expansion of the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens misstated the size of the expansion.
It is 20.6 acres, not 42 acres, in addition to the 21.6 acres now used for the tennis center.


Man Accused in L.I.R.R. Shootings Requests a Different Lawyer
Colin Ferguson, who is accused of killing six people last week on a crowded commuter train, asked a judge today to let him replace his court-appointed lawyer with a Brooklyn lawyer who has been at the center of some of New York's most bitter racial controversies.
The request raises the possibility that Mr.
Ferguson, a black man who prosecutors say may have been motivated to open fire by racial hatred, will have a lawyer, Colin A. Moore, who is known for attacking what he contends is the racism of the criminal-justice system.
His clients have included one of the defendants in the Central Park jogger case and the father of Gavin Cato, the black child whose accidental death touched off the Crown Heights racial disturbances in 1991. 'I Would Prefer a Change of Venue'
Although Mr.
Moore's appointment was delayed pending a psychiatric examination of Mr.
Ferguson, he began his defense this morning in an impromptu news conference, saying it would be impossible for Mr.
Ferguson to get a fair trial in a Nassau court.


Reporter's Notebook; Gore Abroad: Capitalism, Hockey and a Goat Eye
When Vice President Al Gore came to this snow-draped city to hold an American campaign-style town meeting today, his aides were nervous that members of the audience would hesitate to speak their minds about the elections in Russia last Sunday.
So they sent out Jack L. Gosnell, the United States Consul General here, as the warm-up act, and he urged questioners not to be too deferential.
"This is not like Russian college and Russian high school," Mr.
Gosnell told the well-dressed crowd of nearly 1,000 students, business executives and others.
"He wants an exchange."


COMPANY BRIEFS
COMPLINK LTD., Great Neck, L.I., has acquired the assets of Technology Development Systems Inc., a communication system and consulting concern based in Chicago.
Terms were not disclosed.


Janet Margolin, Film And TV Actress, 50
Janet Margolin, an actress with a string of roles in the 1960's and 70's including parts in two Woody ALlen movies, died yesterday at her home in Los Angeles.
She was 50.
The cause was ovarian cancer, a cousin, Ruth Malin, said.


Review/Opera; A Debut, A Return In the Met 'Troyens'
There were many notable aspects to the performance of "Les Troyens" at the Metropolitan Opera House on Thursday night.
There was the return of Maria Ewing to the company for the first time since 1987, when she withdrew from "all future engagements" after a spat with the music director, James Levine.
There was the impressive debut of the French soprano Francoise Pollet, who brought a noble intelligence to the difficult role of Cassandra.
And then there were Peter Wexler's sets and costumes, which a decade in storage has done nothing to improve.
But apart from all the virtues and flaws, large and small, the return of this opera to the Met was a major event in itself.
The Berlioz work looks back to Beethoven in its invocation of massive historical forces, and it anticipates Debussy in its attempts to suspend time.
Mr.
Levine attended to both its drive and its dreamy qualities in his supple conducting, making this performance much more than the sum of its parts.


FSI International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Two Minutes of Silence to Protest Violence in Rio de Janeiro


Hurco Cos. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Business Digest
The Economy
New homes were built in November at the highest rate since early 1990, spurred by the lowest mortgage rates in 25 years.
The increase in housing starts, to an annual rate of 1.4 million units, was the fourth straight and consisted entirely of single-family homes, reflecting what analysts say has become a sizable migration of apartment dwellers from rental units to their first houses.  [ Page 1. ]
Shoppers are charging more this holiday season, retailers and credit card companies say.
But analysts caution that the trend will not necessarily translate into equally robust sales increases, in part because consumers are responding to promotional incentives like offers of airline mileage for using credit cards instead of cash.  [ 37. ] International
The U.S. is likely to seek special trade talks with Japan early next year because the American and European share of the Japanese computer-chip market is continuing to fall, officials said.
Preliminary estimates suggest that non-Japanese makers, most of those American, had 18 to 19 percent of the Japanese chip market in the third quarter, the lowest level in a year.  [ 37. ]  Companies
Rupert Murdoch's Fox Network outbid CBS for the right to televise National Football Conference games next season.
No figures were announced, but a radio report said Fox had outbid CBS by $100 million for rights that cost CBS $265 million.
The deal ends a relationship between the N.F.L. and CBS that goes back to the 1950's and gives Fox its first regular sports programming.  [ 1. ]
Calvert Group, the largest mutual fund family to invest only in companies with good social and ethical records, is at a crossroads.
It is dealing with below-par returns on its investments and new competition from other politically correct funds.  [ 37. ]
First City Bancorp tentatively settled its $3 billion lawsuit against the F.D.I.C., which could produce $145 million for creditors and depositors and help end First City's bankruptcy.  [ 37. ]
Metropolitan Life was ordered by Florida to set aside bonus payments to employees until it settled charges of improper insurance sales that are being investigated in several states.  [ 39. ]
I.B.M. gave responsibility for work stations and personal computer software to the top executive for big computers, consolidating all high-performance systems into one group.  [ 39. ]
Reuters Holdings will pay $125.1 million for Teknekron Software.
The two will develop Teknekron's technology that allows computer networks to share data sent from different sources.  [ 39. ]
Georgia-Pacific expects record revenue from building products but said paper product prices had fallen to a 50-year low.  [ 39. ]
Winnebago gave the title chief of executive to Fred Dohrmann, its president and the architect of a financial turnaround.  [ 39. ] Markets
Crude oil prices dropped below $14 a barrel, to their lowest levels in five years, as world oil markets continued to be depressed by excess supplies.
Gasoline prices also fell to five-year lows.  [ 37. ]
Stocks pushed higher in heavy trading on a triple-witching day.
The Dow industrial average rose 25.43 points, to 3,751.57.  [ 38. ]
Treasury bond prices gained and interest rates fell on a report that the Fed did not see an immediate need to raise rates.  [ 46. ]
The dollar reached a five-month high against the yen, but it drifted against European currencies.
Gold prices rose.  [ 48. ] our Money
Spreading investments among different areas is considered the best way to go beyond mutual funds into individual stocks.  [ 35. ]
Value investing, buying stocks that are cheap in relation to book value and dividends, may offer comfort for the skittish.  [ 35. ]
Important financial steps must be taken to protect the estate of a relative who needs long-term medical care.  [ 36. ]


Humbled by Mean Recession, California Fights for Its Jobs
The days when California was so rich that it did not care whether businesses came or went are over.
Just ask the people at Lego, the Danish toy maker, who were searching for a site for the company's first "family park" in the United States.
In April 1992, Gov.
Pete Wilson phoned Lego's president in Denmark.
Then the State Legislature relaxed the tax laws affecting foreign companies.
Finally, state and local officials, utility executives and private developers formed a special "red team," taking its name from a term coined by the aerospace industry for groups assigned to emergency work.
The state quickly promised $7.1 million in roads and marketing help.


Dec. 12-18: A New Harmony; Israel and Vatican Decide To End Their Long Standoff
When Israel and the Vatican finally establish diplomatic relations on Dec. 30, the agreement will draw a formal line under almost 2,000 years of strained history and provide a new and more harmonious context for relations between Christians and Jews throughout the world.
But it will also serve as a reminder of the laborious and often arcane workings  of the Vatican, which has long recognized Israel's right to exist in secure boundaries but shied from full diplomatic ties.


Honoring a Music Man
A plaque is unveiled at Irving Berlin's New York home, Dec. 14.


Sports of The Times; Memos That Sting Giants, Rile Coslet
IN dominating the Jets, 28-7, the Dallas Cowboys virtually pinned a memo to the door of the Giants' locker room: "See you Jan. 2. Same time. Same place."
Despite their losses to the Dolphins and the Falcons in recent weeks, the Cowboys yesterday showed why they're the reigning Super Bowl champions, why they routed the Giants, 31-9, six weeks ago, why the National Conference East title is still up for grabs, and why the Jets need help if they are to salvage a wild-card berth.


Their Irony, Humor (and Art) Can Save China
On Aug. 21, the "Country Life Plan" exhibition was scheduled to open at the National Gallery in Beijing.
Though the paintings were indifferent, and had to the ordinary eye no hint of political significance, officials ruled that many failed to show the positive side of life in the People's Republic and were therefore unacceptable: the artists were permitted to hang only about 20 percent of their work.
The prime mover behind "Country Life Plan," Song Shuangsong, was furious that the exhibition had been edited.
He told friends that on Aug. 25 he would go to the gallery and cut off his long hair, a symbol of his individualistic way of life.
At noon that day, Song, a professional barber, friends and a reporter from Shanxi television all gathered in the exhibition room.
As the haircut progressed, chance visitors to the gallery stopped to watch.
Song faced first in one direction, then in another, holding a solemn expression for a while, then grinning and posing.
After 20 minutes or so, the barber soaped Song's face, produced a straight razor and began to shave him.
At that moment, the director of gallery security came in and saw the crowd and cameras.
"Who is the authority behind this behavior?" he asked, his face tight with rage.
"This is my exhibition," Song said, "and I take full responsibility."


U.S. Bridge Team Wins Challenge Match
The international challenge match between contract bridge foursomes representing the United States and Europe, played on Thursday and Friday in Manhattan, resulted in a clear victory for the Americans by 50 international match points, 185-135.
The United States team, all former world champions, were Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., Bob Goldman of Dallas, and Paul Soloway of Mill Creek, Wash.
They won $50,000, of which $30,000 went to their backers, who would have been responsible for the entire stake if the team had lost.


Bells, Bells, Bells, Bells
BONGING bells portentously, tinkling them gently at the clavier of a huge 74-bell carillon, one of the world's grandest musical instruments, Joseph Clair Davis annually creates some of the best holiday music in the city -- and among the least accessible to be enjoyed, alas.
For it floats like a lost musical imagining far apart from us all as the bronze-enthrusted airborne notes are shredded by the endless honk and hiss of West Side auto traffic that undermines his musical aerie, 23 stories up at the Riverside Church.
But there is a way to get closer and heed the special music of the carillon, in Yuletide and all year, and even to witness the mellow iron-to-bronze moments of creation by Mr.
Davis, an artist who performs without benefit of long belfry-rope pull from the ground or modern electronic keyboard.


Visits to Peru Rebound As Obstacles Fade
STARTING in 1988, three scourges of a happy vacation cholera, hyperinflation and terrorist violence -- kept tourists away from Peru.
But recently and without great fanfare, cholera and inflation have come under control and guerrilla violence has waned.
Today, visitors are beginning to venture back to the land of the Incas.
For the first time in five years, foreign arrivals are up in Peru.
Since April, 150,000 foreign visitors have come here -- a 36 percent rise over the same period last year.
Tourism's resurgence in Peru is most noticeable in Cuzco, where the number of foreigners buying tour packages increased this summer by 50 percent, to 9,500, according to the National Chamber of Tourism, a Lima-based organization.
Betting on a long-term recovery, Lima's largest hotel, El Libertador, is doubling its capacity to 250 rooms.


Historic Hudson Valley Sites in a Festive Mood
THE holidays are usually happy times for children, and a number of events through the end of the year have been designed with youngsters in mind.
Under the auspices of Historic Hudson Valley, a holiday party takes place today from 5 until 9 P.M. at Van Cortlandt Manor in Croton-on-Hudson.
"Eat, drink and sing your way through a dignified late 19th-century family Christmas and a raucous, tavern-centered Twelfth Night celebration" is the invitation proffered by Darcy Lassek of Historic Hudson Valley.
For more details, call 631-8200.


Al Pacino in 'Chinese Coffee'
THE presence -- a very magnetic one -- of Al Pacino in a two-play repertory caps the Stamford Center for the Arts event-driven theater series.
Given the Rich Forum's spotlight on somebodies -- Tommy Tune turned out in October, Lynn Redgrave shows up in March -- it can be argued that executive producer Alexander H. Cohen presumes the persona, not the play, is the thing.
At this tempo, including the one-night celebrity gigs at the Palace a few blocks away, Mr.
Cohen may have resolved to give Stamford a season of 1,000 stars.
Why not?
In New York, he made it happen in just one night.


Egypt Fears More Violent 'Holy War' by Militants
After a two-year campaign by Muslim militants to overthrow the Egyptian Government, a familiar group has re-emerged with a new plan that is targeting the country's highest officials and threatening to sharply increase the level of violence, senior intelligence officials and Western diplomats say.
The deadlier tactics are a result of several factors, including involvement by Iran and rivalries within the militant movement, the officials say.
They say many members of the group -- Al Jihad, or Holy War -- were trained in Afghanistan by Iranians and are equipped with powerful explosives.


'A Universal Journey'
To the Editor:  I was flattered to be the subject of Celia McGee's article "An Actress's Journey to an Unexpected Place"  [ Dec. 5 ] .
However, I felt it missed the essence of my one-woman play "Pretty Fire," currently at the Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse.
This very personal, very spiritual play explores and celebrates the life of an African-American girl from birth through age 11.
Contrary to Ms.
McGee's assertions, it caters to neither a white audience nor to an African-American one.
It caters to any human being, regardless of race or religion, who wishes to join me on a universal journey through a world of loving mothers and fathers and "grandparents who spoiled us silly."


Dec. 12-18: Perils of Packwood; From Startling to Stunning: A New Chapter in Inquiry
For the better part of a year, Senator Bob Packwood's travails with the Senate Ethics Committee have followed a "can you top this" script, with each succeeding accusation, admission or denial managing to push eyebrows farther past hairline level.
Then, in Federal court last week, came some really stunning disclosures.
First, Senate lawyers disclosed that the Oregon Republican had physically altered  passages in his voluminous diaries, which the ethics panel wants for an inquiry into charges that he engaged in sexual misconduct, blackmail and influence-peddling.
The woman who has transcribed Mr.
Packwood's tape-recorded musings into typed diaries for 24 years, Cathy Wagner Cormack, said he apparently erased or recorded over several tapes' original passages after learning that ethics investigators were assembling a case.


Singing The Unsung
To the Editor:
In response to the Stamps column "The Red Ribbon of AIDS Awareness" (Nov. 28): On April 20, 1989, The New York Times reported that Jean Anne Hlavacek, then a 36-year-old nurse from Madison, Wis., had been waging a campaign for a postage stamp to help stamp out AIDS for nearly two years.
Ms.
Hlavacek felt that a stamp with the words "prevention, research, compassion and education" would help to keep AIDS from being swept under the carpet.


No Weak Links for Devils, Including 2 Newest Players
Except for their inefficiency with the man advantage, which has been the norm in recent games, the Devils played effectively this afternoon at the Colisee and skated away with a 6-2 triumph over the Nordiques.
The Devils dominated for most of the game and got goals from six different players, starting with Jim Dowd and ending with David Emma, their two newest promotions from the minor leagues because of injuries to Bernie Nicholls and Bobby Holik, two key forwards.


On an Odyssey Of Discovery
To the Editor:  When Richard Taruskin accuses a musician of Claudio Arrau's stature of thinking only to "pander to naive audience expectation and disguise his artifice as sincerity," he insults the memory of a great artist.
It seems to be beyond Mr.
Taruskin's comprehension that an artist could use the performance of a well-rehearsed and thought-out piece of music as an opportunity for a sincerely felt odyssey of discovery.
Although accusing those who quarrel with Horowitz's use of art to satisfy his craving for public acclaim of snobbery, Mr.
Taruskin appears to be the real snob here, unwilling to grant the possibility of a performer experiencing true emotional discovery before our very eyes.
"It must be a fake," he cries, avoiding the challenge of honest, deeply felt emotional and spiritual revelation.
STEPHEN DRURY Cambridge, Mass.


Cut Short, a Life Still Resonates
In a city numb with tales of violence, the murder of Jose Duran last August somehow caught the eye: a hard-working immigrant father of 12, returning at midnight from his dishwashing job at an elegant French restaurant in Manhattan, is shot for his wallet.
From a window in the Brownsville Houses, two of his sons, in their nightly watch for their father's return, see him clutch his chest and fall to the ground.
The family is left without its breadwinner.
In the months since her husband died, Maria Enedina Duran's days have been filled with miracles as people from around the world reacted to the crime in an outpouring of generosity.


In Tune


SUNY, Schmooney, Toss Out the Initials
LIKE an adolescent shedding a childhood nickname, the 21-year-old institution always known locally as SUNY Purchase is referring to itself in a new way.
Henceforth, the State University of New York, College at Purchase should be addressed as Purchase College, State University of New York, said Bill Lacy, the school's new president.
He said this was a "name clarification" rather than a new name for the college, which legally retains its former title.


From Harlem to East Berlin
WHY I LEFT AMERICA  And Other Essays.
By Oliver W. Harrington.
Edited by M. Thomas Inge.
Illustrated. 113 pp.
Jackson, Miss.:  University Press of Mississippi. $20.
DARK LAUGHTER  The Satiric Art of Oliver W. Harrington.
Edited by M. Thomas Inge.
Illustrated. 116 pp.
Jackson, Miss.: University Press of Mississippi. $25.


The Nation; The Regulatory Thickets Of Environmental Racism
EVER since civil rights leaders marched in protest 11 years ago to prevent the construction of a new hazardous waste dump in predominantly black Warren County in North Carolina, private and Government studies have reported that minority communities not only suffer disproportionately from toxic contamination but also have been largely left out of the environmental cleanup of the last two decades.
As a political issue, what has come to be called "environmental racism" is almost irresistible to President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore.
By addressing the problem, the Administration is appealing to three of the Democratic Party's most important constituencies -- minorities, the poor and environmentalists.


Alison Hoffman, Michael Almasian
Alison Hoffman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel S. Hoffman of Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Michael Varoujan Almasian, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Varoujan Almasian of Boca Raton, Fla..
The Rev.
Vance E. Polley officiated at the Rye Presbyterian Church.
The bride, 24, graduated from Georgetown University.
She is an associate director of admissions at St.
Lawrence University in Canton, N.Y.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
Her mother is the director of guidance at Rye High School.


Remaining Hopeful Despite Troubles
Mary Sullivan awoke in a hospital bed, unaware that she had spent eight days on a respirator, unwilling to believe that a persistent cough had become pneumonia, and that the treatment had left her too weak to walk.
When the doctors explained that muscle relaxants she received during her treatment had caused her muscles to atrophy, she faced down her fear.
She vowed to fight for her life and struggled through weeks of physical therapy, straining to breathe as she did leg lifts to regain her strength.


Corrections
A chronology accompanying a Nov. 28 article about electronic mail in the White House misspelled the name of a judge who ruled that it has the status of Federal records, misidentified his court and misstated the date of his decision.
He is Judge Charles R. Richey of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, not a Federal appeals court.
He made the ruling in January 1993, not last August.
His ruling was affirmed by a Federal appeals court in August.


Welcome Home, Daddy!


Companies Are Cutting Their Hearts Out
There used to be an unwritten contract in America between top managers and workers: If you did your job conscientiously, you could count on having that job as long as the company stayed in business.
But that implicit contract is being abandoned, at an ever-faster pace.
Even reasonably healthy companies are cutting their payrolls.
For the past four months, American businesses have been slashing jobs by more than 2,000 a day, a 30 percent higher rate than a year ago, when the nation was still in recession.
From the standpoint of investors, this trend seems to make sense.
Stock prices often spike upward after the announcement of a major cut in payrolls, even among companies that are showing no sign of bottom-line distress.
The butcher metaphor of modern management seems apt: It's time to cut the fat, slash the excess, get lean and mean.


In the Region/Connecticut; Hartford Indoor-Outdoor Amphitheater Put on Hold
AN ambitious proposal announced late in October for an indoor-outdoor amphitheater in Hartford's North Meadows, possibly the first such structure in the country, has been put on hold until mid-January while General Assembly leaders scrutinize its merits.
The 60,000-square-foot theater and semi-circular outdoor seating area will cost $22 million and accommodate 7,500 patrons indoors in winter and 22,500 more outdoors in summer.
The project, which would be built on vacant land off Exit 33 of Interstate 91, adjacent to Conrail's freight yard, will also include parking space for 10,000 cars.


Traffic is Murder These Days, and It Will Only Get Worse. But You Don't Just Have to Sit There Steaming.
IT WAS 10 A.M. on one of those pre-holiday Saturdays and Amy Bittinger was cutting things close.
Ms.
Bittinger, who lives in Park Slope, Brooklyn, had 30 minutes to get to the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
"This is only a seven-mile trip," she declared as she headed down Cadman Plaza West to the Brooklyn Bridge's Gothicized grandeur.
"I can be there in no time."
That's on a good day, which this was not.
Ms.
Bittinger, an administrator of services for the disabled, could see that cars were backed up all the way down the entrance ramp.
So she made a quick U-turn, even though that meant bumping over the concrete median on Cadman Plaza.
She headed for the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, even though that meant paying a $3 toll.


Graceful Paths, Greedy Rats
The broad, grassy stretches at the center of Pelham Parkway have long been an urban preserve for residents of the handsome, strait-laced homes that line it, an oasis for pigeon fanciers, walkers and picnickers.
They are also irresistible to rats.
So far, no amount of poison has been enough to completely wipe out the rats as they scrounge free meals.
But their numbers were under control -- at least until a few weeks ago.


Culinary Getaways For a Tired Shopper
SEA GRILL *  (212) 246-9201; 19 West 49th Street, at Rockefeller Center; $$$; all major credit cards


Busy Signals
Thanks to the Smith- sonian Institution, I have finally got a handle, so to speak, on my erotic obsession with the Princess phone.
It was my misfortune to be approaching puberty in 1959, just as the Princess came on the market, kittenishly begging that consumers consider it an extension to the still-dominant boxy black phone.


Funeral for Victim of Pizza Parlor Shooting in Colorado


Cut Short, a Life Still Resonates
In a city numb with tales of violence, the murder of Jose Duran last August somehow caught the eye: a hard-working immigrant father of 12, returning at midnight from his dishwashing job at an elegant French restaurant in Manhattan, is shot for his wallet.
From a window in the Brownsville Houses, two of his sons, in their nightly watch for their father's return, see him clutch his chest and fall to the ground.
The family is left without its breadwinner.
In the months since her husband died, Maria Enedina Duran's days have been filled with miracles as people from around the world reacted to the crime in an outpouring of generosity.


Bistro Fare and Stylish Decor in Litchfield
WEST STREET GRILL in Litchfield does not need any more kudos.
Thanks to the glitter of big name weekenders in the Litchfield Hills, the likes of Tom Brokaw, Henry Kissinger and a cast of hundreds, this four-year-old restaurant seemingly does a land-office business.
The remarkable thing is that a restaurant that has had such a barrage of extravagant press coverage manages to keep its consistency level high.
Even more amazing is that in the interim West Street Grill has actually improved.
When it lost its main chef and key service personnel some months ago, there were questions about what would happen next.
What happened is this: the restaurant is better now than it has ever been, and the stylish, low-key black-and-white decor, mirrored and brick walls and bleached maple floor are just as appealing as ever.


Corrections
A review of the restaurant Zoe in the Good Eating column last Sunday misidentified its chef.
He is Steven Levine; the previous chef, John DiLeo, left the restaurant in August 1992.


Kristin M. Kennedy and John D. Clark
Kristin Marie Kennedy, the daughter of Justice and Mrs.
Anthony M. Kennedy of McLean, Va., was married yesterday to John Dawson Clark, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Arthur Clark of Chevy Chase, Md.
The Rev.
William Edward McConville performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Roman Catholic Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Clark, 25, was until recently an associate at Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons, the investment bank, in San Francisco.
She graduated from Stanford University.
Her father is an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.


Council Seeks Voice in Plan To Privatize
Municipal labor leaders are pressuring Mayor David N. Dinkins to rush legislation that would give the City Council and the unions greater influence over any attempts by Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani to turn city services over to private companies.
The bill would slow down moves to privatize agencies by requiring the city to perform detailed studies and hold public hearings before going ahead with such efforts, Council officials said.
The measure is a watered-down version of another bill that failed to pass last year.


Sorting The Data
MANY analysts say they believe consumer interest in the cornucopia of on-line information services -- weather, real estate listings, data bases, bulletin boards, electronic newspapers, horoscopes and stock quotes -- will not grow unless subscribers have easier ways to get access to and retrieve the information they need.


At Work; Coming to Terms With the Past
FOUR years ago, counselors under her supervision at Radcliffe Career Services, a campus-community counseling agency based at Radcliffe College, began coming to Phyllis Stein, unsure of how to react to a disquieting new response to the usual career-counselor opening line, "Tell me about yourself."
"It would be some version of the following," said Ms.
Stein, director of the agency in Cambridge, Mass.
" 'I'm X, I want you to know I am a survivor of childhood sexual abuse. I'm here in this office to discuss my career issues, but childhood experience is affecting my work life." After hearing that refrain a half dozen times, Ms.
Stein recalled, "I said, 'Whoops, we need guidance.' "


In Glenn Close, 'Sunset Boulevard' Finds Its Megastar
ONE THING WAS PERfectly clear the other night in Los Angeles, at least inside the Shubert Theater.
When the curtain came down on the last preview performance of "Sunset Boulevard," Andrew Lloyd Webber's elaborate, neo-Gothic musical adaptation of Billy Wilder's classic 1950 film, Glenn Close had suddenly become a big, exciting new star of the American musical theater of the 1990's.


Dolli T. Brackett, 82, A Designer of Stamps
Dolli Tingle Brackett, an artist and designer of Christmas stamps for the Postal Service, died on Dec. 11 in Norwalk Hospital, Norwalk, Conn.
She was 82.
The cause of death was respiratory failure, her son, Gordon Brackett, said.


SUNDAY: December 19, 1993; Internot
Any day now, if it hasn't happened already, some friend will fix you with the gaze that used to signal a disquisition on the merits of the merlot grape and announce that last night, while you were watching John Wayne on the tube, he was trolling the Net.
Ohhh!
The Internet!
Trolling!
The words fairly drip techno-romance.
Once, the Internet referred to a network linking smaller networks of government, business and academic computers.
But connections between computer bulletin boards, and businesses, and universities, and various small networks (Fidonet, Usenet, Bitnet) are increasing, and the terminology is becoming more muddled.
The Internet, or better, the Net, is coming to mean the world of cyberspace, a land of virtual treasure waiting for savvy keyboard jockeys.


Out of Wedlock


Corrections
A review on Nov. 28 about "The Death of Bernadette Lefthand," by Ron Querry, misstated the setting of the book.
Dulce, N.M., is on the Jicarilla Apache Indian Reservation, not the Navajo Reservation.


A Troupe Sticks With Passion Instead of Polemic
THE ENTHUSIASTIC AUDIENCE reaction to Toronto Dance Theater at the Joyce earlier this month suggests that Canadians are on to something.
Like Les Grands Ballets Canadiens from Montreal in May, the modern-dance troupe from Toronto clearly satisfied the New York audience's hunger for dancers who move with unabashed passion.
Choreographers in the United States may, it is true, devise trickier and more inventive movement, and the virtuosity of American dancers is unquestioned.
But too often, the very experimental nature of American dance gives it a cerebral, formal look.
Even with an ever increasing number of dramatic dances about personal trauma or social issues like AIDS awareness, the choreography's relentless complexity offers the eye little relief.
Gesture and isolated steps, joined with predictable unpredictability, do not stir up a viewer's own kinetic sense.


Inequity of Lobbying Deduction
To the Editor:
In "Congress's Wrong Turn on Lobbying" (Viewpoints, Nov. 28), Donald B. Susswein argues that the 1993 tax law's denial of Federal tax deductions for business lobbying expenses is not appropriate.
However, he overlooks the similar penalty the tax code imposes on some forms of individual lobbying.


Con-Ed Charges Recalls Blast
For residents of Gramercy Park who were there on Aug. 19, 1989, the day a steam-pipe explosion spewed a geyser of asbestos-laden debris into the air over their neighborhood, learning that Consolidated Edison had been indicted last week rekindled painful memories.
The indictment, announced Thursday, alleges that the company and two officials, now retired, did not tell Government officials for four days that the explosion, which killed 3, injured 24 and forced the evacuation of hundreds from their homes, had released 200 pounds of asbestos.
It said the information was withheld to save the company the cost of a cleanup.
Con Edison has called the charges "without merit."


Elizabeth Ryan, Stephen O'Brien
Elizabeth Drake Ryan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmond P. Ryan of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to Stephen Thomas O'Brien, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert P. O'Brien of Pleasantville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Anne Kimball performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
O'Brien, 28, is a photographer and computer artist in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father, now retired, was a vice president of Capital Cities/ABC in New York.
Her mother, Lynn P. Ryan, is an interior designer in New York and Connecticut.


Make the Data Highway Worthwhile
To the Editor:
Al Ries points out in "An Idea Whose Time Never Came" (Viewpoints, Nov. 21) that companies like Microsoft, Tele-Communications and the Baby Bells are contemplating mass delivery of services to a single unit in a consumer's home.


A la Carte; Have Toque Blanche, Will Travel Anywhere (Including L.I.)
MORE than atmosphere, service or anything else, great chefs make great restaurants, and Long Island is attracting its share of talented kitchen commanders.
Some put down roots, some see service at many local restaurants and others make guest appearances.
Francesco Iovine is one of those master chefs who visit for brief periods.
Mr.
Iovine, among a handful of Italian chefs who have been awarded two stars in the Michelin Guide for France, will be recreating his signature dishes at the Stresa Italian Restaurant, 1524 Northern Boulevard, Manhasset (365-6957), until the end of the month.
His home base is the Gennaro Restaurant in Ischia, Italy.


The Torch Passes


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
AMERICAN HISTORY  AS VARIOUS AS THEIR LAND  The Everyday Lives  of Eighteenth-Century Americans.
By Stephanie Grauman Wolf.
HarperCollins, $28.


25-Year Decline of Smoking Seems to Be Ending
After years of admonitions about the dangers of smoking, some Americans may be growing weary of the message.
New evidence suggests that a decline in cigarette smoking over the last 25 years may be ending, with one recent study hinting that a resurgence may be under way.
Surprisingly, the shift appears to include groups that have historically been at the forefront of enlightened attitudes toward health habits -- adults in their 40's, people with college educations and those in households with more than $35,000 in annual income.


Uncertain Future of a Cherished Station
IT was a more innocent time.
Or perhaps that is a trick played by the amber light falling on the untroubled faces.
The painting by Norman Rockwell called "Commuter" shows a typical morning scene nearly 50 years ago at the Crestwood Railroad Station, which serves the Yonkers neighborhood of Crestwood but is situated in this village in the town of Eastchester.
The painting shows neatly dressed citygoers lining the platform in front of the ticket office as a couple hurriedly kisses goodbye and a newsboy does brisk business.
A few latecomers rush for the train, perhaps having lingered too long over breakfast in the cozy houses dotting the surrounding hillside.
It is the quintessential Rockwell moment, and the artist himself captured the scene for a Saturday Evening Post cover dated Nov. 16, 1946.


Professional Pay Disparity
To the Editor:
As the world turns away from the failed policies of managed economics, Derek Bok is advocating a return to the form of income controls that were integral to theoretical Communism.


MAIL-ORDER AMERICA
Holly Brubach made it sound as if catalogues are sending out a message ("Mail-Order America," Nov. 21).
I have been a catalogue shopper for more than 10 years and receive some 50 catalogues every month.
I never see a message and seldom notice the models.
I concentrate on the merchandise and prices.
KAY KAUFMAN Forest Hills, Queens


For Business Users, a Sharing Experience
THE business applications of interactive multimedia are often overshadowed by the entertainment services.
But analysts predict sharp growth in the use of video teleconferencing and "collaboration" systems, which allow people in separate locations to work with the same documents or files on their screens.
On the market is a video telephone system from A.T.&amp; T. that operates through desk-top personal computers.
The system, which sells for about $6,000 a unit, lets users see each other and work together on computer files.
The company also sells a video control unit, which starts at about $60,000, that lets users in different places join a call.


Ceding A Legacy To Europe
EVERY MONTH, THE PARIS-BASED CLASSICS label, which specializes in 78 r.p.m.-era jazz material, issues five more CD's.
What began as a rivulet is now a flood: over the last four years, the company has released 235 CD's, or some 250 hours of music.
The names make up a who's who of American jazz, from Duke Ellington and Cab Calloway to Fletcher Henderson and Louis Armstrong.
But as important, the label is issuing a slew of CD's by lesser-known artists, filling in the gaps between jazz's great men.
With enough money one can collect the complete works of the stride piano giant James P. Johnson or the great early sides of the trumpeter Roy Eldridge or pieces from now forgotten marquee names like Jabbo Smith or Claude Hopkins or Tiny Parham.
To understand the enormous intellectual and esthetic ferment that produced Charlie Parker during the 1930's in Kansas City, for example, one can buy recordings by his former boss Harlan Leonard, whose band, the Rockets, featured arrangements by a young Tadd Dameron.
To add another voice to New York City's awesome roaring of talent during the 1930's and 1940's, one can listen to the recordings of Teddy Hill, a saxophonist who went on to fame as the manager of Minton's Playhouse, a be-bop incubator.
If some of these names are just out of memory's range, it's because the artists' work isn't readily available in the United States.
And that constitutes a sort of disappearance.


Allison Hanley, L. Scott Frantz
Allison Church Hanley, a drug and alcohol counselor at the Greenwich Academy in Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to L. Scott Frantz, the president of the Haebler Company, an investment concern in White Plains.
The Rev.
Terry L. Elsberry performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Frantz, 28, is a daughter of Mrs.
John P. Lynch 3d and William L. Hanley Jr., both of Greenwich.


The Day the Music Died: Mourning Classical WNCN
Likening it to a death in the family and a portent of America's capitulation to "fast-food, mall mentality," listeners yesterday bemoaned and berated the sudden demise of the classical music radio station WNCN-FM and its jarring, immediate reincarnation as "Pure Rock, Q-104.3."
A forlorn gaggle of members of the station's Listeners' Guild, told of the imminent passing only hours earlier, gathered outside WNCN's offices on the Avenue of the Americas at 47th Street minutes before midnight Friday.
With disbelieving ears, they heard the last strains of classical music struggling, like a death rattle, through a small portable radio, followed by several minutes of tick, tick, ticking before the first blast of rock-and-roll.


For Starters


Ellen Coniglio, Benjamin Patch
Ellen Jane Coniglio, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel A. Coniglio of Doylestown, Pa., was married there yesterday to Benjamin Tuthill Patch, a son of Kathryn W. Patch of Old Lyme, Conn., and the late Howard R. Patch Jr.
The Rev.
John J. Davids performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Mount Carmel Church.
Mrs.
Patch, 27, graduated from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.
She is an owner of Gorilla Graphics, a graphic-design service in New York.


James Johnsen, Jeanine Von Zwehl
Jeanine Von Zwehl, a daughter of Joseph and Noreen Von Zwehl of Glen Head, L.I., and James Edward Johnsen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Johnsen, also of Glen Head, were married in New York yesterday.
The Rev.
Damian O'Connell performed the ceremony at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from New York University, and is the president of Cuffton Inc., a maker of cuff links in New York.
Her father is the president of Varn International, a lithographic-chemical manufacturer, in Oakland, N.J.
Her mother is a land developer based in Glen Head.


Professional Pay Disparity
To the Editor:
It is Derek Bok who is naive to suggest that professional compensation is not the result of market forces.


Drunken Driving And the Laws
All right-thinking citizens of New Jersey should be outraged by the Nov. 7 article "Do Drunken Drivers Get Railroaded?" The article's focus was irresponsible.
The reality remains that drunken drivers continue to kill and maim innocent people on our roadways.
The New Jersey Legislature has taken a strong stand against drunken driving.
As a result, recent statistics reveal that New Jersey now has the second lowest alcohol-related fatality rate in the nation.


O.K., Says Anthony Hopkins, More Mr. Nice Guy
IN THE LONG, SAD HISTORY OF women who love too much, is there anything more tantalizing than the unavailable man?
Emotionally, circumstantially, physically -- any kind will do.
And is there an actor alive who plays him better than Anthony Hopkins?
Certainly not, as his two most recent films attest.
In the critically acclaimed "Remains of the Day" he plays Stevens, an emotionally and sexually repressed butler, perhaps the first in history who really never did it.
But the sweetness!
Lurking just beneath his varnished exterior, in the pivotal scene with the housekeeper Miss Kenton (Emma Thompson), when she tries to see which book he is reading.
How he protects himself, desperate not to have his sentimental longings for romance discovered.
A masochist could occupy herself with a man like this for years.


At Job Lot, the Final Bargain Days
Signs inside the store announce: "50th Anniversary." But Day-Glo orange posters outside tell a different story: "Going out of business sale. Everything 40 percent off marked prices." And so a legendary outpost of the surplus-goods industry has come to a bittersweet end, simultaneously celebrating its birthday and its funeral.
"This store will be gone," Ray Oprysk, manager of the Job Lot chain's flagship store at 140 Church Street, told a customer who wanted to pick up carpets after New Year's.


Charlene C. Ying And Jon P. Wade
Charlene Cecilia Ying, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James W. Ying of Boca Raton, Fla., and Jon Patrick Wade, a son of Betty C. Connolly of Hastings, Neb., and Jack Wade of Smithfield, Va., plan to marry in June.
Ms.
Ying is an architect with Gensler &amp; Associates, an architectural firm in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College and received a master's degree in architecture from Harvard University.
Her father retired as the chairman of the Kendall Group, an investment company in Miami.


Secrets to a Long-Lasting Christmas Tree
SOMEWHERE between cookie baking, gift-wrapping and shopping, there will be time to think about the tree.
Its selection is often a family affair and the choice ends up being an evergreen that is the fullest, the tallest or the straightest one that can be found.
Of course, the tree that will last the longest is the one that is freshly cut, preferably from a "select-your-own" farm where the owner has learned that this sort of selling is a good Christmastime policy.
The family's tree selection will be tagged and after the money changes hands, the owner or a helper will come along with a saw and cut the fine tree down.
The last scene is the ride back home with the beaming family tucked inside the car and the freshly cut tree tied securely on the roof.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 19, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A woman tells about killing her husband nearly 30 years earlier.
2
44
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
3
5
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
4
4
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Warner, $5.99.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a serial killer in Washington.
5
1
DESIRE, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) The romance of a daring lady and a knight who battle to control an isle in medieval Britain.
6
9
THE KILLER ANGELS, by Michael Shaara. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A 1974 novel about the Battle of Gettysburg.
7
51
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
8
4
RED SQUARE, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The detective Arkady Renko returns to Moscow after the fall of Communism.
9
4
THE REMAINS OF THE DAY, by Kazuo Ishiguro. (Vintage, $11.) The life of an English butler and the "great gentleman" he served.
10
88
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/ Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
11
8
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $6.50.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
12
3
CLOSE COMBAT, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.99.) In Volume 6 of "The Corps," there are new challenges for the Marines in World War II.
13
2
PRIVATE PLEASURES, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A scientist's discovery results in sex and violence among a group of Floridians.
14
8
INADMISSIBLE EVIDENCE, by Philip Friedman. (Ivy, $5.99.) A prosecutor struggles to convict a real estate tycoon of murder.
15
92
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
7
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photos by Walter Iooss Jr. and observations by the retired basketball superstar.
2
14
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
4
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of murders.
4
528
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
5
8
SUBMARINE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $14.95.) A guided tour through a nuclear warship and the world of which it is a part.
6
33
THE CAT WHO CAME FOR CHRISTMAS, by Cleveland Amory. (Penguin, $8.95.) A self-styled curmudgeon's memoir of a cat.
7
114
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
8
1
OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.
9*
44
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
10
8
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
11
3
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy, as seen in the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
12
23
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
13*
18
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
14*
3
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
15
39
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
16*
11
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Bantam, $6.99.) The autobiography of the general.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
12
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
1
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1994. (World Almanac/Funk &amp; Wagnalls, $8.95.) The latest edition of the reference work.
3
1
THE CHICKENS ARE RESTLESS, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) A new collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
4
6
THE FAR SIDE GALLERY 4, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of cartoons.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 4, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


WHATEVER HAPPENED TO AIDS?
We will miss Jeffrey Schmalz and his fine reporting on AIDS ("Whatever Happened to AIDS?" Nov. 28).
He was eloquent on the personal pain and politics of the plague of our time.
I can't help but think he might be alive if he had covered a different story.
The story of hope in AIDS.
The story of the Salk vaccine, of homeopathy, acupuncture and vitamins.
The story of long-term survivors.


Hell of a Town
We know how many residents of New York City die in any given year (71,001 in 1992).
We know how many are alleged to have committed sins like murder or speeding (1,208 and 100,243 respectively, also in 1992).
But what we don't yet know, with any statistical certainty, is how many New Yorkers are going to go to Hell.
Surely, now that local priests have been suspected of knocking over armored cars, we deserve an answer more rigorous than merely "a lot."
We do know how many Alabamans are going to go to Hell.
As was recently revealed in The Birmingham News, the Southern Baptist Convention has commissioned a very serious nationwide study to determine precisely how many Americans, come Judgment Day, will be damned.
While the numbers are tightly held -- no one wants to set off a mass panic or, worse, a soul-searching spiritual debate conducted by Bill Moyers -- The News managed to get its hands on the figures for Alabama.
Exactly 46.1 percent of the state's citizens -- more than 1.86 million men, women and children -- will be sent to Hell provided they don't square things with God before they die.
The total is broken down county by county, proving that organized religion has come a long way from the days when no one could reliably calculate how many angels can dance on the head of a pin.
This should be a source of great solace.


EVIL FOR SALE
My father was a survivor of Dachau.
It was not until he was in the hospital with a terminal illness that he would even allude to the nightmare he had experienced.


It Never Gets Easy For Giants' Young
The word around the league is that the New England Patriots will make a big push to get Giants cornerback Mark Collins when the season is over.
The Patriots are so low under the salary cap they have enough room to buy Christmas presents for everyone in Boston.
So the Giants will be faced with trying to keep their star cornerback, an unrestricted free agent at season's end, from joining Bill Parcells.
George Young is the man guarding the exit door.
He will decide who will leave the Giants and who will stay.
In this new era of salary caps and free agency, an era that professional football has never seen before, the general manager takes on an increased role.
In the coming weeks and months, general managers can win games in the front office more than ever before.


In America; 'Pow! It Skinned Me'
The Hudson School is a remarkable little school in Hoboken, N.J., that insists its pupils learn a variety of languages and all about math and science and computers.
It also immerses the children in art and music and theater, and introduces them, among other things, to international travel and friends from abroad.
It's a private school, founded by a visionary named Suellen Newman, but it has a need-blind admissions policy, so a kid from a family that's broke has as good a chance of getting in as a kid whose family is rich.


When Trouble Comes Unforseen
Neither crisis was expected.
For one women, it came when a persistent cough turned life-threatening, leaving her hospitalized and prematurely ending her working life.
For another, it came after a series of downturns that culminated in a day when there wasn't even the money to buy diapers and milk for her two children.
For help, both women found themselves turning to agencies supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Articles, page 55.


A Flat Economy Is Forecast For the Island's Near Future
The Long Island economy will remain flat for the next few years, with a surge of job growth and industrial development around the turn of the century and through the year 2010, according to a study by the Long Island Regional Planning Board.
After World War II, Long Island had the fastest growing economy in the nation, the report said, but with the end of the cold war, growth has come to a standstill.
More than 100,000 jobs were lost over the last four and a half years, many of them high-paying jobs with military contractors.


SUNDAY: December 19, 1993; Go With the Grain
In Japan rice is sacred, much the way cars once were in America.
Consequently the Japanese have resisted foreign rice.
But Japan is now about to open its rice market to foreigners, a break with tradition that has enraged Japanese farmers.
They fear for their livelihood, of course.
But they may also fear that short-grain California rice will do to Japan what Japanese automobiles did to America -- undermine the national identity and sully the national soul.
There is no question that in the country of Honda and Toyota (the United States), traditional forms of car worship are in decline these days.
Unwashed cars, messy cars, cars used for nothing other than transportation abound.
Indeed, the only motor vehicle actively worshiped in this country is the Harley-Davidson motorcycle, made popular by Hell's Angels and now the favorite of a new generation of middle-age outlaws manque.
And if Hell's Angels are the true American patriots, the old chestnut about a refuge for scoundrels is more true than anyone imagined.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen110.17
109.20
123.07
per Dollar
German Mark1.7092
1.6973
1.5641
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.3398
1.3293
1.2753
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.4860
1.4945
1.5560
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold387.10
$383.50
$337.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
STELLA By Peter Wyden.
Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.
The woman of the title was a classmate of the author's in a Jewish school in prewar Berlin.
Ultimately, she made a horrific moral compromise: To save her parents and herself, she became a Nazi collaborator.
Last year our reviewer, Alexander Stille, called the book a "powerful and fascinating story."  THE ENGLISH PATIENT By Michael Ondaatje.
Vintage International, $11.
Four people are left in an abandoned Italian villa used as a hospital toward the end of World War II: a thief turned military spy, an emotionally scarred nurse, the Sikh soldier who is her lover, and, finally, a dying pilot burned beyond recognition, who may or may not be the Englishman he claims to be.
This novel, winner of Britain's Booker Prize and chosen one of the best books of 1992 by The New York Times Book Review, is "a tale of many pleasures -- an intensely theatrical tour de force, but grounded in Michael Ondaatje's strong feeling for distant times and places," Judith Grossman said here.
This feeling is also reflected in Mr.
Ondaatje's 1982 memoir, RUNNING IN THE FAMILY (Vintage International, $10), which describes the author's Dutch-Ceylonese ancestry and his return in the 1970's to Sri Lanka, where he was born.
One critic said, "His consciously blurred memory is the artistic triumph of this splendid book."  BOOK: A Novel By Robert Grudin.
Penguin, $10.
Anyone who has ever been associated with academia knows that what is dry and scholarly to others is life and death here.
Such is the case at the University of Washagon, where an unfashionably traditional professor is subjected to both intellectual and physical attack.
We "marvel at the cleverness of the author's structural artifice," Sven Birkerts said here last year.
More satire of university life is to be found in TILL THE FAT LADY SINGS, by Alisa Kwitney (Aaron Asher Books/Harper Perennial, $10), in which female Columbia students with various eating disorders grapple with questions of literature and love.
Last year our reviewer, Maxine Chernoff, found it "a bright and engrossing novel."  ARCHITECTURE: The Natural and the Manmade By Vincent Scully.
St.
Martin's, $24.95.
One of the most renowned educators in the field expounds on his favorite subject, surveying the history of human edifices and analyzing the evolving relationship between the landscape and what we build upon it.
"His book throws new light on human attitudes to nature and will make an indelible impression on anyone who cares about architecture," Sir Keith Thomas said here in 1991.
For those who care specifically about the buildings of the urban Southwest, there is L.A.
LOST &amp; FOUND: An Architectural History of Los Angeles, by Sam Hall Kaplan (Crown, $19), in which the author discusses certain forms indigenous to that city.
Helped by the work of the book's principal photographer, Julius Shulman, he "provides a lively, streamlined chronology," our reviewer, Julie V. Iovine, said in 1987.
Also out in paperback is FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT, by Meryle Secrest (Harper Perennial, $15), a biography that is more about the architect's life than his work.
Writing in these pages last year, Thomas S. Hines found the author at her best in analyzing the women surrounding Wright: "Ms. Secrest is so good at interpreting these relationships that her book reads at times like an upscale romance novel."  HER MONSTER By Jeff Collignon.
Soho, $10.
A grossly misshapen man isolates himself in a cabin, where he supports himself by writing fiction.
Ultimately, love -- in the form of a young woman who has never seen him but is interested in his plight -- comes knocking.
"The result is a moving and unforgettable first novel," Scott Bradfield said here last year.
ANNA: A Daughter's Life By William Loizeaux.
Arcade, $9.95.
This is a journal about the author's first child, born with a series of congenital defects that ultimately proved fatal.
Earlier this year our reviewer, Helen Epstein, said, "This is honest writing that chooses to risk pathos and embarrassment rather than rewrite reality."  MOTOR CITY By Bill Morris.
Washington Square/Pocket Books, $10.
At a Buick plant in the 1950's, the obsessions range from industrial espionage to Elvis.
The author has "a gift for delineating his characters' inner lives," Michiko Kakutani said in The New York Times last year.
KWANZAA: An African-American Celebration of Culture and Cooking By Eric V. Copage.
Quill/William Morrow, $12.
The author, an editor at The New York Times Magazine, describes his discovery of the meaning of this mid-winter, African-influenced festival in his own life, offering up anecdotes and extensive recipes.
In 1991 our reviewer, Vertamae Smart-Grosvenor, called the book "the best celebration of a holiday I've ever read."  WOMEN OF THE SILK By Gail Tsukiyama.
St.
Martin's, $11.95.
Before the rise of Communism in China, female workers were subject to other kinds of tyranny.
The heroine of this novel, Pei, is one of many who was forced by poverty to toil long hours in a silk factory.
Last year our reviewer, Fran Handman, found the book "straightforward and fast moving, its prose succinct and delicate."  SANTIAGO AND THE DRINKING PARTY By Clay Morgan.
Penguin, $10.
In this novel, the author interprets Latin America's reputation for being a land of the fantastic as a fiction spun by both natives and visitors for their own ends.
It is "an affectionate parody of magical realism," Ilan Stavans said here last year.
LAUREL GRAEBER


Streetscapes/115 West 95th Street; Where Virginia Prompted That Immortal Editorial
ON West 95th Street there's one thing residents want from Santa -- deliverance from the blight of five houses, vacant eyesores since the 1960's.
After years of lawsuits, one new owner is finally renovating two of the buildings, 138 and 140 West 95th, but two others, 125 and 133, are still rotting hulks.
So is 115 West 95th Street.
It was from No. 115 that 8-year-old Virginia O'Hanlon wrote a letter almost a century ago that elicited the celebrated reply, "Yes, Virginia, there is a Santa Claus."


Compendium Aims to Keep Local Money Local
The latest chapter in the Greater Harlem Chamber of Commerce's effort to sell Harlem's wares is a spiral-bound guide in red, purple and green, called "Harlem Means Business."
Its 80 pages cover everything from the history of Harlem to an overview of the community's major assets to a listing of businesses, including 10 art galleries, 30 funeral homes and one medical supply store.


World Markets; Westerners in Russia's Rough Weather
IMAGINE trying to launch a Russian investment fund last week.
That was the unenviable task facing the Framlington Group, a London-based fund manager that had spent a year setting up a plan to attract Western capital and invest it in small and medium-sized Russian enterprises.
Yet despite the political chaos that engulfed Moscow in the wake of last weekend's parliamentary elections, Framlington's launch went smoothly.
Along with two government-funded international agencies -- the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the World Bank's International Finance Corporation -- a hardy band of institutional investors, mostly from Britain, Europe and America, pledged more than $60 million to the fund, exceeding Framlington's $50 million goal.


The Return of Colonel North
ONE MORE MISSION  Oliver North Returns to Vietnam.
By Oliver L. North and David Roth.
Illustrated. 280 pp.
New York: Zondervan Publishing House/ HarperCollins Publishers. $22.


Pickings Still Slim In the Discard Pool
The avalanche of new free agents that some people had expected to swamp the winter signing market this week may not materialize.
Two to three months ago, some baseball executives were forecasting an unusually large number of players who would not be tendered contracts by tomorrow's deadline.
If a contract offer is tendered -- which means the offer is official -- the player remains bound to the club, and the club cannot cut that player's salary more than 20 percent.
Furthermore, the player has the option of salary arbitration and can end up with a higher salary than the club wants to play.


A New Gem Shines Bright in Washington Heights Area
Amid a sense of nostalgia and amazement, New York City high school track and field was reborn yesterday with the unveiling of an Olympic-style surface at the refurbished Armory Track Center on 168th Street in Washington Heights in Manhattan.
They came by the thousands -- athletes, coaches and spectators -- to witness the 40th annual Bishop Loughlin indoor games, the first major event held on the new six-lane, 200-meter Mondo track.
It is the same kind of surface used at the 1992 Barcelona Olympics.


Robert W. Cutler, 88, Manhattan Architect
Robert W. Cutler, who practiced architecture in Manhattan for more than 40 years and was a partner in the firm of Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill, died on Friday in the Heartland Nursing Center in Temple, Tex.
He was 88.
He died of complications following a stroke, said his wife, Morene Cutler.


Wary of Lawsuits, Brokers Turn Reticent on Schools
ANYONE shopping for a house these days is likely to find brokers reluctant to answer the question of which community has the best schools, particularly in the metropolitan suburbs.
While this is a major concern of a buyer, brokers know that an inappropriate answer could be considered a violation of the Fair Housing Law, which carries stiff penalties for violators.
So they are turning to professional educational consultants to provide such information or direct their clients to contact them.


Look at What Rice for Japan Will Cost Us
To the Editor:
After years of pressuring Japan to open its markets to rice imports, United States negotiators finally won a battle for freer trade at the expense of truth in advertising (Business Day, Dec. 8).


In Rememberance Of a Burial Ground
A long-forgotten chapter of black history was unearthed in 1991 when excavations for a Federal office building north of City Hall uncovered 415 graves.
The remains, now being studied at Howard University, were among those of an estimated 20,000 black people interred in the African Burial Ground in the 1700's.
Now, a competition is being held for a memorial to preserve the memory of the site and the people buried there.


A Question Of Inclusion
To the Editor:
I really loved your piece on kids' fashion sense ("The Clothes Ponies," Nov. 28).
I wondered, though, why, with eight pictures, I didn't see any child who was visibly nonwhite.
JUNETTE PINKNEY  New York


Fear Makes Powerful Sales Pitch In Gun Shops Around the Nation
Frightened by a spate of mass shootings and other seemingly random crimes and worried that new gun-control laws may make it all but impossible to obtain a firearm for self-defense or recreational use, many Americans are rushing to buy pistols, rifles and shotguns.
Firearms dealers, in informal interviews from coast to coast, reported a surge in sales in recent weeks, often to record levels.


A Dirt Gardener's List For an Earthy Holiday
I REALLY should write about something controversial (should gardeners stop using peat moss because the bogs are being depleted?), or just downright useful (which composters are the best for the city, suburban or country gardener?).
But I can't concentrate this week.
There are too many Sugar Plum Fairies in my head.
And they don't just dance, they talk: "Hey, if you don't get your tree this afternoon, all the good ones will be gone. Those gardener's hands of yours are disgusting; go get a manicure before the party. Did you call the 800 number for that gazing ball you wanted to give Cousin Janice for her garden?"


Stunned CBS Now Scrambling for A.F.C.
In the wake of the stunning raid by the Fox Network on the television rights to National Football Conference games, one of the two networks that built the fame and fortune of the National Football League was left yesterday with the prospect of being out of the business of televising professional football.
CBS, described by one senior executive as "shellshocked" at the loss of its 38-year-old relationship with the teams that made up the old National Football League, formally presented a bid to league officials yesterday for the rights to the games of the American Football Conference, which have been the property of NBC since the N.F.L.-A.F.L. merger took effect in 1970.


Lynn Rempalski, David Shay
Lynn Patrice Rempalski, a soprano with the Central City Chorus in New York, was married yesterday to David Shay, the founder and president of the Scanlon Shay Company, consultants on employee assistance, also in New York.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard officiated at the Church Center for the United Nations in New York.
Mrs.
Shay, 43, who graduated from the University of California at Irvine, sings under the name Lynn Faro.
She is a daughter of Constance Faro Rempalski of Laguna Niguel, Calif., and the late Edward A. Rempalski.


When Will We Learn to Buckle Up?
AT this late date, it would seem there is little left to say about seatbelts.
They are old technology, well proven as the most important safety item in an automobile, and they have been required in American cars for more than 25 years.
But accidents involving sports figures -- two of them in the last week -- show that America still has a lot to learn.


Cease-Fire in a War Against OTB
Turtle Bay residents are savoring what they consider a victory in their four-year struggle against the Offtrack Betting Corporation.
The Dinkins administration has agreed, in its waning days, not to open a grand new OTB parlor with a simulcast theater on Second Avenue at 52d Street.
But a victory party may be premature.
An OTB spokeswoman, saying the plan was "on hold," voiced confidence that the Giuliani administration would allow it to proceed.


For Byrd
To the Sports Editor:
Just what is it about Dennis Byrd that Robert Lipsyte finds so offensive?
Byrd's crime must have been pretty serious to have provoked Lipsyte to accuse him of having caused his own injury and to complain about the money spent on his rehabilitation, but exactly what was it?
Byrd's unashamed love for his wife and family?
His having had the strength and courage to come all the way back from a nightmarish injury?
Or is it simply his unswerving faith in God?
STEVEN MASON  Forest Hills, Queens


Ideas &amp; Trends; Old Laws Have a Way Of Learning New Tricks
THROUGH an evolutionary process that seems peculiar to broad-based laws that are enacted to combat one set of problems and end up being applied to a host of others, the Federal racketeering act now finds itself the weapon of choice in the struggle against violence at abortion clinics.
Fashioned in 1970 as a tool against the mob, the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organization Act, or RICO, had already undergone several metamorphoses before it was pulled into the contentious abortion debate.
It is now routinely cited in ordinary commercial disputes and in criminal cases far afield from organized crime.
This month, the Supreme Court heard arguments in a case that will decide whether advocates of abortion rights can use the law against groups that have staged unruly demonstrations at abortion clinics.


Missing White House File Is Sought
Federal investigators are trying to determine whether a file relating to a failed Arkansas savings-and-loan owner and his investment firm was taken from the White House office of Vincent W. Foster Jr. after he committed suicide in July, law-enforcement officials said today.
The officials said investigators had been told that Mr.
Foster, the deputy White House counsel who died of a single gunshot wound to the head on July 20, kept a file in his office on James McDougal, the savings and loan owner and a former business associate of President Clinton, and on the Whitewater Development Corporation, a real estate investment firm under scrutiny for possible financial fraud in a separate Justice Department inquiry in Arkansas.


Some Success in Fighting Drunk Driving
SGT.
Bruce B. Bellom still remembers a Friday night two years ago when a 21-year-old man and his 18-year-old sister died in a grisly automobile accident and became two of the county's 16 alcohol-related traffic fatalities in 1991.
This year at the holiday season, Sergeant Bellom, a patrol administrator with the Westchester Department of Public Safety, said he hopes stepped-up efforts to keep drunk drivers off the roads will prevent similar accidents.
Early on that winter night two years ago, according to police records, the 21-year-old man, his sister and a 21-year-old woman were traveling east on the Cross County Parkway when their vehicle sideswiped another car, crashed through a guard rail and fell 150 feet to the street below, where it burst into flames.
Autopsy reports revealed that the driver -- the brother -- had a blood alcohol concentration of .20 percent, twice the legal limit.
The unrelated passenger was thrown from the car and sustained serious injuries.


Transforming the Murky Gowanus Canal
It may be hard to envision the Gowanus Canal, with its reputation as an open sewer running through an abandoned industrial wasteland, being transformed into a trendy waterfront with marinas, restaurants, shops and condominiums.
But that's exactly what neighborhood advocates have in mind, and they are making progress.
City officials are moving ahead with a $5 million project to clean the canal, which they believe will attract developers interested in the area.
On Tuesday, city officials met with prospective bidders for the $1 million project to build motors and a propeller for the canal's "flushing" tunnel, which opened in 1911 and broke down decades ago.


Bridget Murphy, Andrew Cohen
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Murphy of Minneapolis have announced the engagement of their daughter Bridget Mary Murphy to Andrew Steven Cohen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard G. Cohen of New York.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Murphy, 26, is a customer service representative in the direct mail division of Japs-Olson, a printing company in Minneapolis of which her father is the president.


New, Stringent Acid-Rain Proposals Irritate Utilities Industry
Responding to lawsuits by New York State and three environmental groups, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency has proposed rules that would further reduce acid rain by depriving electric utilities of some of the allowances permitting them to emit pollutants.
The new regulations, proposed without fanfare last month, have been denounced by the utility industry.
Utility companies say the rules are being issued so late that there is no way of making them a part of the utilities' planning for an acid-rain cleanup that by law must begin in 1995.


Deals and Discounts
HOLIDAY RATES: More than 100 Holiday Inn hotels in 17 European countries are offering a room rate of $79 a night or less to Jan. 14, subject to availability. (The rates have been popular, but as of early December they were generally still available, especially in major cities, according to a company official.) The rate is protected against currency fluctuations and includes service charges and value-added tax.
Participating hotels include locations in London, Paris, Amsterdam, Cologne, Athens, Rome, Lisbon, Geneva, Istanbul and Brussels.
Call (800) 465-4329.
ICELANDAIR TO EUROPE: Icelandair has a $368 round-trip air fare to Luxembourg from Kennedy International Airport in New York and Baltimore-Washington International Airport, good for travel Monday to Thursday from Jan. 3 to March 15.
All flights stop in Reykjavik, Iceland.
Tickets must be purchased seven days in advance.
Passengers must stay at least 7 and not more than 14 days.
The airline also has other programs; two passengers traveling together who pay a higher fare of $398, for example, can get a free use of a rental car for three days in Luxembourg.
For more information, call (800) 223-5500.
CARIBBEAN ANNIVERSARY: The all-suite Point Pleasant Resort on St.
Thomas is offering a Champagne Anniversary Program through Dec. 22 1994.
For every year of marriage, a couple receives an equivalent percentage discount on the nightly rate.
A couple married 50 years, for example, will pay $130 a night to April 15 and $97.50 from April 16 to Dec. 22; those married 30 years will pay $182 and $136.50, respectively.
That rate includes junior suite accommodations with a kitchen and private balcony; use of a car four hours daily, and a bottle of champagne.
The resort has two beaches and three pools.
Couples must request the rate when making reservations and show their marriage certificate or other evidence on check-in.
A limited number of suites is available at this rate.
Call (800) 524-2300.
WASHINGTON STAY: The 146-room Washington Courtyard by Marriott, formerly the Quality Hotel Central, is offering an $89 room rate through Jan. 15, subject to availability.
It is at 1900 Connecticut Avenue, N.W., four blocks north of Dupont Circle; for reservations, call (800) 321-2211.
SONOMA GETAWAY: Hotels in the Sonoma Valley of Northern California are offering a variety of off-season discounts and other specials from now to April.
Properties taking part in the program, called Sonoma Valley Supersavers, include the 17-room Sonoma Hotel, (707) 996-2996, where rates through March are $60 to $95 a night Sunday to Thursday (weekend and summer rates range from $75 to $120); and the 27-room El Dorado Hotel, (707) 996-3030, where rates through April are $85 to $90 on weekdays and $100 to $110 on weekends (spring and summer rates are $105 to $115 on weekdays, $135 to $145 on weekends).
The El Dorado also offers a weeknight package for $120 a couple that includes a room and a $50 certificate toward dinner in its restaurant.
For more information, call the Sonoma Valley Visitors Bureau at (707) 996-1090.
JANET PIORKO


Traveling to Camden
In a state frequently given to bizarre political playmaking, it should come as little surprise that a professional basketball team is at the center of the latest political dispute in New Jersey.
But a decision by the owner of the Philadelphia 76ers of the National Basketball Association to begin talks about moving his team across the Delaware River to Camden has put Gov.
Jim Florio and Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman at odds publicly and set off a political debate.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on Nov. 28 about the Tour de France bicycle race misstated the telephone number for Breaking Away Bicycle Tours, of Manhattan Beach, Calif.
It is (310) 545-5118.


Ideas for Stuffing Pies and Stockings
THERE are those for whom Christmas isn't Christmas without a whole ham or a roast goose or, for dessert, buche de Noel.
For me, the holiday season isn't complete without mince pies.
In England, the tradition goes, when you bite into the first pie of the year, which is filled with a mixture of nuts, dried fruits, suet and spices -- all soaked in brandy -- you get a wish.
The Puritans frowned on these pies, which used to be boat-shape, representing the cradle of the baby Jesus.
They condemned them as "popish" and claimed the souls of those who ate them would go to hell.
The warnings were ignored, and later Samuel Johnson also discounted the supposed damning effects of mince pies, particularly regarding digestion: "We have never been witnesses of the animosities excited by the use of mince pies and plum porridge, nor seen what the abhorrence was of those who could seek them at all other times of the year, yet shrink from them at Christmas."


School Boards: A Schedule Of Meetings
DISTRICT 1  Jan. 5; P.S. 61, 610 East 12th Street, Manhattan; (212) 602-9765.
Superintendent: William Ubinas DISTRICT 2  Dec. 21; P.S. 158, 1458 York Avenue, at 78th Street, Manhattan, Manhattan; (212) 337-8712.
Superintendent: Anthony Alvarado DISTRICT 3  Jan. 5, P.S. 75, 735 West End Avenue, Manhattan (212) 678-2845.
Acting Superintendent: James Mazza DISTRICT 4  Jan. 19, P.S. 155, 319 East 117th Street, Manhattan; (212) 860-5910.
Superintendent: Marcelino Rodriguez DISTRICT 5  Jan. 20, P.S. 133, 2121 Fifth Avenue, at 131st Street, Manhattan; (212) 769-7600.
Superintendent: Dr.
Bertrand Brown DISTRICT 6  Jan. 19, P.S. 98, 512 West 212th Street, Manhattan; (212) 795-9549.
Superintendent: Anthony Amato DISTRICT 7  Jan. 20, P.S. 25, 811 East 149th Street, the Bronx; (718) 292-0164.
Superintendent: Pedro Crispo DISTRICT 8  (Tentative) Jan. 12, P.S. 182, 650 White Plains Road, the Bronx; (718) 409-8801.
DISTRICT 9  Dec. 22, Community Elementary School 126, 175 West 166th Street, the Bronx; (718) 681-8558.
Superintendent: Felton Johnson DISTRICT 10  Dec. 21, District Office, 1 Fordham Plaza, the Bronx; (718) 584-8338.
Superintendent: John Reehill DISTRICT 11  Dec. 21, P.S. 68, 4011 Monticello Avenue, the Bronx; (718) 519-2647.
Superintendent: Joseph Kovaly DISTRICT 12  Jan.26, C.S. 198, 1189 Tinton Avenue, the Bronx; (718) 328-2310.
Superintendent: Robert Henry DISTRICT 13  Dec. 21, P.S. 54, 195 Sanford Street, Brooklyn; (718) 636-6204.
Superintendent: Dr. Lester Young DISTRICT 14  Not available
Superintendent: Mario DeStephano; (718) 963-4800.
DISTRICT 15  Dec. 22, P.S. 10, 511 Seventh Avenue, Brooklyn; (718) 330-9283.
Superintendent: William Casey DISTRICT 16  Dec. 22, 1010 Layfette Avenue, Room 224, Brooklyn; (718) 919-0323.
Superintendent: Mildred Jones DISTRICT 17  Jan. 19, location to be announced
Superintendent: Bernice Wiley; (718) 604-4302.
DISTRICT 18  Jan. 4, Early Childhood Center, East 101st Street at Flatland Avenue, Brooklyn; (718) 927-5152.
Superintendent: Dr.
Harvey Garner DISTRICT 19  Dec. 21, P.S. 13, 557 Pennsylvania Avenue, Brooklyn; (718) 272-8033.
Superintendent: Levander Lilly DISTRICT 20  Dec. 20, P.S. 105, 1031 59th Street, Brooklyn; (718) 692-5231.
Superintendent: Ralph A. Fabrizio DISTRICT 21  Jan. 19, J.H.S. 43, 1401 Emmons Avenue, Brooklyn; (718) 714-2523.
Superintendent: Donald Weber DISTRICT 22  Jan. 5, P.S. 286, 2525 Harting Street, Brooklyn; (718) 368-8048.
Superintendent: John T. Comer DISTRICT 23  Jan. 27, P.S. 284, 220 Watkins Street, Brooklyn; (718) 270-8636.
Superintendent: Michael Vega DISTRICT 24  Jan. 27, P.S. 153, 60-02 60th Lane, Maspeth, Queens; (718) 417-2693.
Superintendent: Joseph Quinn DISTRICT 25  Jan. 12, P.S. 200, 70-30 164th Street, Queens; (718) 480-4200.
Superintendent: Dr.
Arthur Greenburg DISTRICT 26  Jan. 6, 61-15 Oceania Street, Bayside, Queens; (718) 631-6981.
Superintendent: Dr.
Aaron Friedman DISTRICT 27  Jan. 20, P.S. 64, 8201 101st Avenue, Ozone Park, Queens; (718) 642-5805.
Superintendent: Dr.
Beverly L. Hall DISTRICT 28  Jan. 10, 108-55 69th Avenue, Forest Hills, Queens; (718) 830-5775.
Superintendent: C. Raseh Nagi DISTRICT 29  Jan. 20, I.S. 238, 88-15 82d Street, Hollis, Queens; (718) 978-5961.
Superintendent: Celestine Miller DISTRICT 30  Jan. 11, P.S. 85, 2370 31st Street; Long Island City, Queens; (718) 777-4680.
Superintendent: Dr.
Angelo Gimondo DISTRICT 31  Jan. 10, I.S. 72, 33 Ferndale Avenue, Staten Island; (718) 273-9559.
Superintendent: Christy Cugini DISTRICT 32  Jan. 20, P.S. 384, 242 Cooper Street, Brooklyn; (718) 574-1203.
Superintendent: Felix Vasquez


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Rockets Near a Knicks Record Houston pulled within two victories of the best record in National Basketball Association history by a team with one defeat and pushed Dallas closer to a record for consecutive losses as Hakeem Olajuwon scored 28 points in a 104-93 decision last night.
The Mavericks (1-21) lost their 18th game in a row, two short of the N.B.A. record losing streak set by Philadelphia in 1973.
The Rockets, now 21-1, can tie the 1969-70 New York Knicks for the most victories with one defeat at 23-1 with triumphs next week against San Antonio and Denver. (AP)


Secrets to a Long-Lasting Christmas Tree
SOMEWHERE between cookie baking, gift-wrapping and shopping, there will be time to think about the tree.
Its selection is often a family affair and the choice ends up being an evergreen that is the fullest, the tallest or the straightest one that can be found.
Of course, the tree that will last the longest is the one that is freshly cut, preferably from a "select-your-own" farm where the owner has learned that this sort of selling is a good Christmastime policy.
The family's tree selection will be tagged and after the money changes hands, the owner or a helper will come along with a saw and cut the fine tree down.
The last scene is the ride back home with the beaming family tucked inside the car and the freshly cut tree tied securely on the roof.


Atlanta's Olympic Park Plan Reveals The Complications of Urban Renewal
Midway between Atlanta's surprise designation as the site of the next Summer Olympics and July 1996, when perhaps two million people will descend on Atlanta for the Games, time is running out for the grand dreams of urban renaissance that the Olympics fostered here.
And nothing to date has brought home the political, economic and racial complications that come with trying to mount an event as big as the Olympics in an American inner city as a proposal to bulldoze a ragged, 72-acre swath of downtown Atlanta for a park that could provide the focal point for the Games.


In Return for a Child's Treasure, a Christmas Surprise
A FEW weeks ago, our Park Slope neighbor Martha offered to give my husband and me a few free hours on a Saturday morning.
She invited our daughter, Kate, who is 6, to go with her to the farmer's market at Grand Army Plaza.
Normally Kate and I go to market together.
We like to haggle with the maple sugar man or taste the hot cider.
Often, we bring home more than we can carry.
In truth, I wanted to go with her that morning.
But I gave her $5 and asked her to buy apples, something for herself and a surprise for me.


'Fair-Weather Fans' Can't Stop a Deluge
At least Johnny Mitchell should be satisfied.
Earlier in the week, the Jets' impetuous tight end chided the fans, not so much for their lack of support but for their lack of noise at home games.
"It's sad that we have fair-weather fans here," Mitchell said.


Corrections
An entry on Nov. 21 in the New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks column referred erroneously to the current paperback edition of "The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes," by Vincent Starrett.
It is not the first; a paperback edition was published by Pinnacle in 1975.


The 18th-Century Art of Decorating Palaces
BARNUM'S FORERUNNERS IN 18th-century France produced exotic circuses, which were imaginatively emblazoned in tapestries.
A Beauvais weaving at the Metropolitan Museum of Art depicts a parading camel, musicians plucking zithers, an acrobat climbing a tightrope and a tiger sitting near a cat.
Thus is the lighthearted spirit of the Rococo style clearly established in the museum's Florence Gould galleries for 18th-century European decorative arts, which opened two weeks ago in the now-completed Henry R. Kravis decorative-arts wing.
"That generation of designers wanted to be playful," said Olga Raggio, head of the museum's department of European sculpture and decorative arts, who oversaw the selection and organization of the items.
There are four galleries, each of which will house permanent exhibitions devoted to a particular style -- Baroque, Rococo, Neo-Classical and Empire.
Tapestries reflect the style of each gallery.
Florence Gould, the French woman for whom the galleries were named, died in 1983; her foundation provided the money for them.


Ideas for Stuffing Pies and Stockings
THERE are those for whom Christmas isn't Christmas without a whole ham or a roast goose or, for dessert, buche de Noel.
For me, the holiday season isn't complete without mince pies.
In England, the tradition goes, when you bite into the first pie of the year, which is filled with a mixture of nuts, dried fruits, suet and spices -- all soaked in brandy -- you get a wish.
The Puritans frowned on these pies, which used to be boat-shape, representing the cradle of the baby Jesus.
They condemned them as "popish" and claimed the souls of those who ate them would go to hell.
The warnings were ignored, and later Samuel Johnson also discounted the supposed damning effects of mince pies, particularly regarding digestion: "We have never been witnesses of the animosities excited by the use of mince pies and plum porridge, nor seen what the abhorrence was of those who could seek them at all other times of the year, yet shrink from them at Christmas."


As Reality Sinks In, Knicks Look at Options
Most basketball teams with a 15-5 record would be content, not concerned.
The Knicks, however, are worried after Friday's 98-86 loss to the Chicago Bulls.
The reality that Doc Rivers has been lost for the season with a knee injury has begun to sink in.
Charles Smith, the regular starting small forward, is not expected back until February.
And Friday's loss represented another Knicks failure against a quality team.


Ms. Roth, Mr. Wasserstein
Jodi Lynn Roth, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Roth of Fair Lawn, N.J., was married last evening to Adam J. Wasserstein, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin Wasserstein of New York.
Rabbi Richard Thaler performed the ceremony at the Sutton Place Synagogue in New York.
The bride, 26, is studying for a master's degree in public and private management at Yale University.
She graduated from Tufts University.


O Holy Rating: A Television Christmas
ONCE, DECADES AGO, I HAD A Christmas experience that I suppose was spiritual.
I was a 7-year-old altar boy at midnight Mass on Christmas Eve.
The organist in the choir loft began playing "O Holy Night" and, just for that evening, was joined by a violinist.
As the two instruments dovetailed in exquisite harmony, I grasped for a brief moment what some people call the true meaning of Christmas.
Then I got older.


Church Works From Ellington
"DUKE ELLINGTON is the greatest, most original composer America has ever had," says David Berger, director of the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra, "and it's very strange that so little of his music is performed that aren't the standards." Mr.
Berger has organized an event that focuses on a little-heard aspect of Ellington's jazz genius, his religious music.
The program, called "The Sacred Concert," will consist of three Ellington jazz compositions.
Each of the pieces was intended as a spiritual tribute, not holiday music, Mr.
Berger said, and each was first performed in a special church setting: Grace Cathedral in San Francisco in 1965, the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York in 1968, and Westminster Abbey in London in 1973, the year before his death.


Waiting for Giuliani to Keep Engine Company Promise
Campaigning for the mayoralty, Rudolph W. Giuliani made a promise to Richmond Hill: if elected, he would address the neighborhood's No. 1 concern and reopen Fire Engine Co. 294.
Now Richmond Hill, which voted overwhelmingly for Mr.
Giuliani, is waiting for the Mayor-elect to come through on his promise.


POSTINGS: Snug Harbor Cultural Center; An Ornate Rotunda Has Been Restored
They are very 19th century, Victorian-era murals with Italianate motifs of nautical themes, mythological characters, flora and fauna framed in decorative cartouches, wall borders with trompe l'oeil swags of nautical rope and tackle.
They were painted in 1884, in the Rotunda and on the vaulted ceiling of the Main Hall of Sailors Snug Harbor on Staten Island, the first maritime home for retired sailors in the United States.
Sailors Snug Harbor, off Richmond Avenue in the New Brighton section of Staten Island, is now the Snug Harbor Cultural Center.
Neglect for many years had left its murals dirt-encrusted and almost completely black.
The Rotunda dome was damaged, and one day in June 1991 four square feet of the plaster ceiling crashed to the floor.


MAIL-ORDER AMERICA
Some men may have belonged to "A generation that gleaned some of its earliest information about sex by scrutinizing the pages of prosthetic-looking bras and briefs in the Sears catalogue." But for those of us brought up in New York City, nothing could compare to the titillating lingerie ads in The New York Times Magazine.
For a 12-year-old in those pre-Playboy days, that was the real thing.
MARTIN D. ROBBINS Toledo, Ohio


Farrakhan Urges Black Cleanup of Violence
After serving as the catalyst for a bitter debate in this year's mayoral contest, the Rev.
Louis Farrakhan finally made his postponed public address yesterday, combining a message of black pride with a denunciation of what he called the corrupted moral tenor of the nation.
In a fiery speech, Mr.
Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam, told an audience of nearly 25,000 in the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan of the need for black people to take greater responsibility for addressing the violence in the black community and the necessity to develop stronger spiritual discipline.


Seles on Road Back: Uncertainty Remains
She was stabbed in April, she was despondent in August, and she'd like to play the role of the phoenix, and the more familiar role as defending champion, next month at the Australian Open, the Grand Slam tournament she has won for the last three years.
Monica Seles is weary of being the sidelined victim of a violent crime designed to cripple her career and restore Steffi Graf to supremacy.


Drunk Driving And the Law
In response to "Do Drunken Drivers Get Railroaded?" and Nancy Brach's reply ("On the Testing of Drunken Drivers," Nov. 21 letter to the New Jersey editor):
Frankly, I believe Ms.
Brach's defense of New Jersey's method of prosecuting drunken driving laws missed the article's point.
More directly, I believe that the article expressed the very pertinent question of "To what extent, to what costs and to what benefit shall D.W.I. laws be enacted by our legislatures and be enforced by the police?"


Slaying Adds to the Grim Total in East New York
By most recent measures, the murder rate in New York City, though still high, has declined in the last year.
So has the overall crime rate.
But these trends appear to have little to do with East New York, Brooklyn.
On Friday night, at 9:49 P.M., the police recorded the slaying of Wonika Adams, 14.
She was the 11th homicide victim in eight days in the 75th Precinct in East New York, bringing the year's total there to 122, already 33 percent more than in all of last year.


F.Y.I.
The Dairy Ferries
Q.
How did the body of water known as the Buttermilk Channel, between Red Hook, Brooklyn, and Governors Island, get its name?


Q AND A
Houseboats in Arizona
Q.
Could you give me any information about renting a houseboat on Lake Powell, Arizona?
And what sort of weather can I expect at different times of the year? -- Joseph Balker, Exeter, Calif.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Wednesday
Gross domestic product, 3d qtr., % change
2.7
2.7
Thursday
Durable-goods orders, Nov., % change
2.6
1.6
Personal income, Nov., percent change
0.6
0.6
Personal consumption, Nov., % change
0.8
0.4
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
330
330
This Week's Developments
Tuesday
Federal Reserve Open Market Committee meeting
Two-year Treasury note auction
Wednesday
Five-year Treasury note auction
Thursday
Previous F.O.M.C. minutes released
Friday
Christmas Eve holiday


On Opening Day, a Helping Hand on the Ice


3 New Golf Courses Open in Hawaii
Hawaii-bound golfers can sample three new courses on Maui and Lanai, with a total of 36 new holes.
If that math doesn't seem quite right, it's because of the way that the Makena Golf Club on Maui has developed its new South and North courses: It split its former Makena Golf Course in two, and added nine new holes to each half of the old course.
The new 72-par courses are designed by Robert Trent Jones Jr.; both are championship level and nearly 7,000 yards long.


Maria Laurino and Anthony Shorris
FOUR years ago, Maria Laurino, who was writing an article for The Village Voice about New York City's budget deficit, requested an interview with Anthony Shorris, the Finance Commissioner for the departing Koch administration.
They agreed to meet at the Cedar Tavern, a funky Greenwich Village bar where the air seems to date to the Lindsay administration.
"I always dreaded Village Voice reporters because they were very tough on Koch," said Mr.
Shorris, 36.
"For two hours she tried to pull out dark secrets about the Koch administration, which she failed to do. Mostly, we laughed a lot and talked about lots of things besides the city budget. She didn't get the story, but she got me."


Celebrating a Dickens Christmas
DICKENS is alive, to begin with.
There is no doubt whatever about that.
And so are Scrooge and Bob Cratchit and Tiny Tim.
Marley's Ghost is alive, if that's possible for a ghost.
They will appear in Historic Speedwell's intimate production of "A Christmas Carol," but there is more to the event than that.
The entire presentation is called "Dickens in the Parlor," and it offers a play within a play.
An audience of about 25 will be cast as guests in the home of Charles Dickens, who will greet them at the door after they have followed the lantern-lighted path to his 19th-century mansion.
Dickens family members and friends will guide them to seats next to the fireplace and then join the author in one of his traditional parlor play stagings of his classic Christmas tale.
Later, Dickens will invite all to join him in refreshments, including a bowl of smoking bishop, one of his favorite libations, a hot, sweet drink of citrus-flavored port.
This is the third year that the 150-year-old "Christmas Carol" has been presented by Historic Speedwell, a nonprofit organization that has restored the seven-acre 19th-century Vail estate and maintains it as a museum.
The picturesque setting includes a pond and eight historic buildings.
One is the Vail Mansion, where the play takes place and which was probably built a few years before Dickens's birth in Portsmouth, England, in 1812.
Another is a factory where Samuel Morse perfected and first demonstrated his telegraph with the assistance of Alfred Vail in 1838.
Thoroughly Researched
The museum's theatrical production is a thoroughly researched historical demonstration with authentic costumes.
"The performance is very different than any theater presentation -- this is the way Dickens would do it," said Joanne Catlett, the curator of Historic Speedwell.
"We've tried to be true to Charles Dickens's home theatrical productions. He would invite his family and friends to portray characters and, for the 'Christmas Carol,' he would narrate and play one or two spirit roles."
The play's director, Joann Walukonis of Victory Gardens, in Morris County, said, "It's an interesting thing to do." Like most of the 18-member troupe, Ms.
Walukonis, a computer systems analyst, is a volunteer with community theater experience.
Each cast member has at least two parts to play, she said at a recent rehearsal.
Besides their roles in "A Christmas Carol," where some already have two parts, they must also portray members or friends of the Dickens family.
"It won't be that we'll be presenting the cast when the show starts," Ms.
Walukonis said.
"When the audience walks in, they'll already be there as part of the household. Each will have to assume a role of a cousin or whatever of Dickens and mix with the guests."
Pat Erhardt of Parsippany, an account executive who portrays Dickens and the Ghosts of Christmas Past and Present, said, "For me, it's a challenge." Mr.
Erhardt carried Dickens's biography to rehearsal.
He said his theatrical challenges started at age 6 when he wrote and acted in a summer camp play and continued through productions at the University of Notre Dame.
As Dickens, he must convince the audience members from the moment they enter the old mansion that they have come to a holiday party at Dickens's home and will be seeing that play about "the strange conversion of Ebenezer Scrooge."
Jim Boskey, a Seton Hall University law professor, plays William Macready, who, as Dickens tells his guests, is a friend of his and a "thespian of great note." Macready, in turn, plays Scrooge in the hourlong one-act play version of the story, which retains all the key elements and almost all of the "bah humbugs."
Jim Rorke of Lake Hiawatha, a licensed practical nurse, is stage manager and also plays a couple of minor roles.
"That's the way it is in community theater," he said.
Mr.
Rorke even became a talent scout, recommending Mark Phelan of Boonton for the important part of Fred, Scrooge's nephew.
Asked for a critique of the performance of 7-year-old Cameron Denning in the role of Tiny Tim, Ms.
Walukonis thought for a moment and said: "He's adorable. He's absolutely adorable. That's my favorite part of directing this show -- the wonderful kids. Cameron is playing Tiny Tim, and his brother Michael is playing Tiny Tim's brother. Last year we had a girl doing Tiny Tim. No boys showed up for the auditions."
Aspiring cast members, she said, usually come to auditions with an open mind, ready to take any role, but some are more narrowly focused.
"I've always wanted to play my role of the Ghost of Marley," said Mark Yablonsky of Hopatcong, an employee of the division of motor vehicles.
"I've been preparing for this for the better part of 20 years. When I first saw the Alastair Sim film version of 'A Christmas Carol' as a boy, I was terrified of Marley, but then I began to listen to what he had to say."
The performance schedule of "A Christmas Carol," listing shows on Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 P.M., concludes this afternoon.
Historic Speedwell is at 333 Speedwell Avenue in Morristown.
Reservations are required and may be made by calling (201) 540-0211.


The Executive Computer; A Way to Rate Employee Job Performance More Effectively
IT'S A familiar scenario.
The manager dreads writing employee performance reviews, and not just because they take up time.
Hoping to be thought of as a good person, the manager sidesteps uncomfortable criticism and ends up concocting a bland appraisal that lacks detail, substance or guidance for the employee.
The employee, who recalls that a co-worker got sacked soon after receiving a positive job review, is demoralized despite being praised as a "team player" who "does a nice job."


Under the Tree
AMERICAN FESTIVAL CAFE +  (212) 246-6699; 20 West 50th Street, at Rockefeller Center; $$; all major credit cards
The stunning setting of Rockefeller Center, with its giant Christmas tree and its glass-enclosed restaurant complex wrapped around the ice rink, is one of the most festive and diverting spots in town during the holidays.
The straightforward menu at this cheerful, commodious American cafe offers pleasing fare at moderate prices.
Good starters are the grilled vegetable plate, applejack onion soup and crab cake with tartar sauce.
Entrees include salads, pastas, grilled fish and chicken, burgers and sandwiches.
The cafe offers "Breakfast With Santa"; reservations are required. (Article: 6/13/93)


Commercial Property/The Shifting Nature of 14th St.; The Hub of Change Is Union Square
THINGS are hopping around Union Square these days.
Bradlees, the big regional discounter, has leased the former Mays department store building, which has stood empty on 14th Street between Broadway and University Place since the spring of 1991.
Toys 'R' Us is going into three floors at 32 Union Square East, near 16th Street, where Kiddie City used to be.
House of Blues, a jazz club, will soon open at 20 Union Square East, the old American Savings Bank building on 15th Street.


The Exquisite Vs. the Awful To the Editor:  I can picture Richard Taruskin in a debate with Ross Perot: "You're lower middle class. Case closed." Mr. Taruskin's approach is actually very much in the Horowitz mold: take a theme and blow it out of all proportion, until it becomes grotesque and barely recognizable. Thus, a statement that seems self-evident to any trained musician -- that there is an integrity to the melodic lines and structures put to paper by a composer and that this integrity deserves consideration and respect -- is inflated into a grand and rigid posture, antimusical in nature.


Giuliani Aide Hears Pleas On Drug Magnet
A city-run building at 233 West 15th Street has become a magnet for drug dealing and other crimes, residents say, leading one local leader to describe the block between Seventh and Eighth Avenues as "a free-for all." There was a murder in the building in October and several recent shootings and muggings on the street.
Concern about the building drew much of the attention last week when Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani dispatched a representative, Adam Walinsky, to speak to more than 100 people who gathered at St.
Vincent's Hospital at the invitation of the West 15th Street Block Associations and the Chelsea/ Village Partnership.


Correction
An article last Sunday about Rockefeller Center referred incorrectly to the status of a Lazard Freres move.
The firm expects to move from One Rockefeller Plaza into 30 Rockefeller Plaza; it does not now occupy space in 1251 Avenue of the Americas.
The article also included incorrect 1992 gross revenue figures supplied by Rockefeller Centerfor the 12 buildings in the real estate investment trust.
The gross was $229 million, not $122.4 million.


Communities Study Port Chester's Fight Over Topless Bar
EVERY night there are two live shows at the Diamond Club in Port Chester, both sanctioned by the First Amendment of the Constitution.
Inside the club, in darkness interrupted by bursts of strobe light, two young women in G-strings, high heels and elbow-length gloves gyrate to music on two small stages.
Male customers drinking around the stages push dollar bills between the women's breasts.
Outside the club -- which sits at the end of a shopping strip of three empty storefronts and a chicken-and-ribs restaurant -- a group of protesters picket the strip bar, carrying signs that read, "No Porn in Port Chester" and "Topless Supporters, Leave Town."


The Bittersweet Smell of Success
TONY CURTIS  The Autobiography.
By Tony Curtis and Barry Paris.
Illustrated. 352 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $23.


The World; Regional Trade Makes Global Deals Go Round
ASSORTED presidents, prime ministers and political poo-bahs rushed to congratulate themselves last week on the initialing of the new General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which ended seven years of bargaining only hours before a self-imposed deadline.
Alain Carignon, France's Minister of Communications, called it "a great and beautiful victory for Europe and for French culture." Striking a more statesmanlike pose, Peter Sutherland, GATT's Director General, celebrated the choice of "openness and cooperation instead of uncertainty and conflict."
But all that gush raises an awkward question: If global agreement is, in fact, the holy grail of trade liberalization, why have the last three American Presidents campaigned so fiercely for a separate regional trade agreement for North America, and why is Bill Clinton beating the drums for a separate pact linking the Asian economies to the Americas?


Steady Price Rises For Trips to China
China may still officially be a Communist country, but the law of supply and demand is being felt in its travel industry.
With the number of visitors steadily rising in the last few years, the cost of visiting China has increased, in some cases by as much as 20 percent.
This year a two-week tour offered by Chinasmith, a New York-based tour operator, cost about $3,840 a person, double occupancy.


Trick Question; In Foreign Affairs, Clinton Faces Tests He Can't Study For
THERE is an old saying that experience is what you get from not having it when you needed it, and Bill Clinton is about to get a lot of foreign policy experience as he confronts a Russia that no longer necessarily seems destined for democracy and free markets.
In his first year as President, Mr.
Clinton has excelled in foreign policy when the emphasis has been on trade and economics.
But the political uncertainty now looming in Russia, after a surge by nationalists and Communists in last week's election, is not easily navigated with spreadsheet diplomacy or lawyerly negotiations.


When Is 'Unique' Truly 'Unique'?
To the Editor:
"A Magazine Unbound" (Dec. 12) reports that issues of Visionaire come in pieces that are "assembled like an artist's portfolio," replete with string closures, anarchic sequencing and bags of confetti.


Hollywood Is Seasoning Films With Holiday Gimmicks
WHAT HOLIDAY SEAson would be complete without a television broadcast of "It's a Wonderful Life," "Miracle on 34th Street," "Holiday Inn" (which introduced "White Christmas"), "White Christmas" (a semi-remake of the former), "National Lampoon's Christmas Vacation," "Ernest Saves Christmas," Jean Shepherd's "Christmas Story" or one of many versions of Charles Dickens's "Christmas Carol."
Waiting in the wings to become holiday television perennials are the two "Home Alone" movies and Tim Burton's animated "Nightmare Before Christmas," which opened in theaters earlier this fall.


New Wrinkles on Dried Fruit
Like the batty old relative who predictably tries patience and politesse at holiday family gatherings, fruitcake elicits a snicker, a twinge of guilt, a sigh.
Those who receive fruitcakes may, as the joke goes, store the sweet, moist bricks to give as gifts a year later.
At the same time, fruitcake recipients are embarrassed by their own embarrassment.
The perennial distaste for fruitcakes stems not so much from the prototypical cake, which was made to be eaten on the road by errant knights during the Crusades, but from its 20th-century descendant -- the commercial fruitcake, with its cloying taste of candied fruit.
Commercial fruitcakes are to traditional holiday dining what shopping malls are to the spirit of giving: mass market usurping soul.
Each institution turns the season of remembering into something one would rather forget.


Skip The Handsprings
To the Editor:  I am surprised that my admittedly heretical response to Vladimir Horowitz's playing has driven Richard Taruskin into such a frenzy  [ "Why Do They All Hate Horowitz?" Nov. 28 ] .
Horowitz was one of the most celebrated pianists of the later 20th century, and, as far as I can tell, the only people who have recently questioned his infallibility are Michael Steinberg (in 1980), Joseph Horowitz (on various occasions) and myself (last year).
Certainly we're the only doubters Mr.
Taruskin mentioned by name in his article.
I suppose, grammatically speaking, the three of us do indeed constitute a "they" and that we should be flattered to be seen as such a threat to established orthodoxy.
However, for those Times readers who may have been befuddled by one of Mr.
Taruskin's headier assertions, let me here and now declare Igor Stravinksy entirely without blame in the matter of my personal distaste for many -- but by no means all -- of Horowitz's interpretations.


Dec. 12-18: Squaring a Circle; Britain and Ireland Set Forth Hopeful, if Rather Vague, Principles for Peace Process
By the week's end, a dramatic peace initiative by Britain and Ireland to break the 25-year-long logjam and bring about peace talks in Northern Ireland won plaudits and accolades from just about everyone -- except those on both sides who are doing the actual fighting.
The peace "process" -- it is too amorphous to be called a plan -- is a declaration of fundamental principles in the hopes that gunmen and terrorists for the Catholic minority and the Protestant majority in Ulster can agree upon them and thus be drawn into negotiations.


Maybe the Dog's Owner Is Unaware of the Problem
To the Editor:
I'm sure Mr.
Lipsyte's column will trigger emotional reactions in a city where dogs are the joy of many and perhaps the bane of even more.
But I hope we can step back a little and think about what the incident says about our knowledge of dogs and our interactions with them.
Growing up, I had a dog who was gentle and sweet, so I assumed most dogs who looked harmless, in fact, were.
I would stop and pet cute dogs tied to parking meters.
It's only now, as an adult with my own dog, that I realize how dangerous that can be.


U.S. AGENCIES SPLIT OVER LEGAL TACTICS ON GAY TROOP PLAN
As the Pentagon puts the finishing touches on regulations to carry out President Clinton's policy on homosexuals in the military, the transition from the former policy has caused divisions over legal strategies within the Administration and created new problems for gay troops.
The new rules and accompanying guidelines, which the Pentagon could issue in the next several days, will spell out in precise terms how commanders should enforce Mr.
Clinton's new policy of "don't ask, don't tell, don't pursue." Lawyers writing the regulations have kept them under close wraps.


Lives Market in Marble
THE ordinary Romans of the late republic and the empire, or at least those with some money, left a remarkable record of themselves in the form of their tombs, tomb sculpture and epitaphs.
Once you begin to notice, you see funerary remains all over the city, from huge monuments to tiny fragments of epitaphs embedded in the walls of churches.
I am one of those people who admire ruins as ruins, who don't mentally rebuild the Colosseum and fill it with blood, sand and hollering fans every time they walk past.
But when I read the epitaph of a fishmonger named Aurelia Nais, in the courtyard of the Terme Museum, I can practically smell the fish.


For Wheelchair-Bound, One Very Large Step
To the Editor:
I am writing to applaud Peter Kuper's "Eye of the Beholder" drawing on Dec. 12 showing a man in a wheelchair facing flights of stairs.
I know how frustrating that is as I have multiple sclerosis and need to use a scooter for transportation.
But I and many others don't have to see a multitude of stairs to be frustrated -- just one step will do it.


Elizabeth Meaney, Mark J. Malone
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Meaney of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Barry Meaney to Mark Joseph Malone, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Malone of Medina, Ohio.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Meaney, 24, graduated from the University of Richmond, as did her fiance, and is an account executive in Cincinnati for Reuben H. Donnelley, the marketing company for the Yellow Pages.


Their Irony, Humor (and Art) Can Save China
On Aug. 21, the "Country Life Plan" exhibition was scheduled to open at the National Gallery in Beijing.
Though the paintings were indifferent, and had to the ordinary eye no hint of political significance, officials ruled that many failed to show the positive side of life in the People's Republic and were therefore unacceptable: the artists were permitted to hang only about 20 percent of their work.
The prime mover behind "Country Life Plan," Song Shuangsong, was furious that the exhibition had been edited.
He told friends that on Aug. 25 he would go to the gallery and cut off his long hair, a symbol of his individualistic way of life.
At noon that day, Song, a professional barber, friends and a reporter from Shanxi television all gathered in the exhibition room.
As the haircut progressed, chance visitors to the gallery stopped to watch.
Song faced first in one direction, then in another, holding a solemn expression for a while, then grinning and posing.
After 20 minutes or so, the barber soaped Song's face, produced a straight razor and began to shave him.
At that moment, the director of gallery security came in and saw the crowd and cameras.
"Who is the authority behind this behavior?" he asked, his face tight with rage.
"This is my exhibition," Song said, "and I take full responsibility."


Louise Cannavo, Joseph Parzick
Louise Cannavo, a senior vice president of the Whitney Group, a consulting and executive-recruitment concern, was married yesterday to Joseph Parzick, a managing director of Lehman Brothers, the investment bank.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Joseph Neville performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.


Cut Short, a Life Still Resonates
In a city numb with tales of violence, the murder of Jose Duran last August somehow caught the eye: a hard-working immigrant father of 12, returning at midnight from his dishwashing job at an elegant French restaurant in Manhattan, is shot for his wallet.
From a window in the Brownsville Houses, two of his sons, in their nightly watch for their father's return, see him clutch his chest and fall to the ground.
The family is left without its breadwinner.
In the months since her husband died, Maria Enedina Duran's days have been filled with miracles as people from around the world reacted to the crime in an outpouring of generosity.


The Nannies' Tea Party
Tour guides at Westbury House dress up as Edwardian nannies to benefit Old Westbury Gardens on Long Island; Dec. 12.


'I Never Thought That People Could Be So Good'


Why Spending More on Child Care Reduces Violent Crime
To the Editor:
Your report on the increase of crimes by very young children in New York City public schools (news article, Dec. 4) coincided with my receiving the Department of Labor's third-quarter report on women in the labor force.
The first sentences summarized the findings:


The Nation; It's Not Legalization, but a User-Friendly Drug Strategy
THE suggestion by Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders that the legalization of drugs might markedly reduce crime flashed across Washington this month, only to be swatted down within hours by the Clinton White House.
It was a predictable reaction from a President who has said that if drugs were legal, his brother, Roger, a recovering cocaine addict, might not be alive today.


New P.L.O. Leader: From Jail Cell to TV Guest
For 12 years Sufian Abu Zaida was locked away in Israeli jails, a leader of imprisoned members of Fatah, the mainstream group in the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Now free, he is becoming almost a household word in Israel and the occupied territories.
Since the signing of the Israeli-Palestinian accord in September, Mr.
Abu Zaida has stepped from the shadows, transformed from a clandestine commander into a sought-after guest on Israeli television and radio newscasts.
As a senior Fatah official in Gaza, he has met with Israeli Army generals to calm street violence, and he has addressed Israelis in several interviews.


Do Giant Stores Kill Small Shops? Survey Says No
How does the arrival of a retailing giant affect a neighborhood?
Here in Ozone Park, while some residents, merchants and civic leaders continue to try to halt construction of a Home Depot store at Aqueduct Race Track, partly out of a desire to protect smaller businesses, a recent city survey of a local 75,000-square-foot shopping center confirms a conclusion reached by some other residents: large retail chains do not necessarily discourage mom-and-pop-sized shops.


Cayard Drops Challenge Bid
Paul Cayard, skipper for Italy's 1992 America's Cup challenger, announced recently in Milan, Italy, that he was withdrawing his bid to challenge for the cup in 1995.
"Not having found the majority of the financial support necessary to mount a winning challenge, I feel it is smarter to withdraw," Cayard said.


The Women of Winter: Baseball Tryouts Have Begun
There were 37 of them at Tinker Field today, in all sizes and shapes, from ages 16 to 40, all hoping for one thing.
To be part of history.


Contemplating a Future Without Jobs
With the shortened days of December, happy hour at the Canal Point Restaurant and Bar here gets an early start.
By 4:30 P.M. on a recent Friday, the small, wood-paneled barroom was already crowded and abuzz with two dozen people.
Most had cans of Miller beer in front of them.
"I'll probably always drink it," said Ralph Thompson. "It's a good beer."


AIDS Is the Subject, but Who Is the Audience?
JONATHAN DEMME RECOGNIZES the problem.
The holiday season looms, three solid weeks of happy thoughts, crucial football games and big, big films.
In this season of joy, Mr.
Demme's gift to American moviegoers is a harrowing drama about a gay Philadelphia lawyer who dies of AIDS.


Queenie Pie Gives the Lie To Pop-Lust
DUKE ELLINGTON'S "QUEENIE PIE," WHICH was played in its schematic, unfinished form by the Brooklyn Philharmonic and the Duke Ellington Orchestra at the Brooklyn Academy of Music recently, is highly suggestive for anyone considering the odd relationships between classical and jazz communities.
The story of a Harlem beauty queen who finds an elixir of youth that also creates silken hair, it is roughly based on truth; by inventing a hair straightener, Mme.
C.
J.
Walker became one of this country's first black millionaires.
No doubt Duke Ellington, who was working on this piece when he died in 1974, would have liked something similar: an elixir that would bring back his youthful years of the 1920's and 30's, when his compositional inventiveness revolutionized jazz and swing.
He included songs from the 20's in the show along with some from later periods.


Robert A. Pfeiffer; Broadcaster, 72
Robert A. Pfeiffer, a broadcast performer, producer and journalist in Manhattan and Western Europe for 35 years, died on Friday at Sloan-Kettering Memorial Hospital.
He was 72.
He died of a disease of the bone marrow, his wife, Melody Pfeiffer, said.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
PROVENCAL CRECHES
Jani Caroli, a native of Marseilles, has brought an old French tradition to her French Country Living shop in Greenwich -- the tabletop creche as produced in Provence.
Each Christmas she imports new ones to display and sell, all of them created in the Provencal workshop of Mireille Fouque, whose father, Paul, founded the business.


New Home for Vassar's Art Collection
An art center designed by Cesar Pelli at Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, 75 miles north of New York City, is a new stop on tourist itineraries in the Hudson Valley.
Although the Frances Lehman Loeb Art Center, named for a trustee and member of the class of 1928, was established as a teaching facility for the college's 2,250 students, the 20,000-square-foot galleries are open to the public Wednesdays through Saturdays.
Admission is free.


The Tredwells Invite You . . .
A 19th-century holiday party in the traditions of the period is held at the Old Merchant's House in Manhattan; Dec. 14.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Hillary Rodham Clinton misspelled the name of a photographer.
She is Annie Leibovitz.


Making a Business of Making People Look Good
POSH pays.
No matter how tough the economy, the recession is just a formality to those in the men's formal wear business.
"Our volume is up," said Donald B. Gioffre, the owner of Ridge Squire, a formal men's wear shop in Rye Brook.
"Formal weddings, which account for about 70 percent of our business, are very big. Proms have rebounded. People are also renting formal wear for cotillions and bar mitzvahs. We also have a number of corporate clients. This month alone, in one week we rented 275 tuxedos and did 26 weddings."


If He Wrote It, They Will Read
SHOELESS JOE JACKSON  COMES TO IOWA  Stories.
By W. P. Kinsella. 141 pp.
Dallas: Southern Methodist University Press.
Cloth, $19.95.
Paper, $9.95.


U.S. to Open Jail, Despite Snags
Overriding three years of local opposition, the Federal Government is about to open a new jail in Sunset Park.
The first contingent of inmates is expected to number about 80, but critics are more concerned about the jail's ultimate capacity.
They say that while the original plan was for 1,000, the capacity is being doubled to 2,000 and could be tripled.


BENEFITS
Windows for AIDS  TONIGHT -- A cocktail party from 9 to 11 P.M. will benefit the Window Project, which organizes exhibitions of photographs at AIDS wards of hospitals in New York.
Francesco Scavullo, Patrick Demarchelier and Arthur Elgort are among the photographers who have donated work to the project.
The event, at Club USA, 218 West 47th Street, will raise money for the group's first installation, scheduled to open in January in the new AIDS unit of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Tickets, $15, at the door.
Information: (212) 645-1212 or (212) 229-2441.
Music for a Church  MONDAY -- The Rev.
Alphonse Stephenson will conduct the Orchestra of St.
Peter's by the Sea, of Point Pleasant Beach, N.J., in a Christmas concert to raise money for the restoration of the 125-year-old St.
John the Baptist Church in Manhattan and for its community services.
The 7:30 P.M. concert, at the church, 210 West 31st Street, will be followed by a reception.
Tickets, $20, from (212) 564-9070.


The Next Next Seattle
THE SEATTLE REVOLUTION CAUGHT the music industry off guard.
In late 1991, Nirvana's seminal grunge album "Nevermind" unexpectedly went platinum, and the airwaves were suddenly filled with the guitar-heavy sounds of Pearl Jam, Alice in Chains and Screaming Trees.
A feeding frenzy ensued: reporters swarmed into the Northwest, looking for clues to the "Seattle sound"; for a while, it seemed as if anyone with a loud guitar and a flannel shirt could land a record deal.
Of course, this wasn't the first time the industry had fixated on a single city.
In the late 60's all ears were on San Francisco's psychedelic groups; a decade later, the minimalist, punk-inspired bands of the East Village in New York drew national attention.
In the 80's, the pace of discovery reached breakneck speed: Minneapolis, then Athens, Ga., then Austin, Tex., then Chapel Hill, N.C.
But Seattle marked the most successful -- or at least the most profitable -- attempt to define a musical moment in a single city.
The birth of a fledgling music community is a process rich with old-fashioned values like hard work and cooperation.
But these days, the industry isn't content to let small-town stars remain on the hey-let's-put-on-a-show scale for long.
From Boise, Idaho, to Santa Barbara, Calif., kids with nothing but an electric guitar and a dream go to bed one night in blessed obscurity, and wake up the next morning in the hippest place in America, their every step tracked by fashion designers trying to cop their style, music critics desperate to name their sound and record-label reps waving contracts.
The only consolation is that the attention doesn't last long: In July, Entertainment Weekly labeled San Diego the nation's "Cool Music Scene"; a month later, Billboard dubbed Chicago "the new capital of the cutting edge"; and finally, in October, Time handed the crown to . . .
Halifax, Nova Scotia.


It's Bears Football, but the End Result Is a Broncos Victory
How many times have we seen this winning football formula in nasty weather here at Soldier Field?
*Emphasize field position.


High Court Has Upheld 2d Amendment Limit
To the Editor:
Jacob Chinitz (letter, Dec. 6) questions the interpretation of the Second Amendment by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo as not applying to the states.
However, the Second Amendment, along with providing for jury trials in civil cases and indictment by a grand jury, is a section of the Bill of Rights that has never been subject to the incorporation doctrine -- that is application to the states.


With Guards and Brooms, Jamaica Strip Is Spiffing Up
If a stretch of Jamaica Avenue looks and feels a bit cleaner and safer these days, that's because the business improvement district organized this fall has hired a private security firm and sanitation company.
Armed guards patrol the commercial strip while cleaning crews wipe away graffiti and sweep litter from the streets.


Alison Friedman, Andrew M. Brod
Alison Friedman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Friedman of Boca Raton, Fla., was married last evening to Andrew Marc Brod, the son of Ruth and Alvin Brod of Manhasset Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Merle Singer officiated at the Breakers Hotel in Palm Beach, Fla.


No Headline
"This isn't a generous town. But Les Aspin was a player; he knew the rules of the game." STEPHEN HESS of the Brookings Institution.  [ 30:3. ]


Court Ruling Could Alter Drug Cases
New York City's special narcotics prosecutor said yesterday that thousands of present and future narcotics cases across New York State may be jeopardized by what he called a harsh new evidence requirement imposed by a ruling of the state's highest court.
The prosecutor, Robert Silbering, noted that under a 5-to-1 decision of the Court of Appeals in Albany last week, prosecutors must prove that a suspect not only possessed an illegal drug but also knew its weight -- a fact that often can be established only in a laboratory by chemical analysis.


London Calling
Chronically underfinanced but consistently creative, the London shows always seem to run a distant fourth to Paris, New York and Milan.
But the spring '94 collections prove, without a doubt, the importance of British fashion.
The designers, a geographically diverse group from Sri Lanka and Hong Kong as well as nooks and crannies all over Britain, showed a cross-section of clothes and accessories that ranged from wacky to wearable.
While the styles were in sync with worldwide trends -- slip dresses, sheer layering, fluid lines, pastel colors -- offbeat fabrics like stretch silks and seersucker knits made them unique.
In cases where more traditional fabrics were used, they were often twisted, unraveled and turned inside out.
Alas, while few of the clothes shown in London will actually make their way into American department stores, the six designers on these pages are making a successful leap across the Atlantic.
SELINA BLOW Luxurious Fabrics and attention to details are the essentials of Blow's elegant designs.
A sense of wit pokes through, but Blow's jackets are successful because of their timeless style and because they shun theatrics and focus on clean silhouettes.
Here, a full length damask coat from Blow's sprint-summer collection.
ELLIS FLYTE Ellis Flyte and Richard Ostell teamed up six seasons ago to create a collection of timeless, easy pieces.
Their off-center, affordable classics have carved out a comfortable niche in the American retail market.
This year, in their first runway show, they emphasized stretch silks, bias cuts and subtle colors ranging from soft cream to sand to a deep indigo.
JOHN ROCHA His clothing sells well in more than 21 countries.
Known primarily for his knitwear, the Hong Kong-born designer mixes textures the same way he mixes cultural references: his version of a silk chiffon kimono ties with a belt that is woven with a Celtic cross.
ABE HAMILTON Like many English designers, Hamilton works in almost Dickensian digs.
His humble studio, right, reflects the simplicity of his collection.
A former chef, he spins cloth and appliques flowers as he once spun sugar and decorated cakes.
Hamilton also hand-paints fabrics for gently deconstructed dresses.
GHOST Ghost owner Tanya Sarne is no ethereal being, but a real-live source of style and substance.
The line -- a mix of body-hugging shapes and loose silhouettes -- is such a commercial success that the company was able to stage a second show during the recent New York collections.
PHILIP TREACY Philip Treacy is used to the big time.
For several seasons, top designers like Valentino and Karl Lagerfeld for Chanel have summoned him to Paris to accessorize their collections.
Last month, the milliner decided to strike out on his own.
In his new London studio, Treacy custom-designs sensible hats as well as his signature over-the-top toques.


Lighting His Home and the Lives of Others


Stand Up for Longfellow
THE COLUMBIA HISTORY OF AMERICAN POETRY  Edited by Jay Parini.
Associate editor, Brett C. Millier. 894 pp.
New York: Columbia University Press. $59.95.


Aimee F. Kemker, Charles M. Elson
Aimee Fauntleroy Kemker, a daughter of Mrs.
G.
Harry Kemker of Tampa, Fla., and the late Mr.
Kemker, was married there last evening to Prof.
Charles Myer Elson, a son of Ambassador and Mrs.
Edward E. Elson of Copenhagen.
Rabbi Arthur Baseman and the Rev.
Stephen Ankudowich, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Tampa Yacht and Country Club.
Mrs.
Elson, 26, graduated from Stanford University.
She is a third-year law student at the University of Florida.
Her father was a founding partner in the Tampa law firm of Trenam, Simmons, Kemker, Scharf, Barkin, Frye &amp; O'Neill.


Last Chance . . .  No Kidding
Trinity Church Cemetery, the last active graveyard in Manhattan, is about to run out of space.
After 150 years and 75,000 underground burials and mausoleum interments, the cemetery, which runs east from Riverside Drive to Amsterdam Avenue and north from 153d to 155th Streets, has decided not to build any more mausoleums.


Washington Memo; The Ritual Of Parting: Hyperbole And Pain
Mountain sheep butt heads to establish dominance.
Mockingbirds trill songs; peacocks stage rival displays of plumage.
Then there is Washington, where political animals gain and surrender alpha status in Rose Garden displays of flattery and the drumming of praise in newspapers and on television.
The Capitol has no more highly evolved ritual, and it reached new heights this week, when Defense Secretary Les Aspin abruptly went belly up on national television before President Clinton and his latest choice to head the Pentagon, Bobby Ray Inman.


EVIL FOR SALE
Macabre fascination?
How about perverse profiteering?
I doubt that Marlin Hasher's uncles stationed in Europe during World War II mailed home Hitlerian regalia (while the Nazis executed other family members in Russia) in an entrepreneural spirit, but rather as documentation of the atrocities occurring before their eyes ("Evil for Sale," by James Sturz, Nov. 28).
It is disturbing to read that tens of thousands of Americans buy and sell Nazi memorabilia.


A Taste of the Rajah's Life in Rural Bali
NESTLED in the rice paddies of eastern Bali, on the site of a sacred spring, the last rajah of the Karangasem Regency built his weekend retreat, an elaborate water palace with a view of the ocean to the distant east and Mount Agung to the north.
He called it Tirta Gangga, meaning "holy water from the Ganges," the sacred river in India.
The rajah, Anak Agung Anglurah Ketut, began construction in 1947, but never saw the project finished.
The eruption of the volcanic Mount Agung in 1963 halted construction and forced the rajah and his family to take refuge in the Ubud area of southern Bali.
By the time the rajah died three years later, stabbed by an assassin, the abandoned palace of Tirta Gangga was largely in ruins.


The Clinton Challenge in Russia
President Clinton has dismissed Vladimir Zhirinovsky's surprisingly strong showing in Russia's election as a protest vote by citizens who may not have known much about him.
But the support for this virulent nationalist may reflect more than the mood of the moment.
Many Russians fear radical reform and respond to the appeal of nationalism.
They share Mr.
Zhirinovsky's nostalgia for the good old days of empire when Russia kept "lesser breeds" under heel.


Manager's Profile
Richard B. Hoey Fund: Dreyfus Growth and Income. $1.2 billion in assets.
Manager since inception, Dec. 31, 1991. (Sponsor: Dreyfus Funds, New York.) Born: May 8, 1943; Verona, N.J.
Education: B.A. in politics and economics, Yale University; M.B.A., New York University.
Last Vacation: Visited Disney World with family in October.
Fund Performance: Year through Dec. 10: +16.3% (all growth and income funds: +9.3%); 1992: +20.2% (+8.2%)*
Stock Market View: (self-rating; = most bullish).
Stock Pick: First Financial Management, a processor of credit card charges, because earnings growth "is going to be scarce in the economy and this is a very highly predictable growth stock." Current Strategy: Buy "volume cyclicals," companies that will benefit from higher revenues as the economy expands but that do not need to rely on commodity price increases.
That includes railroads, truckers, some retailers and some industrial companies, including Emerson Electric, Cooper Industries and Albany International.  *
Source: Morningstar Inc.


Millions for Us, Pennies for You
BEATRICE GINDEA thought the lawyers were on her side. Now she's not so sure.
In 1988, the retiree invested $10,000 -- a large chunk of her nest egg -- in a real estate fund sponsored by Prudential-Bache Securities through the firm's Morristown, N.J., office.
It seemed like a good investment -- Prudential guaranteed her 12 percent annually for three years, and then all her money back.
But the promises were false, and the investment collapsed.


New Ways to Airport: London and Frankfurt
Virgin Atlantic Airways and Lufthansa German Airlines have recently devised some creative ways of ferrying passengers to two of Europe's busiest airports.
Business-class passengers on Virgin Atlantic Airways now have a novel, if potentially hair-raising, way of avoiding the limo-lock that can make the trip to Heathrow Airport as long as 90 minutes.
Specially adapted motorcycles zip through traffic, whisking the traveler from central London to the airport in less than half an hour.


Technology; A Surprisingly Sound U.S. Industry
LOOKING at the audio section of a consumer electronics shop or department store and seeing the array of Japanese nameplates -- Sony, Panasonic, Yamaha -- a person might conclude that American companies have withdrawn from the field.
But as any audiophile can confirm, the American audio industry has made a surprising comeback in recent years, earning a reputation for technical innovation and products that discerning consumers around the world are clamoring for.
The Bose Corporation of Framingham, Mass., for example, makes the best-selling brand of loudspeakers in Europe, the United States and Japan.


Building Books
Whenever I take a vacation I rediscover the central role that books play in the emotional decor of wherever I happen to be.
Like most people, I lug along far too many books that will never be cracked open.
On tables and on chairs they make a strange new place seem more familiar.
Books are inanimate objects with a soul.
More than any piece of furniture, they breathe life into empty space.
In the Renaissance, people understood the power of books as potent architectural elements.
Walls of books pivoted as doors to secret passages.
Hollowed-out volumes hid important documents.
If a collection was too sparse, an artist painted in more.
Illuminated manuscripts -- the age's equivalent to modern-day coffeetable books -- sat open on thick moldings running around the room: out of the way, beautiful to behold.
Today, books are seldom an integral part of design; bookshelves are tacked on rather than built in.
One ingenious exception I've seen is at a family-style summer camp in Maine.
In the dining hall, a vast library literally hangs above the tables.
Grids of shelving, suspended from the ceiling, are packed with books, forming text-filled coffers, with a light bulb in the center of each square.
A guest can stand atop a chair and be surrounded by volumes arranged according to the old Dewey Decimal System.
The walls are also lined with books, making for tremendous competitive conviviality during meals, as diners rush to confirm some naggingly elusive fact: How long can beavers stay underwater?
Is xyster really an acceptable Scrabble word?


SUNDAY: December 19, 1993; The Good Book(s)
When the Bible was written, there was just one version for everyone.
Now, we know this was a terrible marketing mistake, but back then nobody knew about demographics.
Live and learn.
This year there are 450 versions of the Book in English alone.
Christian bookstores stock racks and racks of the Word of God.
These are not 450 different translations -- there are about 10 of those -- but repackagings for every conceivable group.
Publishers Weekly declared it "the year of the niche" for Bible publishers.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Maybe the ingredients are all too familiar: a woman murdered in a way that looks like suicide; her sister out to discover what happened; suspects all over the place; a lost scientific formula that will change the world; a psychopathic killer roaming the territory; disinformation skillfully meted out by the author.
All this is present and accounted for in THIN ICE, the latest suspense novel by Meg O'Brien (Perfect Crime/Doubleday, $18.50).
But everything is nicely put together, the writing is expert and a keen intelligence is at work behind the conception and execution.
The heroine, Nicole Ryan, teaches mythology and comparative religion at Georgetown University.
Her sister was a biochemist engaged on a project that she had tried to keep top-secret.
It turns out that she had developed a cure for cancer, AIDS and, indeed, all diseases.


A Young Style for an Old Story
THORNTON DIAL, A 65-YEAR- old self-taught artist from Bessemer, Ala., has come a long way in a short time.
Seven years after making his first painting and two years after his New York gallery debut, this former steelworker is the subject of simultaneous museum shows and an accompanying coffee-table catalogue published by Abrams.
His big, unforgiving relief-paintings, heavy with found wood, metal, wire and rope but lightened by energetic strokes of color or zaps of spray paint, glower from the walls of the New Museum of Contemporary Art in SoHo (through Jan. 2) and the Museum of American Folk Art near Lincoln Center (through Jan. 30).
Dial's paintings are like patches of rough seas in which the faces and figures of living things rise and sink among waves of detritus and color.
Their sometimes harsh carnival-like rawness can be both strange and familiar: their swirling colors and brutal topographies can make you think of Jackson Pollock, Julian Schnabel and Anselm Kiefer, as well as Joe Zucker and Red Grooms.
A tiger, usually of shag rug painted beyond the point of easy recognition, is the dominant form in many of these paintings: rampant, on the prowl, under attack or merely passing through, it is intended as a symbol of Dial himself, and of black men in general.


BEST SELLERS: December 19, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
7
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
2
2
71
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
3
10
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
4
4
17
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
5
14
2
THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.
6
1
THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A collection of stories about American men and the strains of contemporary life.
7
6
12
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
8
9
40
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
9
8
36
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
10
5
3
THE TRUCE AT BAKURA, by Kathy Tyers. (Spectra/ Bantam, $21.95.) The "Star Wars" Rebel Alliance responds to a call for help from a threatened outpost.
11
7
6
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined to kill him and take his place.
12
10
9
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in Victorian England's high society.
13
13
8
DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) An architect-engineer gets caught between the warring factions of a clan that owns an English racecourse.
14
11
15
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Concluding the "Griffin &amp; Sabine" trilogy, about an artist and his secret admirer.
15
12
4
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Talese/ Doubleday, $23.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly reappears in their lives.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
2
2
9
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
3
3
15
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
4
4
17
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
5
6
11
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
6
7
3
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
7
5
32
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
8
9
2
LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The country singer's memoirs, with an account of her relations with daughters Wynonna and Ashley.
9
8
11
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN . . .
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Thoughts on 43 years of marriage.
10
13
3
THE BEST CAT EVER, by Cleveland Amory. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A third volume about the trials and tribulations of the feline Polar Bear and his owner.
11
11
9
STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski. (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played Capt.
James Tiberius Kirk.
12
12
71
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
13
1
I TOOK A LICKIN' AND KEPT ON TICKIN', by Lewis Grizzard. (Villard, $19.) The humorist describes his near-death experience following heart surgery.
14*
10
6
THE DOWNING STREET YEARS, by Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins, $30.) The former British Prime Minister recalls her 11 1/2 years in power.
15
14
11
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
5
AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes from the golf instructor.
2
1
21
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
3
3
31
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
4
4
10
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 4, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear In Mind (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE COMPLETE LYRICS OF IRA GERSHWIN, edited by Robert Kimball. (Knopf, $45.) More than 700 lyrics displaying the fresh and inventive rhymes, supple phrasing, intelligence and wit that made Gershwin a lyricist nobody can read for one minute without humming.
THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER, edited by Mark Tucker. (Oxford University, $30.) A fascinating anthology of 70 years' worth of writing about (and occasionally by) Ellington, who clearly inspired powerful emotions in even the most sober minds.
EXIT INTO HISTORY: A Journey Through the New Eastern Europe, by Eva Hoffman. (Viking, $23.) Seeking out the ordinary, a Polish-born writer with a touch of American objectivity makes a tour of Mitteleuropa, returning with subtle insights about a world in transition.
GARBAGE, by A. R. Ammons. (Norton, $17.95.) A long poem of rueful grandeur and splendid oddity in which what's left over is transmuted; winner of this year's National Book Award.
HENRY JAMES: COLLECTED TRAVEL WRITINGS, edited by Richard Howard. (Library of America, 2 vols., $35 each.) Close to 1,700 pages, in the (as it were) aggregate, densely but never coarsely packed with the observations abroad (for abroad he usually was) of one upon whom nothing (as his own aspiration, immodest but justified by the sequel, had put it) was lost.
A HISTORY OF WARFARE, by John Keegan. (Knopf, $27.50.) Mr.
Keegan, the most readable and original of military historians, argues that war is an omnipresent cultural ritual of mankind, from which the ruthless modern notion of disciplined total war was an aberration.
JOHN JAMES AUDUBON: The Watercolors for "The Birds of America," edited by Annette Blaugrund and Theodore E. Stebbins Jr. (New-York Historical Society/Villard, $75.) The originals for the great engravings, handsomely reproduced, illuminated by helpful essays.
RETURN TO PARADISE, by Breyten Breytenbach. (Harcourt Brace, $22.95.) A bleak, beautiful, subjective collage of reminiscences, political rants and prose poems about this Afrikaner poet's troubled sojourns in South Africa.
SIT!
The Dog Portraits of Thierry Poncelet, with text by Bruce McCall. (Workman, $19.95.) Seventy "aristochiens," 19th-century portraits, each overpainted with a suitable dog's head, accompanied by thumbnail biographies.
THAT'S THE WAY I SEE IT, by David Hockney.
Edited by Nikos Stangos. (Chronicle Books, $35.) The second volume of the artist's recollections is a long, perky monologue -- autobiography alternating with ruminations on vision and the reproduction of images.
W.
E.
B.
DU BOIS: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919, by David Levering Lewis. (John Macrae/Holt, $35.) The first half of the epical life (it lasted till 1963) of the man who by World War I had become the most outspoken, eloquent and influential black American.


SUNDAY: December 19, 1993
When correctnesses collide: You're not supposed to wear fur.
You're not supposed to use sex to sell stuff.
But what about using sex to sell the idea that you're not supposed to wear fur?
This must be ethical, because People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals are using a naked supermodel to stimulate the world's conscience about fur.
The campaign may work.
But women buy a lot of furs, and they may look at Christy Turlington (who has a demographically unrepresentative percentage of body fat) and decide that rather than go naked, they'll wear anything.


Ms. Moran, Mr. Karamouzis
Siobhan Eileen Moran, the daughter of Eugene and Grace Moran of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married there yesterday to Andrew Peter Karamouzis, the son of Panagiotis and Eleni Karamouzis of Elmhurst, Queens.
The Rev.
Donald Babinski performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Agnes Cathedral.
The bride is a lawyer in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received a law degree from St.
John's University in Queens.
Her father is a partner in Moran &amp; Brodrick, a law firm in Garden City, L.I.
Her mother is the deputy chief counsel to the New York State Grievance Committee for the 10th Judicial District, in Syosset, L.I., and is the president-elect of the Bar Association of Nassau County.


5-Year-Old Accused of Killing 3 in India Is Abandoned by His Family


School Boards: A Schedule of Meetings
DISTRICT 1  Jan. 5; P.S. 61, 610 East 12th Street, Manhattan; (212) 602-9765.
DISTRICT 2  Dec. 21; P.S. 158, 1458 York Avenue, at 78th Street, Manhattan, Manhattan; (212) 337-8712.


Everywhere, Fuel For a Fresh Debate Over Glass's Music
LIKE SOME AMAZING POP-UP doll, Philip Glass is everywhere these days.
In recent months there have been releases of his music on three different labels, including Point, which he set up with Philips chiefly to record music by others.
Now Elektra Nonesuch, the master of hip marketing, has begun to release a slew of Mr.
Glass's own music, including Glassian classics in new recordings, early compositions in old recordings and pieces previously unavailable on disk.
The Elektra Nonesuch releases claim precedence, because their ambitious scope highlights the critical debates that swirl around this most controversial of composers.
Some listeners have always despised his music, but lately even some of his erstwhile champions have had their doubts.
For them, the question is whether Mr.
Glass has simply declined, or has declined in an interesting way, or has sold out, or is just uneven, or is groping toward a promising new idiom.


Well, Vanna, I Think It's Time to Buy a Vowel
SOME interactive services on the drawing board allow subscribers to participate in the programming.
Viewers might get to predict the next play in a football game or play along with game shows like "Wheel of Fortune." Advanced versions of the service will allow subscribers to compete for prizes.


A Dickens Classic Brightens Holiday
THIS year is the 150th anniversary of Dickens's "Christmas Carol." It is also the 10th anniversary of the Theater Three presentation.
It is astonishing that this simple yet elegant story of human redemption has been told and retold in many versions without losing its attraction.


Bronx Woman Is Killed
A 71-year-old woman was found stabbed and beaten to death yesterday in her Bronx apartment, the police said.
The apartment, in Pelham Parkway, had been ransacked and the police suspected she was killed during a robbery.
The body of Dorothy Bush was discovered at noon after a neighbor who had come to visit her noticed her apartment door ajar, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman.
She was lying fully clothed on her bedroom floor, stabbed several times in the neck.


Politics and a Video Store Dispute
A long-running dispute over an X-rated video store has become entangled in the politics of the mayoral transition.
The store -- at 510 Avenue of the Americas, near 13th Street -- is in a building owned by the Zucker Organization, whose chairman, Donald Zucker, has been under consideration to head the Economic Development Corporation in the Giuliani administration.


Wall Street; Americans Will Get to Test Drive Daimler
WHEN it comes to auto stocks, the image of Daimler-Benz could not be farther from that of the Mercedes autos it makes -- underpowered and unloved.
Now Americans must decide whether they want to take a chance on the shares.
Over the last seven years, Daimler's share value has dropped about 30 percent.
Over the same stretch, none of eight other major automakers -- two from Germany and three each from Japan and the United States -- suffered any losses.
The best performers in the bunch, Ford and Chrysler, more than doubled.


Smoothing the Way for the Snow Thrower
AS if the holiday rush was not enough, now is also the best time to prepare snow throwers.
Preparing a thrower is much like preparing a lawnmower, but there are some important differences.
For example, leaving old gasoline in the tank or using leftover gasoline are primary causes of starting and performance problems with snow throwers.


The Struggle to Find Buyers for Studios
To the Editor:
Your article neglected to mention one very likely market for a studio apartment -- the neighbors!
The people next door, or even upstairs or downstairs, might wish to live in a larger apartment.
However, given today's real estate market they may be unable, or unwilling to try, to sell their current residence.
Instead of trying to sell their apartment, it might make sense for an apartment owner to buy an adjacent studio apartment and create a doorway (or spiral staircase) between the apartments.
SHAUN BREIDBART  Pelham, N.Y.


Yeltsin Marches Russia Toward Dictatorship; Not So Fast, They Say
To the Editor:
"Russia's Chastening Vote" (editorial, Dec. 14) blurs a subtle difference between the ends and means of reform that Russian voters drew Dec. 12, when they voted for the ultranationalist Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky.


South African Hit Squads Tied to Homeland
With negotiations for the ratification of South Africa's new Constitution approaching a crucial stage, people here have been confronted by a dark new issue: whether Inkatha Freedom Party hit squads have been killing political opponents in hopes of sabotaging the transition to black majority rule.
The issue was underscored in recent days with the release of a report by a senior judge who heads a commission that is looking into the causes of the violence in which as many as 15,000 South Africans have died since late 1984.


Balanchine's 'Nutcracker' in Stamford
THE New York City Ballet's "Nutcracker" has been a sellout at the State Theater in Lincoln Center, almost from the moment the lavish, fantasy-filled production was introduced 39 years ago.
Competing editions of the Tchaikovsky favorite abound, needless to say, but City Ballet has jealously guarded the original Balanchine version, permitting it to travel only on a very limited basis.
Fortunately for Connecticut dance lovers, when Allegra Kent became artistic advisor of the Stamford City Ballet, the celebrated ballerina -- who had been featured in the 1954 world premiere of Balanchine's "Nutcracker" -- persuaded her former colleagues to allow her company to use the original choreography exclusively in Connecticut.


Sam Wanamaker, Actor, 74, Who Led New Globe Theater
Sam Wanamaker, the American actor-director who campaigned to rebuild Shakespeare's Globe Theater on the banks of the Thames, died yesterday at his home in London.
He was 74 years old.
He had suffered from cancer for five years, his family told Reuters.


The World; Alaskans Don't Want To Be Anyone's Siberia
THE remnants of Russian influence in Alaska, from the blue-domed churches found in Aleut native villages to the tiny dolls sold to cruise ship passengers in Sitka, are a big part of the state's modern tourist shtick.
But the 49th state is not exactly warming to the idea of taking this a step further.
So it is saying no, thanks, to Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, the right-wing extremist who stunned the world with his strong showing in elections in Russia on Sunday, and who in the past has suggested that Alaska be reclaimed by his country.


Ellen Lautenberg, Douglas Hendel
Ellen Sue Lautenberg, a daughter of Senator Frank R. Lautenberg of Cliffside Park, N.J., and Lois Lautenberg of Montclair, N.J., was married last evening to Douglas Alan Hendel, a son of Judge and Mrs.
Seymour Hendel of New London, Conn.
Rabbi Harvey Goldman performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Ms.
Lautenberg, 36, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Clark University and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father, a Democrat, has served in the United States Senate since 1982.
He was the chairman and chief executive of Automatic Data Processing Inc. in Roseland, N.J., the payroll processing company of which he is a founder..


Afterthoughts of Chairman Mao


Moments of Joy and Fear While Watching an Eclipse
To the Editor:
As the father of a 2 1/2-year-old insomniac daughter named Marina, I was delighted when I heard there would be a midnight lunar eclipse.
Here was a chance to introduce her to the wonders of astronomy.
The night was cloudless, the pollution negligible, the moon almost directly overhead.
Conditions were perfect.
Since it was very cold, we devised a game plan of taking quick trips outside to a vest-pocket park across the street to catch glimpses of the eclipse as it progressed.


1784 SPANISH SHIP IS FOUND IN GULF
A lost treasure ship whose sinking in 1784 played a minor role in the early history of the United States has been discovered in 300 feet of water about 50 miles off Louisiana and part of the cargo has been recovered, the finders reported last week.
The vessel, El Cazador, or the Hunter, had been sent by Spain from its port in New Orleans to pick up Mexican coins for its holdings in Louisiana, with the aim of stabilizing their currency.
The ship's manifest listed 450,000 pesos.
She left Veracruz, Mexico, on Jan. 11, 1784, but never arrived back in New Orleans.
The ship was eventually declared lost.


Secrets to a Long-Lasting Christmas Tree
SOMEWHERE between cookie baking, gift-wrapping and shopping, there will be time to think about the tree.
Its selection is often a family affair and the choice ends up being an evergreen that is the fullest, the tallest or the straightest one that can be found.
Of course, the tree that will last the longest is the one that is freshly cut, preferably from a "select-your-own" farm where the owner has learned that this sort of selling is a good Christmastime policy.
The family's tree selection will be tagged and after the money changes hands, the owner or a helper will come along with a saw and cut the fine tree down.
The last scene is the ride back home with the beaming family tucked inside the car and the freshly cut tree tied securely on the roof.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 19, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A woman tells about killing her husband nearly 30 years earlier.
2
44
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
3
5
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
4
4
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Warner, $5.99.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a serial killer in Washington.
5
1
DESIRE, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) The romance of a daring lady and a knight who battle to control an isle in medieval Britain.
6
9
THE KILLER ANGELS, by Michael Shaara. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A 1974 novel about the Battle of Gettysburg.
7
51
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
8
4
RED SQUARE, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The detective Arkady Renko returns to Moscow after the fall of Communism.
9
4
THE REMAINS OF THE DAY, by Kazuo Ishiguro. (Vintage, $11.) The life of an English butler and the "great gentleman" he served.
10
88
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/ Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
11
8
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $6.50.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
12
3
CLOSE COMBAT, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.99.) In Volume 6 of "The Corps," there are new challenges for the Marines in World War II.
13
2
PRIVATE PLEASURES, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A scientist's discovery results in sex and violence among a group of Floridians.
14
8
INADMISSIBLE EVIDENCE, by Philip Friedman. (Ivy, $5.99.) A prosecutor struggles to convict a real estate tycoon of murder.
15
92
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
7
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photos by Walter Iooss Jr. and observations by the retired basketball superstar.
2
14
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
4
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of murders.
4
528
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
5
8
SUBMARINE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $14.95.) A guided tour through a nuclear warship and the world of which it is a part.
6
33
THE CAT WHO CAME FOR CHRISTMAS, by Cleveland Amory. (Penguin, $8.95.) A self-styled curmudgeon's memoir of a cat.
7
114
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
8
1
OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.
9*
44
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
10
8
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
11
3
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy, as seen in the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
12
23
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
13*
18
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
14*
3
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
15
39
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
16*
11
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Bantam, $6.99.) The autobiography of the general.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
12
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
1
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1994. (World Almanac/Funk &amp; Wagnalls, $8.95.) The latest edition of the reference work.
3
1
THE CHICKENS ARE RESTLESS, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) A new collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
4
6
THE FAR SIDE GALLERY 4, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of cartoons.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 4, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Rights Granted For Salvage of Andrea Doria
IT HAS been nearly 40 years since that foggy July night when the Andrea Doria collided with a Swedish ship, the Stockholm, about 200 miles off the coast of Sandy Hook.
By early the next morning, the Italian luxury liner -- described as a "floating art gallery" -- lay on its side at the bottom of the Atlantic.
The very next day, two scuba divers descended 250 feet to the wreck.
They were the first of hundreds who would make the dangerous dive over the years.
At least six perished in the attempt, but others returned again and again, lured by the sense of history and artifacts ranging from silverware to a bronze statue of the ship's namesake, a 16th-century admiral.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-23  THAI LINKS TO THE KHMER ROUGE  A Khmer Rouge compound in Thailand is only part of the evidence of close ties between Thailand -- through its military, police and merchants -- and the guerrilla group.  1  U.S.
WANTS NEW IRAQ PENALTIES  Washington wants to impose more requirements on the Iraqi Government for lifting the United Nations ban on oil exports by Baghdad.  1


'Hello Muddah, Hello Fadduh!' Opens
LET'S say you strike an instant kinship with someone who mentions the Grand Concourse or Flushing.
Or that the terms nudnik and boychik invite an approving nod of recognition.
And you reflexively beam -- kvell might be the operative verb -- when you hear, for instance, that a couple named Al and Yetta Cohen have a daughter who is marrying a dentist or a dermatologist.


WHATEVER HAPPENED TO AIDS?
We do not need an "AIDS Manhattan Project." The centralization of the atomic bomb project had more do do with national security reasons than with scientific ones.
What we do need is an emphasis on small, well-focused basic research projects aimed at better understanding H.I.V.'s interactions with the human body; such projects are already underway, here in Manhattan and elsewhere.
JOHN P. MOORE Staff Investigator Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center New York, N.Y.


Mutual Funds; New Future for Dreyfus Investors
FOR Howard Stein, the chairman of the Dreyfus Corporation, the union of his company with Mellon Bank is more a realization of a long-held vision of a new world for investors than just a dollars-and-cents transaction.
His vision is that banks and mutual funds will eventually combine to create a new breed of financial institution that will provide a broader array of products than either institution can provide on its own.
This reflects his fundamental belief that bank savers, who are now fleeing bank deposit accounts because of low interest rates, are never going to return once they've tasted the more exciting -- and potentially more financially rewarding -- world of investing.


The Struggle to Find Buyers for Studios
To the Editor:
In my co-op apartment house anyway, the reason that studios for sale aren't moving  [ "Studio Owners Struggle to Find Buyers," Nov. 21 ]  is their relatively high maintenance charges.
These are drawbacks in selling the larger apartments as well.
Part of the problem lies with the board's seeming unconcern with trying to economize on operating costs, and spending unnecessarily large sums on cosmetic renovations.


Janet Margolin, Film And TV Actress, 50
Janet Margolin, an actress with a string of roles in the 1960's and 70's, including parts in two Woody Allen movies, died on Friday at her home in Los Angeles.
She was 50.
The cause was ovarian cancer, a cousin, Ruth Malin, said.


Ideas for Stuffing Pies and Stockings
THERE are those for whom Christmas isn't Christmas without a whole ham or a roast goose or, for dessert, buche de Noel.
For me, the holiday season isn't complete without mince pies.
In England, the tradition goes, when you bite into the first pie of the year, which is filled with a mixture of nuts, dried fruits, suet and spices -- all soaked in brandy -- you get a wish.
The Puritans frowned on these pies, which used to be boat-shape, representing the cradle of the baby Jesus.
They condemned them as "popish" and claimed the souls of those who ate them would go to hell.
The warnings were ignored, and later Samuel Johnson also discounted the supposed damning effects of mince pies, particularly regarding digestion: "We have never been witnesses of the animosities excited by the use of mince pies and plum porridge, nor seen what the abhorrence was of those who could seek them at all other times of the year, yet shrink from them at Christmas."


China Protests BBC Documentary About Mao
Relations between China and Britain, already strained by the dispute over Hong Kong, have plummeted further because of a British Broadcasting Corporation documentary to be aired Monday that depicts Mao Zedong as a tyrant with a sexual appetite for young women.
The Chinese Embassy here has complained to the British Foreign Office and the BBC in an attempt to force cancellation of the hourlong program, "Chairman Mao -- the Last Emperor."


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Keeping Up the Pace
JUDY HREN is a walker.
But living in the Hamptons, where there is no enclosed mall, Mrs.
Hren found winter walking a challenge.
"You're basically stuck," she said.
"There's no place to walk once the weather gets really cold."


Single Supplement
To the Editor: About "Stiff Premium to Travel Alone" (Practical Traveler, Nov. 7): An important objection to the single supplement comes from those of us who pay it only to discover we are given inferior accommodations.
On many trips, I have paid the supplement to find my room is a closet next to the elevator or a long hike down the hall.
In Spain, my window opened onto a construction site where guard dogs barked all night.
I've been on top floors the elevator didn't go to and in rooms so small you had to vault across the bed to get to the toilet.


Tiny Tots, All Aglow


Brunswick Stew
To the Editor: About "Who Invented Brunswick Stew? Hush Up and Eat" (Oct. 24): I am a 48-year-old who recalls taking part in the ritual of Brunswick stew as a child from Chicago visiting my father's family in Roxboro, N.C.
It was an all-day affair starting early in the morning in a huge black kettle heated with logs out back.
Yes, it seemed everyone added something to the pot, including squirrel, possum, rabbit and chicken.
This went on all day, with folks wandering in, tasting and fetching something else.
As kids, we climbed trees around the bubbling kettle and, when no one was looking, made our own contributions of tree bark, leaves, stones and insects.


A Holiday Celebration in Their Home Away From Home


Ms. Waldman, Mr. Schwartzberg
Lisa Beth Waldman, a law clerk for Judge Thomas B. Wells of the United States Tax Court in Washington, was married last evening to Paul Kenan Schwartzberg, an associate at Shaw, Pittman, Potts &amp; Trowbridge, a Washington law firm.
Rabbi Arnold I. Sher performed the ceremony at the Hyatt Regency Greenwich in Old Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Schwartzberg, 26, is the daughter of Dr.
Martin and Judith Waldman of Fairfield, Conn.
The bride graduated from Cornell University, and she and her husband received law degrees from Emory University.
She also received a master of laws degree in taxation from New York University.
Her father is an endodontist in Fairfield, where her mother is the office manager for his dental practice.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
ETCHINGS OF VENICE
Ugo Baracco may often be found at his stall along the Grand Canal in Venice near the Danieli Hotel, where he sits quietly while an associate negotiates sales of his etchings in summer.
At other times of the year his work is exhibited in galleries in England, France, Japan and the United States.
A selection of his etchings of Venice can be seen until Dec. 31 at Noel Fine Art in Eastchester.


Gina M. Fluhr, Anthony Celli
Gina Marie Fluhr, an assistant vice president at Prudential Securities, was married yesterday to Anthony A. Celli, a floor broker on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Both work in Manhattan.
The Rev.
Eugene J. O'Brien officiated at Immaculate Conception Roman Catholic Church in Tuckahoe, N.Y.
Mrs.
Celli, 34, graduated from the State University at Purchase, N.Y.
She is the daughter of Catherine McMurray Fluhr of Mount Vernon, N.Y., and the late Edward D. Fluhr.


An Ex-Trucker Delivering Souls to the Lord
Howard Jones had just finished saying grace over a tuna sandwich at the truck stop cafe off Interstate 78 here and began to explain how he came to be a chaplain working out of a 45-foot-long Marmon rig parked outside.
"You mean it seems out of place," he said, recasting a question that went something like "What's a nice guy like you doing in a place like this?"


Correction
An entry in this column last Sunday about Corvette stamps misstated the address of the Inter-Governmental Philatelic Corporation, a company from which they are available.
It is 460 West 34th Street, New York, N.Y. 10001.


Epiphanies In a Dive
SCENES blossom and wither, stride forward and then stumble, and you never know for sure how real they are -- great music objectively reported -- or how much they are the product of scene members' subjective enthusiasms.
CBGB, which is celebrating its 20th anniversary this month, was a true scene in the mid-1970's, with all the sweaty interaction that that long and narrow club compelled.
Just going to the bathroom, down long and dingy stairs behind the stage to the left, was an invitation to encounter every sort of downtown denizen and substance consumption known to man (and woman) at the time.
Musicians mingled with groupies and fans and one another; writers schmoozed with each other and with musicians; fights broke out and friendships formed.


In a Season of Giving, Some Fund Raising Should Raise Questions
The telephone caller sounded sincere, pleading persuasively for a charitable donation to buy bulletproof vests for police officers.
Warning bells should have gone off when the caller insistently offered to pick up the donation within 24 hours, acknowledged Mark Ackerman, senior vice president at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center.
But he remembered all the times patrolmen from the Sixth Precinct had pitched in to help hospital workers.
Here was a chance to reciprocate.
He pledged $1,000 to the Metropolitan Police Conference, which sent a messenger for the pickup.


Elizabeth Lusskin, Marc L. Solomon
Dr. and Mrs.
Ralph Lusskin of Manhattan have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Lusskin to Marc Leonard Solomon, the son of Gary and Eileen Solomon of Cleveland.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lusskin, 29, is a legislative counsel for the New York State Office of Federal Affairs in Washington.
She graduated from Yale University and received a law degree from New York University.


Alice Bartlett, William Mahoney
Alice Brewster Bartlett, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Bartlett of New Paltz, N.Y., was married yesterday to William Patrick Mahoney, a son of Ellen L. Mahoney of Portland, Me., and the late William D. Mahoney.
The Rev.
Joel E. Strauch performed the Congregational ceremony at the Larchmont (N.Y.) Yacht Club.


Corrections
A short review of the album "Way Out Where" by the rock band the Verlaines on page 35 of the Arts and Leisure section today misspells the name of the leader of the New Zealand group and its record company.
He is Graeme Downes and it is Slash Records.


U.N. Is Worried by Human Cost of Embargoes
Concern is rising at the United Nations over the human and financial cost of the embargoes the Security Council has imposed on Yugoslavia, Iraq and Haiti.
While the leaders of those countries are responsible for the actions that led to the embargoes, it is common citizens who suffer the most.
United Nations members are paying more than $800 million a year to ease the pain sanctions cause poor and vulnerable groups in those countries.


A Traditional Shul, a Nontraditional Family
CATHERINE SULL is your typical atypical New York Jew.
She grabs some vegetarian Chinese food before Friday night's services, at which she wears a yarmulke.
When she told her grandfather, an Orthodox rabbi, that she was a lesbian, he said, "We love you first." She is a 42-year-old banker who tinkers with sports car engines.
She believes that . . .
"Wait a minute, what's this story about?" she asks.


The Red Baron Of Finance Is Going to Jail
HE loved to be called the Red Baron as he flew vintage fighter planes and built a small California savings and loan association into the nation's largest.
He showed a generation of bankers how to gamble with insured deposits and abuse flexible accounting rules to cover up the losses.
Now Charles W. Knapp is going to prison.


At the Newark Museum, the Unexpected
YOU can expect to find the unexpected in two shows at the Newark Museum.
The diverse work of 68 artists in the 29th Ceramic National show ranges from comic or political statements to eccentric improvisations on traditional forms.
A few pieces reach peaks of elegant grace.
And spotlights in the Contemporary Craft Gallery illuminate the tiny wildflowers that seem alive within the glass of Paul Stankard's paper weights.
A close examination reveals minuscule words and imaginary creatures hidden down among the roots.


Jets' Offense Fails to Show for Cowboys Showdown
Right after Dallas had plastered the Jets to the turf of Giants Stadium, safety Ronnie Lott was preaching togetherness in the New York locker room.
"I'm not going to do anything to fragment this team," Lott said.
"Today, we lost as a team. There are times when the offense has been a good defense for us and there are times when the defense can do more to be a better offense for us. The only thing we as a defense have to show for it today is we lost, 28-7."


Slain Principal Still a Driving Spirit; A Year Later, Patrick Daly's School Survives and Thrives
The first thing they did a year ago at Public School 15, upon hearing word that the principal had been shot dead, was shut the doors.
The killing of Patrick Daly was enough violation for the school in Red Hook, Brooklyn.
The Sullivan Street entrance was first, then the exits on Wolcott and Van Brunt and Richards, the four corners of a tiny universe in peril.
No television cameras were allowed in to seek sound bites of heartbreak.
The damage would be limited.
What was alive and vital inside would be preserved.


Carolina and Williams Pass a Test
North Carolina 81, Ohio State 68  Donald Williams delivered No. 2 North Carolina from the post-exam doldrums yesterday, scoring 16 of his 26 points in a six-minute stretch of the second half for an 81-68 victory over Ohio State in Chapel Hill, N.C.


Al Pacino as Novelist in Stamford's 'Chinese Coffee'
THE presence a very magnetic one -- of Al Pacino in a two-play repertory caps the Stamford Center for the Arts event-driven theater series.
Given the Rich Forum's spotlight on somebodies -- Tommy Tune turned out in October, Lynn Redgrave shows up in March -- it can be argued that the executive producer, Alexander H. Cohen, presumes that the persona, not the play, is the thing.
At this tempo, including the one-night celebrity gigs at the Palace a few blocks away, Mr.
Cohen may have resolved to give Stamford a season of 1,000 stars.
Why not?
In New York, he made it happen in just one night.


Conversations: Larry Dossey, M.D.; A Doctor Looks to Science For Proof of a Spiritual Realm
IN 1986, Dr.
Larry Dossey faced an unusual ethical problem.
As an internist and chief of staff at a major hospital in Dallas, he had long been convinced of the close relationship between mental states and physical healing.
But he had recently been surprised to learn of a carefully controlled study apparently showing that patients in a coronary care unit who were prayed for daily did better on average than patients not receiving prayers.
This might have been less surprising if the patients had known they were getting special attention.
But neither the nearly 400 patients nor their doctors and nurses knew who had been randomly assigned to the group being prayed for.


At Sunnyside, A Candlelight Celebration
A tour of Washington Irving's house, decorated for a Victorian Christmas, Tarrytown, N.Y.; Dec. 11.


Geometric Forms With a Humorous Edge
THE Sound Shore Gallery, in Stamford, is at 6 Landmark Square, where the underground parking lot is a color-coded board game and the color purple marks the bays closest to the gallery.
It makes for an appropriate introduction to the John Pindyck Miller show, a selection of abstract paintings complemented by sculpture in polished aluminum and rusty or painted steel.
They, in turn, provide a sharp contrast with the other exhibition under consideration, which is a sampling of angels on view in New Rochelle.
To the extent that he deals in geometric forms, Mr.
Miller can be counted a Constructivist sculptor and a Suprematist painter.
But he has little in common with the Russian Constructivists of the 1920's or their colleague Malevich, who produced his "Black Square" of 1915 in an attempt to rid painting of its representational ballast.
For one thing, the American artist, who has been on the Westchester scene for 25 years and has appeared in Manhattan, most recently at the Maxwell Davidson Gallery, is no purist powered by political ideology.
For another, he maintains humorous if oblique relations with figuration.


Quebec Chief Vows to Fight For Canada
His father was a Premier of Quebec and so was his younger brother, and now, in an unusual case of political inheritance, it's Daniel Johnson's turn, at least for a few months.
Mr.
Johnson has just taken over as provincial leader of the Liberal Party, which has held power in Quebec for the last eight years under Robert Bourassa.
That means that Mr.
Johnson, a 48-year-old former corporate executive in Montreal, will lead the fight against separatists next year over the province's future.


Knicks Must Replace a Main Man
What now, Knicks?
Do they stand pat, or deal for immediate veteran backcourt help, possibly sacrificing a young talent like Hubert Davis in the process?


Yeltsin Marches Russia Toward Dictatorship; Governing Better
To the Editor:
Marshall I. Goldman offers poor advice to Boris N. Yeltsin in "Yeltsin Needs a Fresh Mandate" (Op-Ed, Dec. 14) because, like many Western observers, he arranges the Russian context according to his own understanding of democracy.


Churches From Before The Church
VISITORS fascinated by the glories of ancient Rome rarely fail to tour the Forum or the Colosseum, vast tracts of archeological remains that paint a broad picture of public life.
But those seeking rarer glimpses into a more private Rome -- the houses, tenements, alleyways, mausoleums and often secret meeting places of the cults of the day -- will find a wealth of remains in and under many of the city's earliest churches.
One can still feel, and indeed see, the stamp of ancient Rome in these paleo-Christian churches even though centuries of restorations have totally transformed them.
A visit also provides a welcome change from the steady diet of glitter and gold provided by Rome's monumental Baroque treasures like St.
Peter's.


The Cranky Spirit Of Archie Bunker Haunts This House
IN THE MYTHICAL WORLD OF LIFE after television, Archie Bunker, the quintessential white Protestant bigot, might be peppering neighbors in some Florida retirement community today with wistful memories of the good old days and lamentations about a hometown gone to hell.
Imagine if he returned to Queens and discovered who was living in his old house.
If it wasn't jarring enough to him when the Jeffersons moved next door, Bunker -- a particularly apt surname for a holdout in a changing neighborhood -- would be greeted by something that would defy all his expectations: a black family in which the blue-collar father engages in outbursts of Bunkeresque intensity, often directed at his son -- who is no liberal Meathead but rather a deep-dyed conservative.
Meet Norman Lear's newest television family, the Cumberbatches, due early next year in a midseason replacement show for CBS called "704 Hauser Street."


The E.M.S. Squabble
To Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani and his supporters, his encounter last week with an emergency medical crew is proof that he would be "a hands-on Mayor" who would stand up to the bureaucracy.
But interviews with people who say they saw the dispute raise questions about his account.
Article, page 47.


Facing the Future; The Palestinians Look In the Mirror and See Trouble
IN the three months since that unforgettable handshake between Yasir Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin, the whole outlook for the Palestinians' future has changed.
A populace that has spent 26 years in submission or revolt is organizing itself to take at least a measure of power.
Yet this has done little to alleviate the anxieties that for decades have come to characterize the Palestinians' psyche.
And whatever unanimity the Palestinians might have once had seems to be evaporating.
Where visions of a brighter future are supposed to be, there is instead much fretting over the many catastrophes looming over the horizon.
The worries range from a fear that Mr.
Arafat, Palestine Liberation Organization chairman, will lead them into dictatorship, to a conviction that Israelis are weaving dark plots.


Driven-Driven
This is a liquidity-driven market," opined David Shulman, a long-headed market analyst with Salomon Brothers, suggesting that higher interest rates to come would sop up that desirable liquidity.
A cartoon by J. P. Rini in The New Yorker shows a man at a modern-art show opening, staring at the "Exit" sign, while another museumgoer explains to a friend, "Roger has always been text-driven."


Scott Leads Redmen Past Fordham
In the seventh game of his first Division I season, James Scott has found a place on the St.
John's team.
Whether he can be a leader as David Cain was a year ago remains to be seen.
St.
John's defeated Fordham, 98-72, today before 7,822 fans at Nassau Coliseum behind Scott's 26 points.
The victory came in the first E.C.A.C.
Metro New York Basketball Challenge, a one-day, four-game event.


Two Bodies Found Inside Burning Car
Firefighters discovered two bodies yesterday amid the flames of a burning car in a remote area under the New Jersey Turnpike in Elizabeth, N.J., the state police said.
The bodies were burnt beyond recognition, said Sgt.
Daniel J. Cosgrove, a spokesman for the New Jersey State Police.
He called the deaths "suspicious" and said an autopsy will be conducted today.


'In Our House There Were No Chinese Things'
CHARLIE CHAN IS DEAD  An Anthology of Contemporary Asian American Fiction.
Edited by Jessica Hagedorn. 569 pp.
New York: Penguin Books.
Paper, $14.


The Battle Over 'New York Days'
To the Editor:
I am more bemused than aggrieved by Lewis H. Lapham's mysterious and interminable broadside regarding my "New York Days" in The New York Times Book Review ("Advertisements for Themselves: A Letter From Lewis Lapham," Oct. 24).
At first I intended not to reply at all, but eventually concluded to do so, in part to set the record straight on two or three matters and also to try to make some sense for myself of Mr.
Lapham's inchoate quarrels and roily resentments.
Sympathetic to the noble reader who may rightfully be impatient with this edgy and querulous contretemps, I shall be as brief as I can.


Dear Tight End
Open Letter to Johnny Mitchell:
Do you know me?
I sit in Section 333 of Giant Stadium watching the Jets play football.
I have been sitting in the same section with my father, mother and two brothers for 10 years.
In those 10 years we have seen the Jets make the playoffs three times and win only one playoff game.
It may sound like I am complaining, but I'm not.
After all, I am the one who decides year after year that this will be the season the Jets win it all.
I am the one who makes the decision to pay the ever-increasing ticket prices, the $5 parking fee and all the tolls on the way to the Meadowlands.


Maybe the Dog's Owner Is Unaware of the Problem
To the Editor:
Regarding Robert Lipsyte's Nov. 5 column, "Dog Bites Little Girl. Doesn't Anyone Care?": I happen to be a lover of both dogs and little girls; I have one of each.
Each morning my day begins by taking my dog to her play group in Riverside Park.
In the evening, even in the dark of winter, we convene again.
We watch out for each other and take care of the park.
As a group we provide a lookout that, by means of example, encourages those around us to keep our neighborhood and park clean.


Alisa Diamond, Stephen Lichaw
Alisa Robin Diamond, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael K. Diamond of East Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Stephen Edward Lichaw, the son of Richard I. Lichaw of Lake Success, L.I., and Phyllis Lichaw of Fort Lee, N.J.
Rabbi Aaron Petuchowski officiated at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.
Mrs.
Lichaw, 31, graduated from New York University.
She is a vice president of corporate affairs and the corporate secretary of Price Communications, in New York, owners of radio and television stations.


Opportunities for Young Thespians
FOR many youngsters, the holiday season wouldn't be complete without an outing to a Broadway show, a performance of "The Nutcracker" ballet or at least a local production of "A Christmas Carol." Those so inspired by the experience that they would gladly exchange their seats in the audience for a role on stage may be interested in some of the county's theater arts classes.
A parent need not have aspirations of transforming their offspring into the next Macaulay Culkin or the next Cosette in "Les Miserables" to enroll a child in an after-school or weekend theater program.


Mother of Two Finds Material and Emotional Support
On the first bitter-cold night of December, Gail Adams roasts a chicken and digs out a dusty box of Christmas ornaments.
A scraggly fir tree is propped up on the porch of her tiny white house, waiting to be decorated.
Her children, Jessica and Ryan, dance dizzily around the tree as she prepares supper.
For Mrs. Adams, life is rarely this good.


New Proposals For Disabled
THE question of who gets the good seats in an airplane's coach section may become subject to enough Government control to permit those with minor disabilities to get seats to match their needs.
The Department of Transportation, in its most recent announcement of proposed new rules, reports a petition from a consumer who has a fused knee and wants the airlines to be required to give those with ambulatory disabilities like hers seats that will accommodate the problem.


Ideas for Stuffing Pies and Stockings
THERE are those for whom Christmas isn't Christmas without a whole ham or a roast goose or, for dessert, buche de Noel.
For me, the holiday season isn't complete without mince pies.
In England, the tradition goes, when you bite into the first pie of the year, which is filled with a mixture of nuts, dried fruits, suet and spices -- all soaked in brandy -- you get a wish.
The Puritans frowned on these pies, which used to be boat-shape, representing the cradle of the baby Jesus.
They condemned them as "popish" and claimed the souls of those who ate them would go to hell.
The warnings were ignored, and later Samuel Johnson also discounted the supposed damning effects of mince pies, particularly regarding digestion: "We have never been witnesses of the animosities excited by the use of mince pies and plum porridge, nor seen what the abhorrence was of those who could seek them at all other times of the year, yet shrink from them at Christmas."


School Boards: A Schedule of Meetings
DISTRICT 1  Jan. 5; P.S. 61, 610 East 12th Street, Manhattan; (212) 602-9765.
DISTRICT 2  Dec. 21; P.S. 158, 1458 York Avenue, at 78th Street, Manhattan, Manhattan; (212) 337-8712.


A Timeless Reminder Of Back Seats in '57 Buicks
THE CASINO AT CAESAR'S Palace was erupting into its usual Saturday night mayhem, but inside the showroom a touristy crowd of 1,100 sat in an almost eerie trance.
Johnny Mathis stood on stage, only weeks shy of 58 but seeming frozen in time, almost as if he were still the voice that piped into the back seats of his fans' 1957 Buicks.
When he took a featherweight leap of an octave in "Misty," his listeners burst into a cheer, as if he had reaffirmed a lost moment of their youth.
Mr.
Mathis could have coasted all night on nostalgia, but the emotions somehow still seemed fresh to him.
As he sang "It's love, this time it's love, my foolish heart," his knees buckled and his hands clutched the air.
Boyish doesn't begin to describe him; he seems all but untouched by life, wide-eyed and unsullied.
Watching him, his audience can sink into the illusion that some things never change.


Mize, Who Got in by Back Door, Stays in Front of Pack at the World Championship
Somewhere off the Great Barrier Reef, Greg Norman is sunning himself on the deck of a yacht, playing with his kids and enjoying a Christmas family reunion, Aussie style.
Tournament officials here at the Johnnie Walker World Championship certainly aren't happy about Norman choosing to pass up this $2.7 million bonanza, but Larry Mize is.
Mize, in the select 28-man field as Norman's replacement, continued his improbable march across the Tryall Club in today's third round.
He birdied six holes and bogeyed three for a round of 68, a 54-hole total of 12-under-par 201 and a three-stroke lead over Colin Montgomerie of Scotland, who also shot 68.


Amy Wolfson, Luca Bigerna
Amy Good Wolfson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman L. Wolfson of Mantoloking, N.J., was married yesterday to Luca Bigerna, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pietro Bigerna of Sansepolcro, Italy.
Msgr.
William E. Maguire performed the ceremony at the Church of the Sacred Heart in Bay Head, N.J.
The bride, 34, is the renewals manager for Conde Nast magazines in New York.
She graduated from Franklin and Marshall College.
Her father, now retired, was the founding chairman of Norman Lawrence Patterson &amp; Farrell, a public-relations company in New York.


Marriage and Fighting Go Together
The few.
The proud.
The unmarried.
That was the new recruiting refrain the Marine Corps was pondering last summer after Gen.
Carl E. Mundy Jr., the Marine Commandant, issued orders to phase out enlistment of married men and women beginning next year.
Marine commanders worried that many young married recruits failed to re-enlist after long tours away from home.


Quiet Nights, Quiet Stars
UPTOWN -- It was a highly unlikely occurrence, something akin to a lunar, if not a solar, eclipse.
On Monday night, Brooke Astor, 91, New York's most sociable of socialites, was staying home.
"This flu is such a bore," said the city's Queen Mother of philanthropy, who, since 1960, has given away more than $165 million of her late husband Vincent's fortune to improve the quality of life in this city.
Dressed in a fine wool Balmain suit and pearl-drop earrings, she was sitting in the library of her Park Avenue apartment, as resplendent under the weather as she is when she's out in it.


The World; Is the Prince of Tabloids Fit to Be King?
LAST week Prince Charles kept to a low-key schedule, unencumbered by intrusive photographers.
He spent some time at Highgrove, his estate in Gloucestershire where he grows organic vegetables.
He attended a conference in an East London school for the Prince's Trust, an organization that assists disadvantaged youth, and gave a lecture in South Wales.
The Princess of Wales, in the meantime, was pursued by paparazzi as she carried out what she said would be her last round of official engagements before a self-imposed retreat.
On Thursday, the whirlwind came to an end at an annual meeting of a charity for the homeless at the Institute of Contemporary Art.
As she stepped toward her Daimler in bright winter sunlight, she paused to mingle one last time with her adoring fans, who pressed gifts, flowers and poems upon her as if she were at dockside, departing Britain's shores for good.


Smoothing the Way for the Snow Thrower
AS if the holiday rush was not enough, now is also the best time to prepare snow throwers.
Preparing a thrower is much like preparing a lawnmower, but there are some important differences.
For example, leaving old gasoline in the tank or using leftover gasoline are primary causes of starting and performance problems with snow throwers.


Elizabeth Ward, William Robbins
Elizabeth Hazzard Ward, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elmer L. Ward Jr. of Far Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to William LeBus Robbins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Robbins of Lexington, Ky.
Canon John T. Morrow officiated at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Gladstone, N.J.


Curriculum Vitae Addendum
To the Editor:  Having read Michael Kimmelman's essay "A New Broom Sweeps the Prado Museum"  [ Nov. 21 ] , I should like to note that although Francisco Calvo Serraller, the new director of the Prado, is best known as a critic of contemporary art, he wrote his doctoral dissertation on the art theory of Vicente Carducho, an important painter of the Spanish Golden age.
Mr.
Calvo's scholarly edition of Carducho's treatise "Dialogos de la Pintura" is a model of its kind.
From an art-historical point of view, Mr.
Calvo is certainly qualified for his new post.
JONATHAN BROWN New York The writer is Carroll and Milton Petrie Professor of Fine Arts at New York University.


Business Diary: December 12 - 17
ECONOMY Believe It or Not, a GATT Agreement (With Some Holes)  When seven years of world trade talks ended last week -- on schedule! -- it was really a bow to the inevitable.
For even as political flash fires flare worldwide, the business world is rapidly making borders irrelevant -- a reality negotiators recognized in cutting many tariffs and moving toward ending subsidies.
The goal was clear: raise everyone's living standards.
And the cheers were equally clear.
"The world has chosen openness and cooperation," said Peter Sutherland, GATT's director general.
There was also a sense that in the deadline dash, negotiators lopped off anything sticky -- like a late spat over European limits on American movies -- to deal with another day.
President Clinton met his "fast track" goal, however -- Congress must vote "yes" or "no," not amend the pact to death.
A comment by France's Foreign Minister, Alain Juppe, best captures the mood: "I never want to hear the word GATT again."


Luxury Hides Its Face
THIS should be high season for life's little luxuries.
Or even great big sumptuous indulgences.
But not, of course, in the 1990's.
Perish the thought!
Once again, in a long history that goes back to scented Roman baths (if not quite to cavemen's skins), luxury has been redefined.
Since extravagance was supposed to have been thrown out with the 1980's, you cannot now have flaunt-it fashion.
Instead, there is a pure cotton Yohji Yamamoto shirt that has to be laundered by loving (read costly) human hands, or a pure silk quilted lining to a sturdy shearling duffel.
Luxury is still in fashion, but it is hiding its face.


Julie Applebaum, Gregory Flynn
Harvey and Elizabeth Applebaum of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter Julie Ellen Applebaum to Gregory Grant Flynn, the son of Donald Flynn of Sandy, Ore., and Roberta Flynn of Ross, Calif.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Applebaum, 27, is a law student at Stanford University.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University.
Her father is a partner in the Washington law firm of Covington &amp; Burling.
Her mother is the program coordinator at the Corcoran Gallery of Art.


Tracy Graham, Jerry Baird Jr.
Mrs.
Robert P. Graham has announced June wedding plans for her daughter Tracy Naureen Graham and Jerry Phillips Baird Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Baird of Greenwich, Conn.
Ms.
Graham, 30, is also the daughter of the late Robert P. Graham.
She is a senior media planner at Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer/Euro RSCG, an advertising firm in New York.
She graduated from the University of Richmond.


Susan G. Bernstein, Michael Vardy
Judith A. Haddad of Hollywood, Fla., and Sidney Bernstein of Great Neck, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Gale Bernstein and Dr.
Michael David Vardy, a son of Dr.
Moshe and Edith Vardy, also of Great Neck.
A February 1995 wedding is planned.
Miss Bernstein is an actress and singer in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Carnegie Mellon University.
Miss Bernstein is a stepdaughter of Edward M. Haddad.


Corrections
A theater listing and a picture caption about "The Ash Fire" in the Arts and Leisure guide today misstate its opening date, because of a schedule change made after the section was printed.
The play is still in previews and will open on Jan. 9, not today.


Russian Premier Assails Reformers in Cabinet for 'Poorly Thought-Out Experiments'
In another strong signal of a shift against economic reform after the Russian elections, Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin was quoted today as scathingly accusing Westernized reformers in his own Cabinet of "poorly thought-out experiments" and a failure "to think about the people, for the sake of whom the reforms were started."
Mr.
Chernomyrdin said the Government would now focus less on tight monetary and spending controls, which would reduce Russia's high rate of inflation, and more on social protection and on state and private investment to create jobs.


Helping the Neediest Women
A refugee arrives in New York from Belarus.
At 56, she has endured for decades a marriage to an abusive, alcoholic husband who has, at least once, come close to killing her.
She speaks no English; but immigrant organizations help her to adjust.
They arrange English classes.
As her confidence grows, she finds the courage, for the first time in her life, to ask for help.
In desperation, she calls the agency that has already helped her so much, an agency supported in part by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
She finds herself in the office of Victoria Neznansky, a vibrant young woman from Odessa who speaks her language, understands her plight, tells her she's not alone and offers support.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 High above Riverside Drive, Joseph Clair Davis rings bells and more bells -- 74 in all -- in a joyous shower of song.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Orchard Street, the fabled marketplace of the Lower East Side, is marketing its history in a struggle to revive.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 15 "Sunday Saturnalia" on the Bowery; "Night Before Kwanzaa" in St.
Albans.
MOVIE CLOCK 18 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 22 From the Rockefeller rink up to Central Park, sustenance, and then some, for the weary holiday shopper.
SOAPBOX 25 Hamilton's Harlem home: what is to be done?
Plus, letters and a child's Christmas in Brooklyn.


Wall Street; Is Obeying the Rules Enough?
THE news about the company seemed sure to depress its stock price.
But did the company's top officers know that, when some of them sold their entire stock holdings just days before the news reached the general public?
Biocraft Laboratories Inc., a generic-drug maker, is under scrutiny by the Food and Drug Administration over problems in documenting quality control at a major plant.
When the news was announced on Nov. 22 in The Wall Street Journal, the stock price dropped $4.38, to $25.13 a share.
By last Friday, the stock had fallen to $20.25 a share.


WHATEVER HAPPENED TO AIDS?
Kristine M. Gebbie, the AIDS czar, does not seem capable of taking a ferocious AIDS bull by the horns.
She says she cannot "conceptualize" what it takes to "fix AIDS." So why is she policy coordinator?
DONNA LUPIE Astoria, Queens


U.S. IS HARDENING ITS STAND ON IRAQ
Hardening its position toward Saddam Hussein's Government, the Clinton Administration wants to impose tough new requirements for lifting the United Nations ban on Iraqi oil exports.
The United States is urging other members of the United Nations Security Council to insist that Baghdad recognize Kuwait as an independent country and stop persecuting dissident Kurds and Shiite Muslims.


The Nationalist Roadblock in Europe
The collapse of the merger between Volvo of Sweden and Renault of France reflected many factors, but among them was one particularly worrisome in Europe: rising economic nationalism.
The proposed Volvo-Renault merger fell apart this month against a backdrop of cross-border strains involving many of Europe's large corporations and industries.
Volkswagen of Germany, struggling to restore its financial equilibrium, has provoked harsh criticism in Spain with its plan to close its aged Zona Franca car plant in Barcelona operated by its money-losing subsidiary, SEAT, at a time when Spain has one of Europe's highest unemployment rates.
At the same time, Volkswagen is squabbling with the Czech Government over its investment plans in Skoda, the car maker.


Richter Still in Record Hunt
Statistics never lie, right?
That means goalie Mike Richter can still break Davey Kerr's Ranger record Sunday night when the Rangers play host to the Ottawa Senators at Madison Square Garden.
If Richter plays and gets a victory or a tie, he will have 20 consecutive decisions without defeat.
Kerr first set the record of 19 in 1939-40, the last season the Rangers won the Stanley Cup.
"I really don't care about that because we didn't win," Richter said Friday night after the Rangers lost, 6-4, to the Red Wings in Detroit.
"The way I look at it, I should have to start a new streak in the next game."


A Tradition, From Boom to Bust
ATTITUDES TOWARD THE classical-music canon have been changing over the last two decades.
The "art music" world, it has increasingly been noted, is dominated by a handful of dead white men, mostly dead white German men.
Despite the supposed sophistication of late-20th-century scholars, musicians and listeners, most have, over the years, willingly yielded to a kind of dehumidifier principle of fame, which sucks all the subtle moisture out of history.
The famous become ever more famous, because they are relentlessly performed and anthologized, while those just below vanish into the abyss.
There are two classes, the canonized and the disappeared, with almost nothing in between.
No phenomenon better illustrates the pleasures and woes of this superhero approach to music than the humble bust on the piano.
Composer busts are concrete but at the same time ideal.
In their idealism, in fact, they are sometimes almost interchangeable.


Showcases of the Roman Scene
ROME without piazzas would be Venice without the water, Pisa without the tower.
In this city of walkers and strollers, the piazzas are the markers, the loosely defined destinations of the afternoon stroll -- the passeggiata -- when talk is more the point than exercise, the centers where all those tangled byways converge and inspire comments like: "Oh, here we are."


Ms. Matheson, Mr. Toepler
Thornton Matheson, a daughter of Mrs.
Charles Becker of Aiken, S.C., and William L. Matheson of Hobe Sound, Fla., was married yesterday to Stefan Toepler, a son of Christa and Kurt-Hartwig Toepler of Porta Westfalica, Germany.
Justice Sidney H. Asch of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated at the Yale Club in New York.
Ms.
Matheson, who is keeping her name, graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and received a master's degree in international economics and European studies from Johns Hopkins University.
She is an economic research associate in the Washington office of the Tudor Investment Corporation.
Her father retired as the chairman of the Michigan Energy Resources Company, a utility holding concern.


Renewal Plan Moves Ahead
Ground breaking is scheduled to begin next spring on an ambitious plan to restore one of the city's most impoverished areas -- 28 blocks in the northwestern portion of Ocean Hill-Brownsville and the southeastern portion of Bedford-Stuyvesant.
As part of the Saratoga Square plan, the city this month sent out requests for proposals to nonprofit community agencies for the marketing of 1,200 housing units -- a mixture of new two-family houses and renovated apartment buildings.
The plan also calls for the creation of park areas and for new commercial development.


Single Supplement
To the Editor: When will hotels, travel groups, cruises, etc., learn that a huge number of single, widowed or divorced travelers do not care to share a room with either a stranger or a friend to save the single traveler's penalty?
Would-be travelers either skip the trips with surcharges for singles or fly to their destinations and rent a service apartment.
For both business and pleasure travel this is far more interesting, comfortable and less expensive than the usual cookie-cutter chain hotel room, which is far too large for one person, and too cooped up for pleasant long-term living.


Surgeon General's Son Sought on Drug Charge in Arkansas
The son of Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders, who suggested two weeks ago that the Government study legalizing drugs to reduce crime, is being sought by the police here on a drug charge.
The police issued an arrest warrant on Wednesday for Kevin Maurice Elders, 28, for possession of cocaine.
The police said today that they had not arrested Mr.
Elders because they could not find him, but that an arrest was expected soon.


ARNOLD GLIMCHER AND HIS ART WORLD ALL-STARS
As curator of "Drawing Into Film: Directors' Drawings," the exhibition referred to in Karen Odyniec's letter on Arnold Glimcher (Nov. 14), I felt compelled to respond to her remarks.
In locating directors who draw in the cinematic process, I made numerous inquiries into the work of talented directors of various races and both genders.
The show was subsequently comprised of only those directors who chose to respond and participate.


Out Man in a Mig
MY FIRST LOOK AT POST-SOVIET AVIation was not confidence-building.
From the rusting outhouse to the old planes lining the Tarmac in various stages of cannibalization, the little airfield some 100 miles west of Moscow might have been home to a fly-by-night crop-duster in a 1940's B movie.
Why, then, am I -- the sort who buckles his seat belt to move the car in the driveway -- perched on a bench in the tumbledown flight-operations center, struggling to memorize the three ways to trigger a VS-1-BRI rocket-assisted aircraft ejection seat?


SUNDAY: December 19, 1993; Subtext
Torn earlobe? -- Pregnant? -- Do you need braces? -- Fix your hair! -- You may not know if you have lupus.
It's all the standard fare of subway ads.
But wait.
What is that just above the head of the man with all the pierced flesh?
Next to the hot-line poster?


Thousands in Budapest Mourn Hungarian Prime Minister


Smoothing the Way for the Snow Thrower
AS if the holiday rush was not enough, now is also the best time to prepare snow throwers.
Preparing a thrower is much like preparing a lawnmower, but there are some important differences.
For example, leaving old gasoline in the tank or using leftover gasoline are primary causes of starting and performance problems with snow throwers.


DEC. 12-18;
In the 1980's, it seems, many things in the art world were priced higher than they are today.
Back in 1987, a $10 million gift to the Metropolitan Museum of Art by Henry R. Kravis was enough to put the financier's name permanently on a museum wing.


Playing Till You Drop
VIDEO games are already a multibillion-dollar industry and are expected to get even bigger when they become interactive through cable.
An interactive video game network will allow subscribers to call up thousands of games from a library and download their choices to their television sets.
The network will also make it possible for two or more subscribers in different locations to play each other.
For example, a subscriber in Manhattan who wants to play with a friend in Queens will no longer have to wait for the weekend to cross the East River to do battle.
Or, if the friend in Queens is not available, the subscriber in Manhattan can solicit a pickup game with any subscriber to the network.


TODAY IN The City
THE ROAD WARS  Traffic is murder, and it's going to get worse.
But you don't just have to sit there steaming.
Page 1.
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT  A dispute over Grant's Tomb; after a slaying, a "miracle" in Brooklyn.
Pages 6 and 10.


In Nairobi, Car-Jacking Is a Bitter Fact of Life
It happens on average 10 times a day here.
And for many in this East African capital, it has become a fact of life, a danger almost as common as being robbed on the streets.
But car-jacking is more terrifying, they say.
Every day, the local newspapers list the previous day's thefts and victims: a truck stolen at an intersection in central Nairobi by men dressed as policemen; a four-wheel drive vehicle stolen as the driver pulled out of a hotel parking lot; a Catholic priest robbed of his car by eight armed men.
Worried about his safety, not even President Daniel arap Moi likes to travel by car at night, Kenyan officials say.


Great Affectations
SPLENDOURS AND MISERIES  A Life of Sacheverell Sitwell.
By Sarah Bradford.
Illustrated. 486 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $35.


Hartford Firm Tests New Legal Issues
RECENTLY, a husband and wife consulted a Hartford lawyer, Maggie Cassella, about a problem they had.
In a few weeks, the man could become a woman.
But doctors said they would only perform the sex-change operation if the couple were divorced, because two women could not legally be married.
The couple, still very much in love, wished to continue living together after the operation.
They wanted Ms.
Cassella to handle the legal work of the divorce and a subsequent property-sharing agreement that would substitute in certain respects for a marriage contract.


Human Override
To the Sports Editor:
The New York Times computer ranking system seems quite flawed.
Experience and common sense suggest that with the regular season three-quarters gone, a team's ranking should not change very much as the result of a single game.
The most recent ranking, however, had the Giants and Chargers moving up six places and the Jets dropping back seven.
Eight other teams moved four or five places.


A Viper in the Bosom of Blues?
To the Editor:
The review of James Lincoln Collier's "Jazz: The American Theme Song" (Nov. 21) is yet another example of the impoverished state of criticism that obscures the quality and honor of this art.
Your reviewer refers to Mr.
Collier as "a stickler for the truth." That is more than absurd.
Among professional musicians and serious scholars of jazz, he is known for what he truly is -- a poseur who attempts to elevate himself above his subject.
His biographies of Louis Armstrong and Duke Ellington are filled with errors.
His purpose is not critical, musical or scholarly.
As a musician, he is just what he now pretends to be outraged by -- a man who cannot seriously analyze music but takes advantage of the lay public by using musical terminology.


Handling A Move Overseas
WHAT arrangements should you make for your home if you plan to live overseas for the next few years?
And what questions should be raised before signing a lease at the other end?
These problems face an increasing number of families as commerce goes global and overseas markets require an overseas presence.


Even Marines Retreat From Cowboys' Defense
After today's 28-7 whipping of the Jets, the Cowboys probably should have given a game ball to Jimmy Johnson's first psychology professor.
Last Sunday, after the Cowboys manhandled the Vikings, 37-20, the Cowboys' coach lashed out at his defense, saying it was playing lethargically.
In effect, he was saying that with the playoffs coming, he did not want fat-cat players.


For Belgrade's Broken Middle Class, War Brings Chaos and Bread Lines
What was striking about the bread line that began to form in the center of the city a little after 1 A.M. today and eventually stretched for some three miles was how well-dressed many of the people were.
Many of the men wore carefully kept suits.
There were fur collars and even fur coats among the women who waited patiently for hours at one of the capital's most elegant pedestrian malls, lined with graceful 19th-century buildings.


Three Dimensions Illustrator's Forte
BIGGER is better for Kevin O'Callaghan, 35, of Stony Brook, a three-dimensional illustrator.
As an innovator in dimensional illustration, he solves design problems dimensionally and usually with "backyard mechanics or anything you can find in a hardware store."
Whenever possible, Mr. O'Callaghan said, he chooses environmentally safer methods.


Corrections
A brief report on Oct. 24 about how to dress in punk style, accompanying an article about fashionable imitations of the punk look, omitted the name of a co-author of the punk how-to book "Wild Style." Cyn.
Zarco wrote the book with Robert Hofler.
On Nov. 26, Ms.
Zarco wrote to The Times about the omission; this correction was delayed by a misrouting of her letter at The Times.


Professional Pay Disparity
To the Editor:
In "It's Time to Trim Hefty Paychecks" (Viewpoints, Dec. 5), Derek Bok's disingenuous call for income cuts for lawyers, doctors (presumably medical only) and executives is startling not for what it says but for what it reveals about the academic community's lack of introspection.


Secrets to a Long-Lasting Christmas Tree
SOMEWHERE between cookie baking, gift-wrapping and shopping, there will be time to think about the tree.
Its selection is often a family affair and the choice ends up being an evergreen that is the fullest, the tallest or the straightest one that can be found.
Of course, the tree that will last the longest is the one that is freshly cut, preferably from a "select-your-own" farm where the owner has learned that this sort of selling is a good Christmastime policy.
The family's tree selection will be tagged and after the money changes hands, the owner or a helper will come along with a saw and cut the fine tree down.
The last scene is the ride back home with the beaming family tucked inside the car and the freshly cut tree tied securely on the roof.


Data Bank/December 19, 1993
Data Bank/December 19, 1993
Sales at Retail Outlets
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Monthly percent change
0.4
1.8
0.2
Industrial Production Index
Monthly percent change
0.9
0.7
0.4
Housing Starts
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,432
1,378
1,371
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
83.0
82.4
81.9
Merchandise Exports
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
In billions
$40.1
$38.9
$38.1
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$50.6
$49.5
$48.1
Weekly Jobless Claims
Dec. 10
Dec. 3
Nov. 26
In thousands
330
337
322
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Dec. 17
Dec. 10
Dec. 3
Yield in percent
6.27
6.20
6.23


The Case Of the Met's Empty Galleries
IT WAS AT A PRIVATE LUNCHeon in New York on Oct. 8, 1991, that Philippe de Montebello, director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, first asked a senior official from Spain's Culture Ministry to support a major exhibition on the art of medieval Spain.
Delighted by the Spaniard's enthusiastic response, Mr. de Montebello gave his team the go-ahead for what promised to be one of the museum's showpiece exhibitions of the 1990's.
The Met and Spain already had an impeccable record of working together, starting in 1987, on major exhibitions of such figures as Zurbaran, Goya, Velazquez and Ribera, as well as of the Islamic art of Spain.
In the two years that followed the meeting with Jose Maria Luzon Nogue, then Spain's Director General of Fine Arts, Met officials combed Spain for the 80 or so works -- from Visigothic marble tombs to Romanesque wooden carvings -- they would need from that country.
In all, the show was to include some 160 works.


'A Serious Agenda For Change'
To the Editor  While Walter Goodman is critical of Lewis Lapham's recent slashing attack on public television in Harper's magazine  [ "Making the Case for PBS (And It's Not So Easy)," Dec. 5 ] , he can't resist joining Mr.
Lapham in belittling "Quality Time? Report of the Twentieth Century Fund Task Force on Public Television." Yet the report offers concrete suggestions for improving what public television does.


Dec. 12-18: TV Via Satellite; From Big Dish to Saucer: An Alternative to the Cable
Fed up with the local cable television service?
Starting next April, people will have a new choice: satellite television, beamed to a petite new 18-inch receiver.
On Friday, Hughes Communications launched the first of two huge satellites that will ultimately beam 150 channels to any home in the continental United States.


Maybe the Dog's Owner Is Unaware of the Problem
To the Editor:
I do not appreciate being described, as Robert Lipsyte describes dog owners in his column, as a "two-legged nut case" needing therapy from my dog.
I have had my dog for more than 16 years and I am judged to be quite well adjusted, thank you.
As for the snide remark about a licensed dog being a rarity, in all my years of dog walking, I have yet to encounter a dog that was not licensed.
I think Mr.
Lipsyte would be better off directing his sarcasm at the human beings who abuse children and animals, shoot each other and other such things.
CHERYL BRASLOW Manhattan


Irish Americans
To the Editor:
In the discussions about Northern Ireland, an experience I had might be relevant.
I was approached by an ardent Knights of Columbus partisan, but not an official of that body, to write a book or a long article about the remarkable fact that 19 United States Presidents stemmed from ancestors who had emigrated to this country from Ireland.


CLASSICAL BRIEF
Korngold: 'Abschiedslieder,' Symphony in F sharp  Linda Finnie, alto ("Abschiedslieder"); BBC Philharmonic conducted by Edward Downes.
Chandos CHAN 9171; CD.


World Cup's Big Gamble Winds Up in Las Vegas
It is no small irony that this neon oasis, a haven for games of chance, will play host Sunday to what is widely presumed to be the big fix.
The final draw for soccer's World Cup will be held to determine first-round matchups and playing sites around the United States for next summer's monthlong tournament.
When the lottery is completed, someone will claim that it was rigged.
It always happens.
A cry of foul will be raised.
"Fraud!" someone will shout.
"Disgrace!" a headline somewhere is sure to blare.
Of course, there will be no immediate proof of chicanery.
But proof is irrelevant.
Protest is as much theater as serious objection, just another sideshow in the 24-ring circus that is the World Cup.


Sound Bytes; He Ventured Into Cyberspace -- Then Got MTV to Follow
Adam Curry is best known as the "vee jay," or video jockey, who is host of the "Top Ten Requests" and "Top 20 Countdown" of music videos on the MTV music television network.
But in the electronic realm of cyberspace, he is also the creator of "mtv.com" on the Internet.
It is an on-line service that he hopes will soon become the Wired Generation's "one-stop shop for all your entertainment needs."
Mr.
Curry's family moved to the Netherlands when he was 7 years old and he lived there 15 years -- the last few working as host of a music television show.
He joined MTV in 1987, shortly after returning to the United States.
We interacted with him face to face at the recent Internet World conference in New York.


Beyond Maps: Study Guide For Jam Time
IT'S a fact of life: driving around New York City can be a nightmare.
Perhaps these books will save you some time and irritation.
Some titles were provided by the New York Bound Bookstore, at 50 Rockefeller Plaza.
NO TIME FOR TIE-UPS  by Joshua B. Isaacson (Herruth Publishing, 1992, $16.95)
This book uses maps to show drivers how to bypass highway traffic jams and includes escape routes into Long Island, northeast New Jersey, and Westchester, Rockland and Fairfield Counties.
SHADOW TRAFFIC'S NEW YORK  SHORTCUTS AND TRAFFIC TIPS  by Gridlock Sam (Fodor, 1993, $16)
The author, Sam Schwartz, a former city traffic commissioner, writes a traffic column for The Daily News.
Whimsical in tone, this book covers all five boroughs, with simple maps, fast routes to airports and stadiums, and information on how to beat construction delays, rush-hour traffic and midtown traffic.
THE ORIGINAL HOW TO BEAT  A PARKING TICKET  by Joel S. Peskoff, edited by Richard Fireman and Judy Ornstein (J. F. Caroll Publishing, 1991, $3.95)
Looks like a Zagat guide.
Explains the bureaucracy, gives possible defenses and even supplies sample defense letters.
CASCADE'S PARK IT!
IN MANHATTAN: THE SURVIVAL GUIDE FOR YOU AND YOUR CAR  edited by Susan Cascade (Susan Cascade Inc., 1992, $9.95)
The back cover asks, "How can I take control?" The answer is inside.
Lists parking garages and rates, from the Battery to 96th Street, by destination.
With tips on how to drive across Central Park, 24-hour gas stations and pharmacies open late for the medicine you need for the headache you got driving.
HOW TO BEAT  PARKING TICKETS LEGALLY  compiled and edited by Leonard Gleich, Jane G. Katz and Joanne Sandler (P.S. Publishing Group, 1991, $7.95)
Tells how to protest parking tickets, with defenses explained for both private and commercial vehicles, and how to appeal if you lose.
NEW YORK CITY  ALTERNATE-SIDE-OF-THE-STREET  PARKING CALENDAR  (Parking Survival Gear, 1994, $6.95)
A wall calendar with 135 suspended parking days highlighted.
For each month, there is a tidbit of information, like shortcuts, new fines and parking trivia. (How much does New York City's biggest parking-ticket scofflaw owe? $267,487.) EYEWITNESS  TRAVEL GUIDES: NEW YORK  (Dorling Kindersley, 1993, $24.95)
In its "Survival Guide," there is a section on getting around New York that explains how to locate addresses and how cabs, traffic signs and parking regulations work.
NEW YORK CITY FASTMAP  (H. M. Gousha, $4.95)
A collapsible, laminated map of the highways of New York City and the immediate vicinity on one side, and a closeup of Manhattan up to 135th Street and the parts of Hoboken, Brooklyn and Queens that are closest to Manhattan.
THE STREET BOOK:  AN ENCYCLOPEDIA  OF MANHATTAN'S STREET NAMES AND THEIR ORIGINS  by Henry Moscow (Fordham University Press, 1978, $14.95)
Ponder the name of the street on which you've been sitting in traffic for what seems like an eternity.
THE INTREPID NEW YORKER  by Kathy Mayer Braddock and Tory Baker Masters (Villard, 1992, $15)
A guide to New York with a "Getting In and Around" section that has a parking calendar, parking rules, garages, car services and transportation alternatives.
LET'S GO: NEW YORK CITY, 1993  Let's Go Inc. (St. Martin's Press, 1993, $11.95)
With maps and a New York City orientation section explaining neighborhoods and transportation.


On Sunday; The Patriarch Never Rests, Even at 74
HUGH L. CAREY, the most loquacious, pun-loving, topic-brachiating, id-deprecating governor who ever saved New York City as much as it can be saved, is listening to the latest bit of politics to engage his interest.
It is the election of his 10-year-old granddaughter, Eileen, as president of her class in Brooklyn.
"Keep an eye on Julio," the patriarch instantly advises the girl in his vivid, rapid-fire monotone.
Who is Julio?
"Julio's the class vice president," Mr.
Carey explains, darting off to other topics: the state's mortality rate, Singapore's education system, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's resemblance to an "armorer artificer" in an old cavalry regiment -- as he marshals conversation subjects like a sackful of mice scrambling off a griddle.


A Trophy Case With One Vacancy; In a Long Career of Accomplishments, a Stanley Cup Still Eludes Gartner
Mike Gartner did not start his collection until a few years ago.
It seemed right, then, with his children growing up and his career growing older.
And there were so many moments to immortalize.
He kept the stick and puck he used to score his 500th career goal.
He added the awards from his most valuable player appearance in last season's All-Star game.
And the gifts given him by the Rangers after he scored 30 goals last season, making him the only player in National Hockey League history to score 30 or more goals in 14 straight seasons.


INSIDE
Russia Reformers Under Fire
Signaling a shift in economic policy, Russia's Prime Minister accused reformers in his Cabinet of "poorly thought-out experiments" and failure "to think about the people." Page 18.
New Question in Foster Case
Federal investigators are looking into a report that a file relating to a failed Arkansas company was removed from the office of a Clinton aide after he committed suicide.
Page 28.
Beltway's Law of the Wild
The eat-or-be-eaten nature of official Washington went on garish display with the resignation of Defense Secretary Les Aspin.
Page 30.
Farrakhan in New York
The Rev.
Louis Farrakhan finally made his postponed public address in New York City, speaking of black pride and moral corruption.
Page 47.
CBS vs.
NBC in the N.F.L.
The Fox Network won the right to broadcast National Football Conference games.
CBS and NBC will vie for the A.F.C.
SportsSunday, Section 8.
From Bach to Rock
Listeners bemoaned and berated the sudden shift of a classical music radio station to rock.
Page 47.


Q and A
Paying an Officer For Extra Services  Q. The bylaws of my co-op provide that "no salaries shall be paid to the officers." But the treasurer of the corporation keeps the books and is paid $150 as a management fee each time he performs this chore.
Does the payment violate the by-laws?
Is the payment reportable to the I.R.S. on Form 1099? . . .
Mary Tierney, Jackson Heights, Queens A. According to Arthur Weinstein, a Manhattan lawyer, the individual can receive the money for bookkeeping services provided to the co-op, but not for services rendered as an officer of the corporation.
"It is not unusual for persons who provide services to the corporation for payment also to be unpaid officers of the corporation at the same time," he said.
"Any income, of course, should be reported on the appropriate I.R.S. form, in this case 1099," Mr.
Weinstein added.
A Fee Complaint On Bike Storage  Q. The management in my condominium recently installed two bicycle racks in an underground garage.
To store a bicycle, residents have to pay a $50 annual fee per bike.
I think that the amount charged is ridiculously high.
Many bikes only cost $60 or $70.
So, the annual fee for the storage is close to the purchase price.
It is like charging a $5,000 or more fee to garage a car.
Does the management have the right to impose such a fee?
If the answer is yes, is there any limitation on such a fee? . . .
Victor Maltsev, Rego Park, Queens A. According to Morton H. Rosen, A Manhattan lawyer, there is no limitation on charges, unless the bylaws state otherwise, when the service is available to all unit owners on a nondiscriminatory basis.
"It is a voluntary act on the part of the unit owner whether he wishes to store his bike in the condo's facilities," he said.
Grandfathering A Co-op's Canines  Q. About a decade ago, my Park Slope co-op board of directors banned dogs.
Interestingly, this prohibition was done on the noneviction plan; existing dogs could remain but no new canines were welcome.
Is this rule enforceable when it explicitly does not apply to all residents? . . .
Lilian Fields, Nyack, N.Y.
A.
According to Marc Luxemburg, a Manhattan lawyer who is president of the Council of New York Cooperatives, the board has an obligation to treat all shareholders equally, but grandfathering in a particular situation, like being allowed to keep a pet, is not a violation of the equal-treatment provision.
Mr.
Luxemburg also said that you should also be aware of the city's pet law, which requires the board to act within 90 days of the time it learns that a pet is in the building.
Failure to do so endangers its right to enforce the rule.
The law, he added, is part of the city's administrative code, and it applies to all rental buildings and co-ops.


Corrections
An essay by Robert B. Reich on page 54 of The Times Magazine today, about corporate downsizing, includes an outdated statistic about job cuts.
In the last four months, American businesses have been eliminating jobs at a rate of 2,600 per business day, not 2,000 per day.
The essay also misstated the increase in that rate.
It is 5 percent higher than in 1991.
The comparison "30 percent higher than a year ago" is erroneous.


A Video Jukebox for Movie Junkies
WITHOUT question, the interactive service that has generated the most excitement is one through which a viewer can call up a movie from a library of thousands using a menu displayed on the television screen.
Video on demand is expected to be immensely popular because of the huge market for video cassette rentals.
More than movies will be available on demand, however.
The service is also expected to offer popular television and cable programs at different starting times, or allow the consumer to buy shows on an a la carte basis, following their initial air date on broadcast or cable television.
For example, those who missed this week's "N.Y.P.D. Blue" or "Murphy Brown" could call them up at their convenience for a fee.


Cari Jackson, Preston Lewis
Cari Lynel Jackson, a daughter of Lois M. Jackson of Laurelton, Queens, and Curtiss L. Jackson of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to Preston Kevin Lewis, the son of the Rev.
Gloria J. Lewis of Bloomfield, Conn.
The Rev.
Ronald Roschke performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Lutheran Church in New York.


The Uncertain Promises of Interactivity
HARDLY a week passes without a giant merger or technological advance that is supposed to bring the much-ballyhooed era of interactive multimedia a step closer to reality.
That day will see the telephone, television and computer become one, allowing subscribers to do everything from visiting the video store to trading stock options to playing video games with faraway friends -- all from the living room sofa.


Residents Favor A Police Academy For Armory Site
A transit police training academy is the front-runner to occupy the 14th Street Armory.
The vast building, at 125 West 14th Street, is to be vacated by the National Guard in March, and many residents feared that the state-owned building would be used as a homeless shelter.
Michael Klein, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's regional representative, said that the transit police and St.
Vincent's Hospital have presented "the most attractive proposals" for the 130,000 square feet of space.
"The Governor wants a friendly tenant that the community can live with at peace," he said.


Susan Horst, Robert Morelli
Susan Alberta Horst, the daughter of Alice A. Horst of Windsor, Conn., and John C. Horst of Port Jervis, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Robert Michael Morelli, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ondino A. Morelli of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Richard J. Malone performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Memorial Church at Harvard University in Cambridge, Mass.
Mrs.
Morelli, 25, is a medical student at the University of Connecticut.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard, from which her husband received a doctorate in mathematics.
Her father, now retired, was a biology and chemistry teacher at Windsor High School.
Her mother teaches mathematics at St.
James Elementary School in Manchester, Conn.


Florio May Veto a Tax Bill Unless Whitman Backs It
Christine Todd Whitman watched the final voting sessions of the Republican-controlled Legislature last week with some misgivings.
Like someone raiding a cookie jar before going on a diet, the lawmakers gave final approval to bills that the Governor-elect said could complicate her attempt to balance the budget while cutting income-tax rates.
The bills, if signed into law by Gov.
Jim Florio, would authorize borrowing $220 million for public and private college construction projects without asking voter approval, and would raise the tax on gasoline and home heating oil to pay for upgrading underground fuel storage tanks.


Mexico Turns Off Its Quake-Warning System
With memories seared by the sight of their city collapsing around them eight years ago, people here are edgy about earthquakes.
City officials have installed what is believed to be the world's only public earthquake alarm system.
But so many people have complained that the system does more harm than good that it has been turned off.


U.S. Asks Egypt's Help on Missing Libya Dissident
President Clinton has asked President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt for help in finding a prominent Libyan opposition leader who disappeared in Cairo a week ago, American officials said today.
Mr.
Clinton made the personal appeal in a letter delivered on Tuesday by the American Embassy in Cairo, the officials said.
In the letter, he asked the Egyptian President to do whatever he could to find Mansour Kikhiya, 62, a United States resident and human rights campaigner who disappeared from a hotel in Cairo, where he was attending a conference of the Arab Organization of Human Rights.
Mr.
Kikhiya is a founder and board member of the rights organization.


The Executive Life; Hollywood Packs Up For a 2-Week Holiday
WHILE Hollywood's fast-track executives push themselves to the max virtually all year, there is one two-week break that is accepted by almost everyone: from the week before Christmas until after New Year, when the trade papers get skinny because nothing is happening.
"Things wind down the week before Christmas," says one studio executive.
"Then the next week there isn't a soul in town."
Like college students at spring break, the entertainment community at Christmas heads either for the beach or the snow.
Some are drawn to established Hollywood hangouts where they can continue to network; others prefer to escape.


Segregation's Threat to the Economy
According to a Harvard University study, the nation's schools are now more segregated than they have been in 25 years.
The segregation is not only racial, with more and more African-American and Latino students attending schools with predominantly minority enrollment.
It is also economic, with more minority students from low-income families clustered together.
The nation long ago recognized that integration was a moral and political imperative.
These statistics also make clear that to remain economically viable and competitive, the United States cannot keep pushing large numbers of black and Latino children further and further to the margins of society.
Fully one-third of those entering the work force in the next decade will be minorities.
It makes no sense to keep so many of these future workers isolated in schools that are educationally inferior.


Professional Pay Disparity
To the Editor:
Derek Bok suggests that the pay disparity among professionals directs talented individuals away from public service.
He goes on to suggest that higher taxes for lawyers, doctors and chief executives are part of the solution.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Oxford Press to Join Library at Former Altman's
More books are coming to the former B. Altman building on Fifth Avenue at 35th Street.
In January, the New York Public Library bought space in the landmark building; now, Oxford University Press has announced plans to move its office across 35th Street.
The university press expects to be up and operating in the spring of 1995, and the library is to open that fall.


WHAT'S DOING IN TOKYO
If Asia has a capital city, Tokyo is it.
From the air and even from the highway, it may look like an unrelieved ode to urban gray, but at ground level it is one of the most bustling and international cities in the Far East, and in some ways the most deceiving.
The apparent Western air -- the glitzy boutiques in the Ginza, the English-language signs everywhere -- leads many visitors to the quick conclusion that this is a familiar place, albeit one so sprawling that getting around is a bit intimidating.
In fact, getting around is a cinch, with an outstanding subway and train system.
The hard part is sorting out the two Tokyos -- the caffeine-charged city of all-day business and all-night drinking, and quiet neighborhoods where old men in their yukata robes and geta, or clunky wooden sandals, make their way back home from the public baths.
Most visitors spend their time in the high-tech and Western Tokyo, from the electronics shops of the Akihabara district, stocked with goods that have yet to hit America, to the coffee shops filled with young people who seem to feel equally at home in New York, Honolulu or the Ginza.
But it is still worth searching for the tiny enclaves of the second city.
That is where the few remaining geisha alight from rickshaws and head for the ryotei, or private restaurants of the wealthy and powerful, and you are left standing in wonder at the hidden life.


Smoothing the Way for the Snow Thrower
AS if the holiday rush was not enough, now is also the best time to prepare snow throwers.
Preparing a thrower is much like preparing a lawnmower, but there are some important differences.
For example, leaving old gasoline in the tank or using leftover gasoline are primary causes of starting and performance problems with snow throwers.


Iran's Currency Tumbles as Economy Falters
Reflecting growing signs of economic turmoil, the Iranian rial plunged against hard currencies on the open market this week after the central bank announced that the rial's official value had fallen 45 percent over the last two months.
The Government said sagging oil prices had caused the currency crisis.
But general concern about price instability, job losses and shortages have brought economic activity to a near standstill, hastening to the currency's decline.


EVERGLADES CLASH THREATENS ACCORD
An agreement between farmers and government to help restore the endangered Everglades ecosystem fell apart this week because the two sides could not reconcile their visions of the region's future.
The conflict mirrors the clash of values in forestry, mining and other industries as the Clinton Administration seeks to turn away from piecemeal natural resource management to restoration of whole ecosystems.
The idea is to negotiate broad agreements with local interests based on mutual advantages, but as the collapse of the Florida agreement shows, accord can be difficult when economic interests and the environment collide.


U.S. ASKS GERMANY TO PUSH RUSSIA AID
Vice President Al Gore appealed to Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany today to put aside any doubts about Russia's political stability and to speed up aid to the country.
In a nearly two hour meeting at Mr.
Kohl's home, Mr.
Gore also raised the question of whether the International Monetary Fund should ease the inflation quotas put on Russia so the country can get aid faster to relieve its severe social and economic troubles.


Corrections
A listing of ski programs on Nov. 21 included an outdated name for the resort in Telluride, Colo., offering the Kidspa program.
It is the Peaks at Telluride; its name was changed in September from Doral Telluride Resort and Spa.


They May Be Cute, but They Can Also Be Pests
UP on the rooftop is about the only place that Alice and Bill Morris don't hear deer hooves this time of year.
"We lie in bed at night," Mrs.
Morris said, "and I hear this click, click, click. It's their hooves on the metal leaders as they walk around the house. Then we hear tap, tap, tap. They're nibbling on the bushes, and their antlers are hitting our bedroom wall."


Bookshelf
TOO MANY TAMALES.
By Gary Soto.
Illustrated by Ed Martinez.
Putnam. $14.95 (Ages 5 to 8) There is a party at Maria's house on Christmas Eve, and she and her mother are preparing tamales.
Maria tries on Mom's ring, loses it in the masa and enlists the other children in solving the problem by eating the whole batch.
WHEN IT SNOWED THAT NIGHT.
By Norma Farber.
Illustrated by Petra Mathers.
Laura Geringer/HarperCollins. $16. (All Ages) A charming collection of short poems about the Nativity -- about birds, beasts, the queens who came late and a contemporary mother and child.
Rich and subtle illustrations.
THE FIRST NIGHT.
By B. G. Hennessy.
Illustrated by Steve Johnson with Lou Fancher.
Viking. $13.99. (Ages 3 to 8) Here is a very simple retelling for the youngest children of the birth of a child long ago and far away.
The text is set opposite strong, appealing illustrations.
A DOZEN SILK DIAPERS.
By Melissa Kajpust.
Illustrated by Veselina Tomova.
Hyperion. $13.95. (Ages 4 to 7) It seems that a mother spider and her children lived in that stable in Bethlehem, too, and after Mary rescued a spider child, the family made a gift.
THE CHRISTMAS DONKEY.
Written and illustrated by Gillian McClure.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $15. (Ages 4 to 8) Here is Arod, the proud donkey who led Joseph, Mary and the unborn King to come to Bethlehem.
ALL DRESSED UP AND NOWHERE TO GO.
By Daniel M. Joseph and Lydia J. Mendel.
Illustrated by Normand Chartier.
Houghton Mifflin. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8) David, who lives in Maine, goes to spend Christmas in Florida with his grandparents.
It's hot.
THE GINGERBREAD DOLL.
By Susan Tews.
Illustrated by Megan Lloyd.
Clarion. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8) Great-grandmother Rebecca tells about Christmas in 1930, when times were so hard and the family so poor her mother made her a gingerbread doll.


Single Supplement
To the Editor: I have pretty much always been a lone traveler.
In the past I would go to a hotel and ask for a single room and that is what I got -- a room and bed for one at a single rate.
Then came a time when I didn't travel.
And now that I've retired and want to begin moving around again I find there no longer seems to be such a thing.
There just seems to be a single supplement.


WHATEVER HAPPENED TO AIDS?
I read your article on the supposed disappearance of AIDS as a public issue with bewilderment.
We are literally inundated with AIDS fund-raisers, AIDS marches, AIDS thrift shops, movies about AIDS, etc.
The pressure coming from AIDS activists overwhelms reason at times.
MARK E. SQUIRES Philadelphia


BEST SELLERS: December 19, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
7
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
2
2
71
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
3
10
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
4
4
17
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
5
14
2
THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.
6
1
THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A collection of stories about American men and the strains of contemporary life.
7
6
12
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
8
9
40
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
9
8
36
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
10
5
3
THE TRUCE AT BAKURA, by Kathy Tyers. (Spectra/ Bantam, $21.95.) The "Star Wars" Rebel Alliance responds to a call for help from a threatened outpost.
11
7
6
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined to kill him and take his place.
12
10
9
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in Victorian England's high society.
13
13
8
DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) An architect-engineer gets caught between the warring factions of a clan that owns an English racecourse.
14
11
15
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Concluding the "Griffin &amp; Sabine" trilogy, about an artist and his secret admirer.
15
12
4
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Talese/ Doubleday, $23.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly reappears in their lives.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
2
2
9
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
3
3
15
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
4
4
17
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
5
6
11
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
6
7
3
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
7
5
32
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
8
9
2
LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The country singer's memoirs, with an account of her relations with daughters Wynonna and Ashley.
9
8
11
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN . . .
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Thoughts on 43 years of marriage.
10
13
3
THE BEST CAT EVER, by Cleveland Amory. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A third volume about the trials and tribulations of the feline Polar Bear and his owner.
11
11
9
STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski. (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played Capt.
James Tiberius Kirk.
12
12
71
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
13
1
I TOOK A LICKIN' AND KEPT ON TICKIN', by Lewis Grizzard. (Villard, $19.) The humorist describes his near-death experience following heart surgery.
14*
10
6
THE DOWNING STREET YEARS, by Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins, $30.) The former British Prime Minister recalls her 11 1/2 years in power.
15
14
11
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
5
AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes from the golf instructor.
2
1
21
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
3
3
31
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
4
4
10
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 4, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear In Mind (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE COMPLETE LYRICS OF IRA GERSHWIN, edited by Robert Kimball. (Knopf, $45.) More than 700 lyrics displaying the fresh and inventive rhymes, supple phrasing, intelligence and wit that made Gershwin a lyricist nobody can read for one minute without humming.
THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER, edited by Mark Tucker. (Oxford University, $30.) A fascinating anthology of 70 years' worth of writing about (and occasionally by) Ellington, who clearly inspired powerful emotions in even the most sober minds.
EXIT INTO HISTORY: A Journey Through the New Eastern Europe, by Eva Hoffman. (Viking, $23.) Seeking out the ordinary, a Polish-born writer with a touch of American objectivity makes a tour of Mitteleuropa, returning with subtle insights about a world in transition.
GARBAGE, by A. R. Ammons. (Norton, $17.95.) A long poem of rueful grandeur and splendid oddity in which what's left over is transmuted; winner of this year's National Book Award.
HENRY JAMES: COLLECTED TRAVEL WRITINGS, edited by Richard Howard. (Library of America, 2 vols., $35 each.) Close to 1,700 pages, in the (as it were) aggregate, densely but never coarsely packed with the observations abroad (for abroad he usually was) of one upon whom nothing (as his own aspiration, immodest but justified by the sequel, had put it) was lost.
A HISTORY OF WARFARE, by John Keegan. (Knopf, $27.50.) Mr.
Keegan, the most readable and original of military historians, argues that war is an omnipresent cultural ritual of mankind, from which the ruthless modern notion of disciplined total war was an aberration.
JOHN JAMES AUDUBON: The Watercolors for "The Birds of America," edited by Annette Blaugrund and Theodore E. Stebbins Jr. (New-York Historical Society/Villard, $75.) The originals for the great engravings, handsomely reproduced, illuminated by helpful essays.
RETURN TO PARADISE, by Breyten Breytenbach. (Harcourt Brace, $22.95.) A bleak, beautiful, subjective collage of reminiscences, political rants and prose poems about this Afrikaner poet's troubled sojourns in South Africa.
SIT!
The Dog Portraits of Thierry Poncelet, with text by Bruce McCall. (Workman, $19.95.) Seventy "aristochiens," 19th-century portraits, each overpainted with a suitable dog's head, accompanied by thumbnail biographies.
THAT'S THE WAY I SEE IT, by David Hockney.
Edited by Nikos Stangos. (Chronicle Books, $35.) The second volume of the artist's recollections is a long, perky monologue -- autobiography alternating with ruminations on vision and the reproduction of images.
W.
E.
B.
DU BOIS: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919, by David Levering Lewis. (John Macrae/Holt, $35.) The first half of the epical life (it lasted till 1963) of the man who by World War I had become the most outspoken, eloquent and influential black American.


Sports of The Times; A World Cup Mystery: The Strange Case of the Missing Pele
IF you stopped the average American on the street and asked for a quickie opinion of soccer, quite likely it would be something like this: "It's that sneaky furrin sport where they all have funny names and do creepy things with their feet and their forehead instead of the good old-fashioned way with their hands like Bill Laimbeer and Mike Tyson and all those honorable hockey goons. We don't like them slippery foot-fetish types in our country."
And if you really pushed our average American to name just one soccer player, quite likely the answer would be: "Yeah, well, old Pele, he was a great player, from what I hear."


ELLEN BAXTER
On a bright autumn morning, a crowd has gathered in front of one of New York City's most notorious places: the Fort Washington Armory, in upper Manhattan.
In the worst years, on the coldest nights, as many as 1,200 homeless men would claim the cots set less than two feet apart on the cavernous drill floor.
Crackheads, drunks, panhandlers, hustlers, muggers, burglars, sociopaths and psychopaths -- all were jammed in with runaway kids, the jobless and others down on their luck.
But on this day, sparkling with promise, Mayor David N. Dinkins announces "a terrific proposal" for the armory.
There won't be any more cots on the drill floor.
Instead, it will be used once again for regional high-school track meets.
A new tower above the armory will provide 200 low- and moderate-income apartments, youth and day-care centers, space for art programs and a community theater.


The World; Russia's Elections: A Dose of Invective
FOR a week now, politicians, diplomats and ordinary Russians here have been talking about little else than the stunning showing by the far-right party of Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky in elections last Sunday.
When the initial panic abated, it became clear that Russia was no more in the grip of fascism now than it was in the grip of civil war when President Boris N. Yeltsin ordered the shelling of Parliament on Oct. 4.
These were the latest symptoms of a nation in the throes of a protracted revolution, ricocheting in all directions as it searched for its final course.


Officials Laud Emergency Work in L.I. Shootings
Five months ago, a study by the Brookhaven National Laboratory found that emergency workers' response to the 1990 crash of an Avianca airliner that killed 73 people was poorly organized, and that delays in treatment may have raised the death toll 20 percent.
But on Dec. 7, when 23 people were shot on a Long Island Rail Road train, things were different, county officials and hospital administrators said this week.


A Steakhouse Is a Steakhouse Is a . . .
JAKE'S in Huntington is a steakhouse for the 90's.
It has all the traditional trappings and more.
Yes, there are the expected masculine look and thick, juicy, flavor-packed steaks that rival the best on the Island.
Additionally, the restaurant spotlights contemporary dishes not offered at some of the more conventional steakhouses.
Appetizers make the point.
This is not a skimpy list limited to sliced tomatoes and onions and shrimp cocktail, but is headed by this year's favorites, portobello mushrooms, grilled shrimp and a platter of grilled vegetables.
The three perfectly cooked, small and well-flavored portobellos are set over salad.
Nor were there complaints about the lightly hatch-marked zucchini, yellow squash, red peppers and eggplant on the vegetable plate.
Sherried mushrooms received mixed reviews.
One evening the bountiful button mushrooms sat in a bowl of sherry sauce, but had soaked up little taste.
Another time they were presented on a plate with no sauce but lots of flavor within.


Ouch! You'd Better Watch Out!
In December, a hardy news media perennial appears - the dangerous toys story in which holiday shoppers are warned against sharp edges and small parts.
But rarely are holiday decorators told to watch out for fragile glass ornaments and overheated lights.
The results from a national survey of emergency-room visits should give tree-trimmers pause.
Christmas-tree lights were cited in more than 3,000 injuries last year; non-electric ornaments in about the same.
Candles and fireplaces are twice as likely to be cited in an emergency-room visit as they were a decade ago.


POSTINGS: From 14 Floors to 9; Newsweek Moving Somewhat Uptown
Ah, change -- inevitable, maybe, but bittersweet nonetheless.
RCA, PanAm, all those building-top signs that dot the skyscape, gone to new ownership and new names.
And now another skyline mainstay bites the dust: The Newsweek clock, which for decades has silently announced the time from 42 floors above Madison Avenue and 49th Street.
In April the magazine will leave 444 Madison Avenue, its headquarters for 34 years, for 251 West 57th Street, between Broadway and Eighth Avenue.
That building's large floors enable Newsweek to fit on 203,000 square feet on nine floors; at 444 Madison it was scattered across 200,000 square feet on 14 floors.


SURFACING
BEAUTY  White models with dreadlocks: An increasingly common sight in fashion publications, particularly the current issues of Harper's Bazaar, Mademoiselle and Interview.
COMMUNICATION  Chefs in headsets: At some trendy restaurants like Bolo in New York and Lulu in San Francisco, you can see chefs using headsets to talk to one another while food is being prepared.
Madonna's influence at work?


WHATEVER HAPPENED TO AIDS?
As an H.I.V.-negative member of the gay community, I have seen the passing of many men as a result of the AIDS epidemic.
I do not choose to forget, but it is impossible to survive with a positive state of mental health, if I choose to hang on too closely to the illness that has claimed the lives of many of my brothers.


Folk Tours
To the Editor: The story on folk dance tours ("Stepping Into the Czardas," Oct. 17) brought back many treasured memories.
My thirst for travel is fueled as much by meeting the "real people" as it is by seeing the "real country." Traveling with Jim Gold International, as the author did, makes that possible for me.
No rendition of "Danny Boy" will ever sound as sweet and pure as the a cappella version by a young lad's Mom in the basement of a Tipperary church at a ceili.
Nor will any dance hall be as hilarious as the one we impetuously pranced into in Donegal to join the locals.


Yeltsin Marches Russia Toward Dictatorship
To the Editor:
In "Reinventing Peter the Great" (Op-Ed, Dec. 12), Martin Malia is confident that President Boris N. Yeltsin's leadership in Russia is producing "very real progress toward democracy," but he ignores basic lessons of the history he cites to support his conclusion.
Yes, "democracies are born in revolution." But Mr.
Malia's analysis of the Russian case ignores related truths: that fascism is spawned in conditions of economic chaos and that political turmoil provides fertile ground for authoritarianism.
Mr.
Yeltsin has delivered both.


Words of Advice For Donald and Marla
IT is a common refrain when referring to troubled couples, "Can this marriage be saved?" While it's usually a question that follows rather than precedes a wedding, in the case of Donald Trump and Marla Maples, many are already talking.
Here are some bits of prenuptial wisdom from a random sampling of New Yorkers, some of them married, some of them single, who were asked, "What advice do you have for Marla and the Donald?"


It's Beginning to Look A Lot Like Solstice
THIS year's holiday greeting cards arrive.
More renditions of the manger, more pictures of triumphant angels, more images of the big fat guy in the red suit.
But among the standard-issue greetings lurk notes of disaffection, even hints of rebellion.
"Lose your Xmas Depression!" one greeting card reads. "Celebrate Winter Solstice!"


An Uncivil War Over the Keeping of Grant's Tomb
Frank Scaturro, a history major at Columbia University, has harbored a passion for Ulysses S. Grant's Presidency for nearly half his 21 years.
Now he has written a 119-page report detailing the deterioration of Grant's Tomb, igniting a furor at the Manhattan office of the National Park Service.
The report lists damage to the monument, from sandblasting scars and graffiti to water damage and urine stains, and attributes the loss of a beak on the eagle statue to the east of the memorial to firecracker damage.
The report also accuses the Park Service of misusing funds and employees of stealing.


A Stripped-Down Studio 54 For the Post-Disco Era
At the Studio 54 of the 70's, Bianca, Andy and Halston exchanged cocktail chatter while the less chic tried merely to get in.
The Studio 54 of the 90's will be something completely different.


Denyse R. Finn, Andrew O. Clancy
Denyse Ronan Finn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold B. Finn 3d of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Andrew Oliver Clancy, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Clancy of Dallas.
The Rev.
Michael R. Moynihan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Michael the Archangel.
Mrs.
Clancy, 26, was until recently a development assistant at Castle Rock Entertainment in Los Angeles.
She graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and received a master's degree in English from Columbia University.
Her father is a partner in Finn Dixon &amp; Herling, a law firm in Stamford, Conn.
The bride's grandfather Wilford R. Young of Greenwich retired as the vice chairman and general counsel of Texaco.


Selling History on the Lower East Side
ORCHARD STREET will never be confused with a suburban shopping mall.
Lining it are tenements laced with a spider's web of fire escapes.
Levels and levels of coats are displayed above awesomely cluttered sidewalks.
Throngs of people, all sworn never even to think of paying retail, paw suspiciously through mountains of merchandise, be it Italian silk sheets or three-for-$10 T-shirts.
In spirit, this marvelously raucous lane, which extends from Canal Street north to Houston, seems to have changed little since the turn of the century, when Yiddish was spoken everywhere and the Lower East Side was home to pushcarts, penny knife grinders and "glimmer men" who fitted eyeglass lenses by the process of elimination.


Finishing Where Segovia Left Off
JULIAN BREAM'S EFFORTS on behalf of the classic guitar, it can be argued, have been more important in purely musical terms than the celebrated accomplishments of Andres Segovia.
Segovia, through the force of his personality, won a mainstream concert audience for the instrument.
Mr.
Bream, on the other hand, sought a respectable international repertory for it and brought technical and interpretive standards up to date.
His discography stands as compelling evidence.
In honor of his 60th birthday, last July, BMG has released "The Julian Bream Edition" (RCA Gold Seal 09206-61583-2; 28 CD's), which brings together the solo, concerto and chamber-music recordings he made for RCA between 1959 and 1990, when he defected to EMI.
Only the three duet collections he recorded with John Williams are missing. (For the record, Mr. Bream made four LP's for Westminster and two for Decca/London before starting at RCA.)


Pol Pot &amp; Co.: The Thai Connection - A Special Report; In Big Threat to Cambodia, Thais Still Aid Khmer Rouge
Not far from here, less than a mile east across the border into Cambodia along a well-maintained dirt road, is a compound of spacious wooden homes and storehouses built by Thai contractors for a demanding client.
Foreign diplomats and United Nations peacekeepers say the client was Pol Pot, the leader of the Khmer Rouge, the Maoist-inspired guerrillas responsible for the deaths of more than one million Cambodians in the 1970's.


The View From: Milford Academy; A Preparatory School Works to Change a 'Factory' Image
JEFF BEVINO'S lunch was getting cold on his desk -- and indeed would go uneaten -- as he responded to a constantly ringing telephone.
First, it was Bob Shoop, an assistant football coach at Northeastern University, asking about seven players at the Milford Academy and requesting some tapes.
Then there were calls from Dennis Goldman, an assistant coach at Syracuse, and from another assistant at the University of Connecticut, Jay Paterno, the son of the Penn State coach, Joe Paterno, inquiring about a few other players.
Mr.
Bevino fielded more calls than ever in early December, and at times it would have been easy to mistake him for a sports agent when in fact he is a football coach, teacher and athletic director.
The calls come from college coaches all over the nation, including many of the best-known football schools, who ask questions about players they have seen at a scrimmage involving players from Mr.
Bevino's team at Milford Academy.


Their Irony, Humor (and Art) Can Save China
On Aug. 21, the "Country Life Plan" exhibition was scheduled to open at the National Gallery in Beijing.
Though the paintings were indifferent, and had to the ordinary eye no hint of political significance, officials ruled that many failed to show the positive side of life in the People's Republic and were therefore unacceptable: the artists were permitted to hang only about 20 percent of their work.
The prime mover behind "Country Life Plan," Song Shuangsong, was furious that the exhibition had been edited.
He told friends that on Aug. 25 he would go to the gallery and cut off his long hair, a symbol of his individualistic way of life.
At noon that day, Song, a professional barber, friends and a reporter from Shanxi television all gathered in the exhibition room.
As the haircut progressed, chance visitors to the gallery stopped to watch.
Song faced first in one direction, then in another, holding a solemn expression for a while, then grinning and posing.
After 20 minutes or so, the barber soaped Song's face, produced a straight razor and began to shave him.
At that moment, the director of gallery security came in and saw the crowd and cameras.
"Who is the authority behind this behavior?" he asked, his face tight with rage.
"This is my exhibition," Song said, "and I take full responsibility."


RECORD BRIEFS
'Of Eternal Light': Choral Works by Monk, Messiaen, Gordon, Ligeti, Sherman, Moran  Musica Sacra conducted by Richard Westenburg.
BMG Catalyst 09026-61822-2; CD.


And How About That Nice Zirconia Ring?
TO be successful in the interactive world, home-shopping services must allow subscribers to get information about specific merchandise instead of just showing them a parade of products on the screen, as they do now, analysts said.
For example, a subscriber looking to buy a wedding gift would request the wedding department and search for gifts in a certain price range and age group.
The subscriber could then tailor the search to avoid popular gifts that the couple is likely to receive.


Crash Russian Course For Procter &amp; Gamble
IN its brief but intense experience in the quirky Russian market, Procter &amp; Gamble, the Cincinnati-based consumer products giant, has had to learn a few lessons.
Lesson No. 1: Shoppers need help learning about Western products.
"I was in a store in Volgograd, and people kept coming up to me asking what this or that product actually does," said Peter Smit, who heads the company's Russian operations.
"You have to put yourself in the shoes of the Russian consumer. She wants to be educated."


GATT's Big Payoff for the U.S.
PROBABLY the most long-lasting benefit for the United States of the recently negotiated global trade pact isn't the most obvious, like being able to sell more beef to Europe and more supercomputers to Japan.
Instead, it may be to encourage growth in many of the world's poor but aspiring nations.
That -- contrary to the dire warnings of America's new isolationists like Pat Buchanan and Ross Perot -- would be good for most Americans, too, say most economists who focus on trade and growth.
"It's true that successful third world economies are competitors," said Paul Krugman, a trade economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
"But they also become bigger markets for our products and they are also suppliers of better and cheaper products to our economy. Those benefits almost surely outweigh the adverse effects of increased competition."


TAKEN FOR A STRANGER
Add me to the list of men who have felt that women in the park were eyeing me suspiciously when I brought my young son there (About Men: "Taken for a Stranger," by Armin A. Brott, Nov. 21).
The thing I try to remember is that such an attitude is their problem, not mine.
I also suspect that, even today, women have a difficult time accepting a man who appears in a park during what are normally working hours.
Maybe they don't appreciate that working at home, flex time and the like help us to participate more fully in the raising of our children.


Corrections
The On Language column in The Times Magazine on Dec. 5, quoting a reader, referred incompletely to the magazine Psychology Today.
The magazine did indeed cease publication in 1989, but it resumed publication in 1992.


Harbingers of Joy or Mischief Makers, Angels Continue to Fascinate Artists
THE first angels to appear in the Bible are the cherubim, stationed by God east of Eden lest Adam and Eve return to eat of the Tree of Life.
Cherubim, who have four faces and two pairs of wings, rank below seraphim, who are flaming entities possessed of six wings.
The two groups, along with thrones, are to be found in the first angelic hierarchy.
Dominations, virtues and powers occupy the second hierarchy, while the third includes principalities, archangels and plain angels, who do most of the work as messengers between God and humankind.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
THE BOWERY A Long Program For a Short Day
With a bow to the winter solstice, which arrives on Tuesday, CB's 313 Gallery on the Bowery will offer a 10-hour continuous musical program called "Burn: Songs to Bring Back the Sun: A Sunday Saturnalia." More than 30 acts will appear today at the gallery, which is next door to CBGB's, the rock club.


Giuliani E.M.S. Account Disputed
The entire encounter lasted less than 11 minutes: An anguished mother pleaded with an ambulance crew to take her son, who had been struck by a taxi, to the hospital where the boy's father works, even though another hospital intended for injuries like his was much closer.
A bystander bluntly persuaded the chief paramedic to do as the mother wished.
The bystander, though, was Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani, and thus the otherwise innocuous encounter on the Upper East Side of Manhattan on Tuesday morning turned into something more.


More Than Just Prime Time
To the Editor:  When Walter Goodman asks what public television has done lately, he comes up short because he tunes in only for the prime-time schedule.
Apart from a glancing nod at "Sesame Street," he made no mention of public television's massive and unparelleled commitment to children.
Just this week, PBS announced it is expanding its children's programming to nine hours daily and will distribute companion teaching materials to adults to help children get the most out of these programs.
What other free television channel devotes five hours each weekday morning to preschool programming, providing a critical educational foundation for children of all economic circumtances?


Madden and Summerall Fear a Trip to Sidelines
The Fox Network's $1.58 billion bid that wrested National Football Conference games away from CBS for the next four seasons shocked John Madden and Pat Summerall, CBS's top football announcing team.
"It was strange and surprising," Madden said yesterday from Detroit, where he was preparing for the 49ers-Lions game today, "even though you knew Fox was coming with something, you knew they were serious, you knew they were a player, then boom, boom, boom, you didn't expect them to take the N.F.C.'s package."


Looking to Foreclosures for Bargains
THE still-depressed residential real estate market is full of good buys these days.
Take, for example, the four-bedroom Cape Cod that Sandra Nieves bought in Patchogue, L.I., last month.
She paid $94,000 for a two-story stucco starter home on a half-acre lot.
That's almost 30 percent less that the home's bank-appraised value of $130,000.
"After we fix it up, it will be worth about $150,000," she said.
Ms.
Nieves's home was sold below its market value because it was in foreclosure.
That means that the previous owner didn't keep up with the payments, and the holder of the delinquent mortgage had taken possession of the property and was selling it to pay off the loan balance.
A decade ago, homes in foreclosure were few and far between.
They also carried a stigma of failure and misfortune that, regardless of how low the sale price, often repelled home buyers who weren't speculators or professional real estate investors.
Nowadays, though, home buyers, mirroring a trend found among consumers in other sectors of the economy, are becoming more value conscious.
They are often seeking out and even limiting their searches to foreclosures or homes in pre-foreclosure -- when an owner has fallen behind in mortgage payments and is looking to sell a house to recover equity or avert further damage to the owner's credit rating.
Most buyers who wind up buying a home in foreclosure have actively sought out a financially distressed property.
In many cases, all they did was ask local real estate brokers to show them only foreclosures, estate sales or homes being sold because of death or divorce.
In some cases, though, buyers have found foreclosure properties by going directly to local banks, which often have large inventories of foreclosed homes, or to the Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal agency that acts as repository for assets held by failed banks and savings and loan institutions.
Properties that are about to be auctioned at foreclosure sales can also be found by scouring court records, legal notices in newspapers, the real estate classifieds or specialty publications, like Foreclosure Update, a weekly newsletter that prints lists of foreclosed properties in New York's five boroughs. (The newsletter, which can be subscribed to by calling 212-982-4026, costs $260 a year, $160 for six months or $89 for 12 weeks.)
"The hottest bargains now are in foreclosures," said Melissa S. Kollen of Commack, L.I., the owner of Long Island Real Estate Training, a real estate school, and the author of "Buying Real Estate Foreclosures" (McGraw-Hill, 1992).
"The only better way to get a home is to inherit it.'
The foreclosure market isn't limited to starter homes, or low-priced houses or less-than-desirable properties, either.
Last June, for instance, Ann and Larry Kaplan bought a four-bedroom contemporary home on two acres in the Cos Cob section of Greenwich, Conn., for $515,000.
After putting in a $40,000 septic system, installing a water-softening system and repainting the house they now believe it is worth $750,000 to $800,000.
"This house was such a fantastic deal," said Ms. Kaplan.
Not all foreclosure sales offer such significant savings.
In fact, most properties are sold for at least 90 percent of their current market value.
Buyers, however, might also get a slight reduction in the interest rate on their mortgage or on the amount needed for a down payment, as banks are often eager to unload foreclosed properties.
"It is a popular way to get a little bit of an edge in price and maybe in financing," Theodore J. Doll, the president of Washington Savings Bank in Hoboken, N.J., said.
Those slight savings might not cover the cost of necessary repairs, though.
Maintenance on many homes in foreclosure is usually minimal; many have been boarded up for months.
"We saw foreclosures that were so bad that you wanted to tear them down," said Ms.
Nieves, who had new carpeting installed in her home after she closed on the sale.
BESIDES the additional costs, buying a home in foreclosure is a complicated procedure and the rules often vary from state to state.
"There is a lot of homework and legwork that has to be done," Ms.
Kollen said.
Danielle Weitz, who with her husband, Robert, bought a three-bedroom ranch in Franklin Lakes, N.J., last year that had been in foreclosure, strongly recommended hiring a lawyer to help in the process.
"Without an attorney at the sale, you could wind up having more liens against the house than you know about," she said.
"You have to do an iron-clad title search."
Ms.
Weitz paid $160,000 for her home.
She also paid $65,000 to pay off a second lien that had been levied against her home and an $8,000 tax lien.
The total amount she paid, $233,000, is still below the $299,000 that the former owners had sought.
She had even offered the owner $270,000 before the home fell into foreclosure.
The most daunting aspect of Ms.
Weitz's purchase, however, was that a 10 percent down payment was required immediately, with the balance due within 10 days.
Getting financing on such a time frame is, to say the least, difficult for most home buyers.
It was accomplished only because she and her husband, Robert, had recently sold their home but had not yet moved out.
"The timing was phenomenal," she said.
There was also a second bidder on the house the Weitzes bought, indicative of the increased interest in buying foreclosures.
"If there had been no other bidder, we would have paid $123,000 or $125,000, and usually there are no other bidders," she said.
"But one other person took us up to $160,000."
Ms.
Nieves also noted the increased competition.
"We had made a bid on a house in Bay Shore that was in foreclosure, but someone outbid us," she said.
Ms.
Nieves, who is 25 years old, lives in West Babylon, L.I., but will move into her new home on Jan. 1 with her 18-month-old son, Joseph Anderson, and her fiance, Martin Anderson, a 27-year-old general contractor.
"There are foreclosures all over the place," she said.
In the Northeast, in particular, foreclosures have increased phenomenally in recent years, according to statistics compiled by the Mortgage Bankers Association of America, a trade organization in Washington.
In New Jersey, for example, the percentage of mortgages in foreclosure has tripled in the last five years to the highest rate in the nation: 2.42 percent, or one in every 41.
In Connecticut, the foreclosure rate has gone up almost eightfold since 1988, to 1.75 percent.
In New York, the figure has quadrupled over the same period, to 1.55 percent.
THE high current rate in New Jersey is attributable largely to the length of time it takes in that state to complete the process -- up to two years.
By comparison, foreclosures can often be accomplished in less than six months in Connecticut.
Nationally, mortgages that have fallen into foreclosure have increased by about 20 percent in the last three years, to 1.02 percent, as of June 30, according to the Mortgage Bankers of America, which surveys about 40 percent of the mortgages in the nation.
"I don't see any reason why foreclosures in the New York area would go down as long as the economy remains the way it is," said David Breger, a lawyer and vice president of Real Property Publications, the publisher of Foreclosure Update.
"The market for foreclosures is as active as it ever was. My bet is that it will stay the same in '94."
Subscriptions to Foreclosure Update cost $260 for a year, $160 for six months or $89 for 12 weeks.
Many of the foreclosures in the Northeast are a direct result of the hundreds of thousands of job losses in the region since 1987, which have helped depress local property values and home equity levels.
In some cases, exasperated home owners walk away from a property when their mortgage is larger than the value of the home.
Foreclosures, though, may also be a result of divorces or deaths that have left a spouse unable or unwilling to keep up with mortgage payments.
As an example of the different circumstances that can lead to a foreclosure, the home Ms.
Nieves bought in Patchogue was formerly owned by a house painter who went out of business; the home Ms.
Weitz bought in Franklin Lakes was previously owned by a dentist involved in a costly divorce, and the home bought by Mrs.
Kaplan in Greenwich had been owned by a real estate developer who had pledged his home as collateral for a failed real estate project.
"We had been looking for three years, and we wanted to live in Greenwich," said Ms.
Kaplan, 41, an executive recruiter, who along with her husband, Lawrence, 51, an accountant, used to live in nearby Darien.
The couple have a 6-year-old daughter, Jacqueline.
"We were looking for estate sales, divorces or foreclosures," she added.
"We lost a house we wanted that was involved in a divorce. We were outbid."
Though there is an abundance of foreclosures in the Northeast today, there are also recent signs that, as the real estate market and the economy improve, the number may have peaked.
"Our foreclosures have declined," said Mr.
Doll, whose bank had 21 loans in foreclosure in October compared with about 50 at the same time last year.
"We still have a few that were in process back in 1991, but there are less than there had been."
Lawrence G. Esmonde, a spokesman for the Resolution Trust Corporation, also said that his inventory was shrinking.
"The numbers are certainly lower than they were a year ago," he said.
Nationally, the R.T.C. took over about 114,000 commercial and residential properties in 1989; it has about 16,000 left.
There are currently 128 R.T.C. residential properties for sale in New York and 83 in New Jersey.
No figures are available for Connecticut.
"We not getting any new assets and were are getting rid of what we have pretty quickly," Mr.
Esmonde said.
The inventory of foreclosed properties is still high, however.
Terance P. Beaty, director of special services for William Pitt Real Estate in Stamford, Conn., said that 5 percent -- or 207 -- of his company's real estate sales in Fairfield and Litchfield Counties in the last year had been foreclosures.
A decade ago, that figure would have been about 0.5 percent.
"The Northeast has never seen this level of foreclosures," he said.
"The 80's really killed a lot of people. We have about 320 in inventory, and we're getting about 30 more a month, and closing on about 10 of them each month."
He said that many of the foreclosed homes were starter homes boughtby first-time buyers, adding that foreclosures frequently resulted not only from job losses but also because of no-income documentation or no-down-payment loans that were common in the 80's.
"There were a lot of loans made to people who should have never received loans," he said.
Mr.
Beaty added that he did no see the level of foreclosures declining until late next year.
"And you won't see any appreciation in the rest of the market until the foreclosures get cleared away," he said.
"People won't be able to get market prices because the foreclosures pull down the overall market."
The downward drag on all home prices because of the foreclosure market is exacerbated by the growing number of people who are learning about and looking for foreclosures.
Ms.
Nieves, Ms.
Kaplan and Ms.
Weitz, for example, all shopped specifically for below-market-price properties and were introduced to them by bankers or brokers.
Ms.
Kollen, the author of the book on foreclosures, said that a common question buyers asked about the foreclosure market was 'Where are the homes found?' "
For pre-foreclosures, she suggested scanning the real estate sale ads looking for key phrases like "owner desperate" or "motivated" or "anxious to sell." There are also lists of homes, called lis pendens, that have legal actions pending against them.
"CONTACT the owner through a letter or a personal appearance," Ms.
Kollen said.
"You may have to do it five or six times because a lot of these people are in denial. They can't sell their home and they can't keep the debt. Tell them you are going to pay off their debt. The benefit to them is that they will have no deficiency judgment."
"It is really better to work something like this out without having the house taken back or foreclosed," she said.
"And banks are working with delinquent owners as never before. The banks will sometimes accept the deed as payment in full, or consider a buyer who wants to assume the mortgage."
Should this tactic fail, Ms.
Kollen suggested getting in touch with the bank that holds the mortgage and offering to pay off the debt and assume the mortgage.
The bank then may increase the pressure on the delinquent owners.
The best way to find homes that have already fallen into foreclosure is to check the legal ads of newspapers for auctions or ask a local bank or broker about homes that are in foreclosure.
Ms.
Nieves, Ms.
Kaplan and Ms.
Weitz all found their homes with the aid of a broker or banker.
Foreclosure policies vary widely among banks and states, but usually the process does not begin until a borrower is at least 90 days behind on mortgage payments.
Once the foreclosure process is begun it may take several months before a judgment is reached in court.
With a judgment issued, it may take several more months before the home can be seized or sold.
In most states, the property is usually sold at an auction -- either in the courthouse or at the property site.
In most cases, the bank or mortgage holder is the only bidder; in essence, it is buying back the property for a nominal processing fee.
The mortgage holder will then resell the property, either through a private auction or through brokers, to recoup the money it is owed.
If the mortgage holder does not recover all the money, it may still pursue the original owner for the balance, unless the owner has filed for bankruptcy or, in rare cases, has a nonrecourse loan.
Only about one in seven loans that go into foreclosure results in judgments, however.
And of those, only about one in seven results in evictions.
Most borrowers who are subject to foreclosure sell their homes, especially if they have equity in the properties.
If they cannot sell, a not uncommon problem these days, or if they have little or no equity, they often seek revised payment schedules or get stays through legal motions or bankruptcy protection.
But once a property has reached foreclosure, the lender, which is responsible for taxes and maintenance of the property until a new buyer takes over, is often eager to make a deal.
As Mr.
Doll, the savings bank president, said: "We are not in the business of owning properties."


Who's a Saint?
To the Sports Editor:
Hooray for Robert Lipsyte ("Are Four Jock Heroes So Saintly After All," The Times, Dec. 5) and his condemnation of "sports saints," especially Joe Paterno and David Williams.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GREENWICH VILLAGE  $245,000
115 Fourth Avenue (12th St.)  (Petersfield)  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,260-sq.-ft. loft-condo; 24-hr. doorman, 12-ft.-ceilings, original moldings and detail, 2 exposures; common charge $546, taxes $3,228, listed at $279,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Douglas Elliman)


Dec. 12-18: Opening the Windows; Argentines Are More Willing To Face Up to a Nazi Past
It has been an open secret for more than 40 years that Argentina, under Gen.
Juan Domingo Peron, welcomed Nazis after World War II.
What no one had documented, because Argentina refused access to any "Nazi files," was the number of war criminals and collaborators who stepped onto Argentine soil, as well as the efficiency with which the Argentine authorities frustrated the Allies' attempts to track them down.
It was a dark history fed by xenophobic nationalism that troubled many thinkers, who saw it as undermining Argentina's halting attempts to embrace democracy.


Americans Impress Germans This Time
In a World Cup simulation today at Stanford Stadium, Germany used its heads to score two goals, its feet to kick American shins and were still maligned for it.
Either they win by five goals, or it is national catastrophe.
And since their margin of victory this afternoon was only 3-0 -- over the pitiable Americans, no less -- the predictable result was a shoving match outside the locker room.
The fracas pitted Lothar Matthaus, a star player, against members of the German news media, who expected more of a rout today.
Upset with what he called their negativity, he declined all interviews and ultimately shoved a German reporter.


Habitat/25 East End Avenue; A Lavish Riv Vu Wreck
THE kitchen possesses one of the oldest Kitchenaid dishwashers in existence.
This museum-quality appliance is set under a Formica counter trimmed with metal, right below a pair of 1950's farmyard chintz curtains that might warm the heart of any textile collector.
Along a long wall is a pea-green wallpaper mural depicting an exotic garden, complete with palm trees.
"Yes, I would say this has wreck status," said Lauren Day, the real estate agent who sold the apartment, as she opened one of the 10 pea-green drawers in the pantry, this one segmented and lined with the brown felt specially treated to protect silver.
"The past owner had all the accoutrements for a formal sitdown dinner."


Professional Pay Disparity
To the Editor:
Derek Bok's strategy for equalizing compensation among teachers, civil servants and private-sector workers misses the most crucial point: Government and educational compensations have stagnated because the customer (the taxpayer) is not willing to pay more for these services given the poor quality of the current product.


Tokyo Airport
To the Editor: I read with great interest David E. Sanger's report in the Travel Advisory about the new Haneda Air terminal in Tokyo (Oct. 31).
The new terminal is immense, but the kinks are not out yet.
On Oct. 9, my daughter and I, in a group of 13, arrived at Haneda for Japan Airlines flight 551 to Akita at 8:30 A.M.
It was a holiday weekend; the vast terminal was packed.
Finally receiving our boarding passes, we proceeded to the gate area only to face a vast throng in a huge smoke-filled room.
The gates are lined up the length of the room, and our gate was at the far end.
There were not enough seats, so we stood for 45 minutes until we could board a bus and stand for the mile ride to the plane.


New York City and Clean Air
To the Editor:
The letter by Janette Sadik-Khan (Letters, Dec. 5) regarding the article "Getting Them There Is Half the Job" (At Work, Nov. 21) was astonishing.
As the director of the Mayor's Office of Transportation, she must know that her employer, New York City, is a principal violator of the trip-reduction rules of the Clean Air Act of 1990.
Every city agency issues parking permits to its employees, allowing them to park with impunity at meters, hydrants and crosswalks.
Manhattan is flooded daily with cars; many display permits issued by city agencies.
AL ROSEN  Manhattan, Dec. 7


Review/Music; A Cellist Comes Home, Bringing Bach's Suites
Few bigger statements are available to cellists than the six unaccompanied suites of Bach, and Ralph Kirshbaum was evidently intent on making a big statement over the weekend, when he presented the works complete at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Mr.
Kirshbaum, an American, has built a sizable career in Britain and achieved wider notice through his recordings, but he has not appeared much in this country in recent years.
Now he seems poised to establish a major presence here, and it is high time.
Mr.
Kirshbaum is a thoughtful and elegant artist, as his performances of the Second, Fourth and Sixth Suites on Saturday evening proved once again. (He played the other three suites on Friday.)


A Strong Start for 'Schindler's List'
For weeks, Hollywood waited to see if Steven Spielberg's three-hour-plus drama about the Holocaust, "Schindler's List," had box-office potential.
The impressive early results indicate that the answer may well be yes.
"It's sensational," said Bruce R. Feldman, the senior vice president for marketing and national publicity at Universal Pictures, this morning.
"We're ecstatic. For this picture to do this level of business is extraordinary and certainly indicates there's a large audience for the picture."


Home Is Where the Recovery Lurks
If the nation finally has a recovery worthy of the name, it is due in large part to the turnaround executed by home builders like Robert Spies.
Mr.
Spies, based in the Dallas suburbs, builds what used to be called starter homes.
These days he is keeping busy, and then some.
Straight through the weekend, he tours subdivisions where he could start projects and inspects the last of the more than 100 homes he has built this year, the most since 1988.


Knicks Get C.B.A. Assist Leader for Point-Guard Hole
Carrying two large suitcases, Corey Gaines checked into the Knicks' practice facility today to fill the point-guard vacancy created by the season-ending knee injury to Doc Rivers.
Gaines, who has played 51 games in the National Basketball Association during the past five seasons, with the Nets, Philadelphia and Denver, was playing with the LaCrosse (Wis.) Catbirds of the Continental Basketball Association, and leading the C.B.A. in assists with 11.2 per game, before the Knicks signed him this morning.


For Shoppers, A Fast Flight To Paradise
Eighty of the 133 people aboard the 8 A.M. flight from Grand Rapids, Mich., and hundreds more passengers from Milwaukee and Omaha and Cleveland and elsewhere, landed at the Minneapolis-St.Paul International Airport this morning with a single purpose in life.
They did not have the expectant, searching eyes of a traveler meeting a loved one.
They did not look up for the signs for baggage claim.
They were not wearing coats; they would not be needing them, even in December in Minnesota.


'20/20' Accused of Avoiding Nuclear Topics
A media watchdog group has charged that the executive producer of the ABC News program "20/20" kept producers on his program from investigating stories about dangers of nuclear energy and other environmental hazards because his wife is a public relations executive with clients in the energy industry.
The group, Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting, or FAIR, which advocates a liberal agenda in its criticism of the media, issued a report today that cites several instances in which it says Victor Neufeld, the executive producer of "20/20" since 1987, either discouraged or rejected stories related to risks of nuclear energy and other environmental issues.
The report also points out that Lois Neufeld runs a company that represents, among others, the United States Council for Energy Awareness, a group that supports the use of nuclear energy.


Liberals and Republicans Scrambling for Giuliani Jobs
It's hard to keep straight all the interest groups and political leaders who are claiming credit for the narrow victory of Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani.
But none are more unabashed than the leader of the state's Liberal Party, who has been introducing himself to Republicans lately as "Ray Margin-of-Difference Harding."
Of course, Mr.
Harding, the girthy, occasional Terminator or King Maker of New York politics, is no stranger to that maxim about the victor and the spoils.
He has helped promote two allies to deputy mayorships, and if only Mr.
Harding didn't have two sons -- Russell and Robert -- New York's hothouse political establishment might not be so confused about which one is going to get the government job. (The answer probably is both.)


Giants Adding Illnesses To Injuries as Opponent
Quietly and rather suddenly, the Giant defense has become more banged up than it has been all year.
Dislocated shoulders, bad hamstrings, strained ligaments and now this week a good old-fashioned flu bug is moving through the linebacking corps.
This new rash of ailments couldn't have come at a worse time.
The Giants play before a national television audience on Monday night and go against the New Orleans Saints, who are fighting to keep their season from sinking into the proverbial gumbo.


No Headline
If men can get up at 4 in the morning to go shoot a deer, why can't we get up at 4 in the morning to shop?
Let's keep this in perspective. -- STACEY HOFFERBER, who flew from Bismarck, N.D., to Minneapolis -- and the Mall of America.  [ D9:1. ]


INSIDE
Israel and P.L.O. at Impasse
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators, meeting in Norway, failed to break the deadlock that has imperiled the pact for the occupied lands.
Page A10.
Seeking the Political Spoils
The Giuliani victory gives many political outcasts a shot at City Hall jobs, and many are knocking.
Page B1.
Who Gets Bragging Rights?
Experts say the President is claiming more credit than he deserves for hopeful economic signs.
Page A14.
Serbia Party Lagging in Vote
Initial results in Serbian elections appeared to indicate that Slobodan Milosevic's Party is in trouble.
Page A3.
World Cup Fills in the Blanks
The United States will play Switzerland, Colombia and Romania, and Italy will face Ireland in soccer in Giants Stadium.
SportsMonday, page C1.


METRO DIGEST
CUOMO SUGGESTS ANTICRIME MEASURES
With an election year nearing and crime emerging as a dominant issue, Gov.
Cuomo has begun outlining a broad package of proposals to fight crime that range from ending parole for repeat violent offenders to requiring weapons training for gun license applicants.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY NEW INSIGHTS INTO DRUG MARKET
The discovery of 400 pounds of heroin in a luxurious Manhattan apartment tower this month, the authorities say, provided illuminating new insights into the workings of the nation's biggest drug market, including indications that they had underestimated both the volume of heroin pouring into New York City and the degree of involvement of traditional organized crime families.
B3.
OFFICER ARRESTED IN DRUG CASE
A police officer was arrested in Brooklyn by Federal and local authorities on charges of trying to sell cocaine, the police said.
B2.
NEW UNIFORMS FOR FIREFIGHTERS
After years of controversy and testing, and amid lawsuits by injured firefighters, the New York City Fire Department has decided to adopt a new uniform designed to give firefighters better protection from burns.
The department recently asked the city for $9 million to buy the uniforms for all of its more than 8,000 firefighters.
Fire Department officials insisted that the decision was not prompted by the several dozen lawsuits that have been filed against the city by firefighters who say they were burned because of a gap that can open between the coat and boots of the current uniform.
B7.
PARTY REUNITES CHILDREN WITH PARENTS
Tears flowed as 186 children placed in foster care and perhaps 120 of their parents united for a Christmas party in the hall of Holy Family Church in Manhattan.
"One of the biggest needs is to support what family life there is," said the Rev.
Robert Robbins, the parish pastor.
B3.
SCHOOL PROJECT CROSSES OLD GENDER GAP
The five girls of the Civil Engineering Club of Public School 147 in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, celebrated their victory in the Erector Set Contest, a nationwide design competition.
Their winning entry was a 6-foot suspension bridge with a span of about 4 feet, an impressive creation considering that the longest girder in the kit is about a foot long.
B4.
CHALLENGES AWAIT THE GIULIANI TEAM
New York has survived 106 mayors since 1665 and it will probably outlast the 107th.
Mayor-elect Giuliani's challenge, though, will be to resolve a systemic conflict that threatens not only the city but also his ability to make it to a second term.
Metro Matters by Sam Roberts.
B8.
REGION UNION CLOUT FADING IN ALBANY
By passing one bill and killing another last week, the New York State Legislature sent renewed notice that union influence over statehouse politics continues to wane.
Neither action represented a crushing blow to labor, which remains an important player in the Capitol.
But viewed in a line of setbacks this year, they suggest Albany that has become less able, or less willing, to deliver for unions.
B6.
WHERE WILD AND DOMESTIC ONES MEET
The Dinosaur Bar B Que in Syracuse has emerged as a melting pot where the heirs of the "The Wild One" rub shoulders with people who bought their children the video.
The clientele is a melange of bikers and business people, rebels and yuppies -- united by the love of good food and the unceasing wail of the blues.
B6.
A PLACE TO GO IN TIME OF CRISIS
A hostel for people with mental-health crises is being set up in Ithaca, N.Y.
People who have been hospitalized at least once in the last three years will be able to stay there for up to two weeks.
Residents will take an active role in their treatment with the assistance of staff members, many of whom have been treated in the mental-health system.
B6.
2 BODIES ARE RECOVERED IN L.I. SOUND
Police divers recovered the bodies of two of the four occupants of a small airplane that crashed in Long Island Sound earlier this month.
The wreckage of the airplane was found about three miles south of New Haven Harbor.
B6.
Neediest Cases B11
Chronicle B11


Thousands Honor Prince of Peace with Six-Hour Ritual


Troubles for Labor; Legislative Actions in Albany Show Longtime Clout of Unions Is Fading
By passing one bill and killing off another last week, the New York State Legislature sent renewed notice to organized labor that union influence over statehouse politics continues to wane.
Neither action represented a crushing blow to labor, which remains an important player in the Capitol.
But viewed in a line of setbacks this year, they suggest Albany that has become less able, or less willing, to deliver for unions.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
BILL BAKER, president of WNET-TV, Channel 13, had just finished a somewhat hostile debate about noncommercial public television in which his opponent contended that it was only for the rich, when he met someone who proved otherwise.
"I was using a pay phone on the street and a guy at the phone next to me, clearly a messenger with his messenger bag, bike and beeper, looked at me with a big smile," Dr.
Baker said in an interview the other day.
"He said, 'You're Channel 13; I love your station and I watch it all the time.'


Market Place; For United Airlines, a buyout plan promises a competitive lift.
AS the board of United Airlines' parent company, the UAL Corporation, mulls over a proposal from its unions to gain control of the company, analysts and shareholders have voiced many opinions on the merits of the offer and its impact on UAL.
What seems clear is that the deal would add additional debt to UAL's balance sheet, but improve its operating performance.
Over all, their proposal promises slightly more lift than downdraft on United's competitive position.


'Prevailing Wage' Bill Threatens Public Works
To the Editor:
The innovative housing development proposed for the Hunters Point section of Queens will fail if the "prevailing wage" pending in Albany is passed.
It would vastly expand the definition of public works projects subject to extraordinarily high wage rates and unreasonable work practices.
The Hunters Point project would fall under this definition and so would most housing and economic development projects in New York.
No one can object to reasonable working wages for our construction trades, but even nonunion workers in New York City earn more than their union counterparts in Jersey City.
No wonder New York is losing its competitive edge, encouraging the exodus of jobs and business.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Media Business
The Administration is poised to make broad changes in communications policy and will support legislation that would break down barriers separating the telephone and cable television industries.
On Tuesday, Vice President Gore plans the first of two major speeches outlining this and other principles in the White House plan for a national information infrastructure.  [ Page A1. ]


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY  NBD Bancorp Inc TUESDAY  Amer Bldg Maintenance CPC Intl Inc Federal Paper Brd Metro Finl Corp Montana Pwr Co Moorco Intl Inc Upjohn Co


World Economies


In Serbian Election, Nationalism Is Unchallenged
With Serbia's economy in ruins and its leaders accused of war crimes, there was only one thing the leading candidates and most voters could agree on as ballots were cast today in a parliamentary election: Serbia is great.
Rampant nationalism has been the sole coin of political discourse in a campaign in which President Slobodan Milosevic is trying to hold on to power.


Hungarians Mourn Their Prime Minister; Rehabilitating Horthy
To the Editor:
The Dec. 13 obituary of Prime Minister Jozsef Antall of Hungary states that he "lauded Adm. Miklos Horthy, the Hungarian leader who collaborated with Hitler." This statement is misleading as it omits the political reality of the period.
In 1941, Hungary was surrounded by annexed Austria on its western border, the fascist client states of Slovakia on the north, Romania on the east and Croatia in the south.
Poland had been overrun, and Hungary had opened its borders to 100,000 Polish refugee soldiers.
Hungary had also signed a "friendship treaty" with Yugoslavia, the only pro-Western government of the region.


Youth Is Dragged by Van
A 9-year-old youth was struck by a hit-and-run van and dragged about a block down a street in Jamaica, Queens, before he finally got free, the police said.
He was critically injured.
The youth, who was not identifed, was apparently helping relatives carry packages from a church to a parked car across the street at Linden Boulevard and 194th Street at about 5:45 P.M. when he was struck by the van, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.
Witnesses told the police that a maroon livery van ran a red light before hitting the youth and then, with him hooked somehow to the van, dragged him all the way to 195th Street before he got loose, Sergeant Mohrmann said.
The youth was taken to Mary Immaculate Hospital and was listed in critical condition.


Challenges of Today Await Giuliani's Administration
"Mayors come and go but the life of the city must endure." David N. Dinkins,  Nov. 3, 1993
IMPLICIT in Mr.
Dinkins's message of continuity was the comforting fact that New York City has survived 106 mayors since 1665 and that it would probably outlast the 107th.
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani's challenge, though, will be to resolve boldly a systemic conflict that threatens not only the city but also his ability to make it to a second term.


Dance in Review
'The Nutcracker'  New York City Ballet New York State Theater
Valentina Kozlova and Igor Zelensky made a handsome couple as the Sugarplum Fairy and her Cavalier when the New York City Ballet presented George Balanchine's production of "The Nutcracker" on Saturday night.
Miss Kozlova brought a good mix of regal distance and warmth to her role.
Though just back from pregnancy leave, she danced with the gracious, rather matter-of-fact expertise for which she is known, secure in her balances and offering steady, textbook classical arabesques.


Winners in the Christmas Toy Sweepstakes
Maybe it was all that talk during the 1992 Presidential election about rebuilding the infrastructure, but construction toys have been a surprise hit during this holiday season.
The reliable snap-together sets of recent years, Lego and Duplo, Lincoln Logs and Tinker Toys, have been joined by something old, the Erector Set, which is returning to the United States after an absence of 10 years, and something new, an elaborate set of plastic building parts that go by the name K'nex.


Topics of The Times; A Welcoming Space
It did nothing for corporate America's pride when the Sony Corporation took a long lease on A.T.&amp; T.'s imposing headquarters tower in New York City two years ago.
Sony then proceeded to offend public sensibility with plans to enclose the open acre at the building's base.
That precious space was an American giant's gift to the city; Japan Inc. was taking it away.
The enclosure is finished now.
About one-fifth of it is a soaring glass emporium of you-know-who's products, a dazzling production itself.
But Sony also did the public space well.
Open 24 hours a day, it has 8 trees, 78 tables, 222 chairs, 2 bakery-coffee shops, a newsstand, a ticket agency, a shop for Sony spinoffs (like Neil Diamond T-shirts), a carry-out "commissary" and artistic photo-murals afloat overhead.
Still to come is "Sony Wonder," an interactive technology lab for children.


49ers Clinch Division As Lions Clutch Air
So you thought the Dallas Cowboys or the Giants would become the National Football Conference team in the Super Bowl?
Maybe, but don't count out the San Francisco 49ers.
The Detroit Lions thought they could beat the 49ers today in the Silverdome.
Instead, the Lions were destroyed.
The 49ers scored the first five times they had the ball, rolled to a 31-10 lead at the half and won, 55-17.
The victory gave the 49ers the Western Division title and put them in the National Football League playoffs.


Record To Richter, But Cheers To Kovalev
Aleksei Kovalev had gotten a bit hesitant, a bit frustrated, a bit nervous.
This is not like him.
Kovalev is a player with flash and charisma and he has a personality to match.
Lately though, he had been stuffed on breakaways.
He had failed to finish rebounds.
And he had been hesitant to shoot.
That changed last night.
With Eddie Olczyk hollering "brosay" -- the Russian word for shoot -- at his new linemate and Coach Mike Keenan encouraging Kovalev to stretch his talents, the young Russian lit up Madison Square Garden with two goals and an assist as the Rangers defeated the Ottawa Senators, 6-3.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Federal Budget . . .
November  Wednesday  G.D.P. (revise) . . . 3d Qtr.
Thursday  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
November  Personal Income . . .
November  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


Bills and Notes to Be Sold
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to bills and notes, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
Also being auctioned on Tuesday is a new two-year note, followed on Wednesday by a new five-year note.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.02 percent, and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.20 percent.
The two-year note was being offered on a when-issued basis at a price to yield 4.21 percent, and the five-year note at a price to yield 5.16 percent.


Patents
STILL looking for a unique gift for that impossible person on your Christmas list?
Well, consider some newly patented items that could solve your problems this time next year.
It is probably safe to say that anyone would welcome Michael J. Ure's invention, a checkbook case that keeps its own records.
In the grocery store line, flip open the wallet-like case and a current account balance appears on a calculator display inside the lid.
A wire runs from the calculator to a thin pad placed under each check.
A sensor in the pad follows pen movements, detecting the dollar amount, date and name jotted on the check, and a microprocessor in the calculator records the information and updates the balance.


Dashing Through the Neighborhood to Deal With Hearts Aglow


10 Killed in Gun Battles in Southern Egypt
Ten people were killed today in the southern province of Asyut in two shootouts between Government security forces and Muslim militants, Interior Ministry officials said.
The shooting erupted after security forces and police officers surrounded Al Rahman mosque in the southern town of Manfalout after receiving information that militants inside the mosque were planning to carry out attacks during Christmas.


CHRONICLE
Striking workers picketing a restaurant on a chilly winter's night received some warm words recently from KATHARINE HEPBURN.
"She came over to the picket line, leaned on the police barrier and said, 'Aren't you cold?' " KIAN FREDERICK, an organizer with the Hotel Employees and Restaurant Employees Union, told The Associated Press.
"I said, 'Yeah, a little,' and then in her Katharine Hepburn way, she said: 'Well, why don't you go to my house to warm up? If you have to go to the bathroom or you just want to warm up, come to my house.' "


Cuomo Offers Broad Proposal To Toughen Crime Penalties
With an election year nearing and crime emerging as a dominant issue, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has begun outlining a broad package of anticrime proposals that range from ending parole for repeat violent offenders to requiring weapons training for gun-license applicants.
In an interview covering issues he is likely to highlight in next month's State of the State address, Mr.
Cuomo said today that he would call for establishing a task force to investigate gun traffickers in New York City and a special court to speed their prosecution.
He also said he would seek to toughen penalties against people who sell guns to juveniles, end parole for rapists, ban assault weapons and outlaw gun clips that hold more than 10 bullets.


'Crisis Hostel' to Help in the Treatment of People With Mental Illness
Jeanne Dumont still remembers the terror of the first time she was in a psychiatric hospital, where she was being treated for depression when she was 27 years old.
Particularly scary was what happened after she was injected with Thorazine, a commonly used anti-psychotic drug at the time: Her speech became blurry, her tongue felt thick and she could not walk normally.
Even worse, no staff member would explain what was happening.


Home Wrecker: Buffalo Pours on the Points in Miami
After it was over, this scoreboard-bombarding game between the Buffalo Bills and Miami Dolphins, Bills linebacker Darryl Talley seemed glued to a chair in front of his locker.
Eventually, he glanced at fellow linebacker Cornelius Bennett, who was leaning against his locker.
"You know what I'm thinking?" Talley said.


Japan's Promising New Leader Seems to Lose His Magic Touch
When he swept into office five months ago as the unlikely leader of a political revolution, Morihiro Hosokawa was hailed as the Prime Minister who could finally change Japan.
He reveled in American-style politics -- from teleprompters to polo shirts to brisk tennis games -- and promised to end Japan's political corruption and economic collusion.
But after a blazing start, Mr.
Hosokawa seems to be losing his magic touch.
The programs on which he staked his leadership, reforming the political system and deregulating a languishing economy, have bogged down.
Tokyo's back-room deal-making, which he denounced for years as Governor of a southern prefecture, is beginning to engulf him.
Time and again in recent weeks he has struggled to keep ideological rifts between the Socialists and the seven other parties in his fragile coalition Cabinet from splitting the Government apart.
So far it has held together, but at great political cost to Mr.
Hosokawa.
Motivated by Bitterness
The bureaucrats who ran the country for four decades with the now-deposed Liberal Democratic Party snipe about the new Government's disorganization, whispering over lunch in Kasumigaseki, the Government center, that Mr.
Hosokawa is proving himself a small-town politician.
He is uninterested in foreign relations, they say, at sea when it comes to handling the economy, unwilling to delve into policy details.
Editorialists have begun to complain that his Government is long on symbolism but short on action, too captivated by the example of another former Southern Governor across the Pacific.


Under Pressure, Fire Department Seeks New, Safer Protective Gear
After years of controversy and testing, and amid lawsuits by injured firefighters, the New York City Fire Department has decided to adopt a new uniform designed to give firefighters better protection from burns.
The department recently asked the city for $9 million to buy the uniforms for all of its more than 8,000 firefighters, and a spokesman for Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani, whose administration is expected to consider the request while drawing up the city's budget for next year, said Mr.
Giuliani "is supportive of it."


It's a No-Win Situation for the Mavericks and Their Rookie Coach
You may have noticed, things have not been going that great for the Dallas Mavericks lately.
They have the worst record by far in the National Basketball Association, 1 victory against 21 losses, a worse start than last season.
They have lost 18 straight games, one short of tying the team record -- set last season -- and only 2 shy of tying the N.B.A. record.
At the rate they're going, they could quite easily finish with the worst record in the history of the league, 9-73 by Philadelphia in 1972-73.
Last season, the Mavericks won their final two games to avoid tying that mark.


A Year Later, Raw Meat Still Lacks Labels
In the 11 months since their little boy died after eating an undercooked cheeseburger, Diana and Michael Nole have been to the far edge of grief and to the front line of the politics of beef.
Joined by other parents who lost children this year, they have been trying to change a meat inspection system that has not been significantly strengthened in more than half a century.
They found a powerful ally in Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy, who said he wanted to enlist them in his effort to "revolutionize" Government scrutiny of the 53 billion pounds of meat and poultry consumed by Americans every year.
Safety Rules Urged
But nearly a year after the deaths of three children brought to light how a staple of the American table could lead to heartbreak, the most basic of changes have been stymied by legal challenges.
Mr.
Espy temporarily closed 30 slaughterhouses after surprise inspections turned up a host of violations, and he has hired 200 new inspectors.


CBS Makes Biggest Bid for A.F.C., but Still Might Lose
The National Football League's television lineup -- altered dramatically Friday by the Fox Network's $1.58 billion pre-emptive strike to wrest the National Conference schedule from CBS -- will be completed today when either NBC or CBS will be awarded the rights to American Conference games.
The league's TV committee will meet by a conference call in which it may decide to award the A.F.C. rights to NBC even though the incumbent network is offering less for those rights than CBS is.
Sources familiar with the negotiations said the NBC bid for the four-year package is between $215 million to $220 million, and that the CBS bid is $240 million to $250 million.


Is It Autobiography or Fiction? But Then Does It Really Matter?
For a man on the verge of being about as famous as serious contemporary authors can be, Roddy Doyle is acting pretty gun-shy.
He grants interviews guardedly (although having committed to one, he responds forthrightly to questions).
He implores journalists not to describe his home ("It's not just mine; it's ours," he explained today, the "ours" including his wife and two young children).
He resents what he regards as personal attacks in reviews long (or not so long) past.
This does not make him standoffish; just reserved with strangers.
With a two-week publishing tour coming up in the United States next month, however, he'd better get used to interviews, since he'll be doing a lot of them.
They will probably be very friendly indeed.


Books of The Times; Mystery and Suspense From Three Old Hands
Decider  By Dick Francis  318 pages.
G.
P.
Putnam's Sons. $22.95.
Sacred Clowns  By Tony Hillerman  305 pages.
HarperCollins. $23.
The Mexican Tree Duck  By James Crumley  247 pages.
Mysterious Press/Warner Books. $19.95.
Racetracks, the Navajo reservation, Vietnam: these are the subjects with which Dick Francis, Tony Hillerman and James Crumley respectively have come to be identified, and in their latest suspense novels they perform more than reliably.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Blazers Lose Drexler  The Trail Blazers beat Milwaukee, 93-81, at Portland last night, but they lost Clyde Drexler for two to three weeks due to a severely sprained ankle.
Drexler was taken from the court on a stretcher late in the second period, but X-rays on his left ankle revealed no broken bones.
The seven-time All Star was having one of his best games of the season with eight points, eight assists and six rebounds in 17 minutes. (AP)


Nona Balaban, Spencer Kroll
Nona Balaban, the daughter of Dr.
Philip and Anna Balaban of Fair Haven, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Spencer Daniel Kroll, a son of Martin and Rita Kroll of East Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Jack Rosoff performed the ceremony at Congregation B'nai Israel in Rumson, N.J.


Shoppers Are Fickle This Holiday Season
Consumers are taking merchants on a roller coaster ride this holiday season, jamming to overflowing parking lots outside malls and strip centers one day, and staying home en masse the next.
So erratic has their business been that many retailers say they will not really know how they fared during their peak sales and profit period -- the weeks between Thanksgiving and Christmas -- until the proverbial fat lady sings, and they do not expect her to make a curtain call until Christmas Eve.


Dance in Review
Everett Dance Theater  Bessie Schonberg Theater
The Everett Dance Theater of Providence, R.I., brought "The Science Project" back on Saturday night.
This work by Dorothy Jungels made a favorable impression when it was first presented in New York two seasons ago.
It remains fascinating for being both a celebration of scientific research and a warning about the dangers that science can unleash.


Moses Gunn, 64, a Veteran Actor Honored for 'Ragtime' and 'Roots'
Moses Gunn, an actor whose career of more than three decades included roles ranging from Othello to Booker T. Washington, died on Friday at his home in Guilford, Conn.
He was 64.
The cause was complications of asthma, said his wife, Gwendolyn.
He had been ill since May, she said.


Woman Stabbed to Death
A 41-year-old woman described as reclusive and shy was stabbed to death in her home in a robbery attempt, the police said today.
Cheryl Knapp of Colonie, an Albany suburb, was found in her home Friday night, about 24 to 32 hours after being killed, said the police, who went there after a neighbor grew suspicious that Ms.
Knapp was not answering her phone.
Police Lieut.
Steven Heider said that Ms.
Knapp's house showed signs of a struggle and that she had been stabbed several times.
The police had gone to the house earlier Friday after the contents of her pocketbook were found behind a nearby bank, but they left when she did not answer the door.


Dance in Review
Lori Belilove and Company  Isadora Duncan Foundation for Contemporary Dance Chelsea
It ought to be possible on any given winter afternoon to slip away from the bustle of everyday life for an hour of dance like that presented by Lori Belilove and Company in an informal "salon" program on Friday.


Welfare Recipients Are Victims, Not Criminals; Abolish the System
To the Editor:
The case for a school-to-work program, which is outlined in "America's Job Disaster," Bob Herbert's column of Dec. 1, is persuasive.
Certainly, society needs to do much more to help put today's youth into the jobs of the future.
But is in-school training the answer?
The best training ground available is the school of employment; yet our inner-city youth shun the entry-level jobs that offer them a step up into the world of work.
Why?
Because earnings are effectively wiped out by benefit reductions, making crime and welfare the economy of choice for the urban ghetto.


22 Wounded Adults and Children Evacuated from Mostar


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Dec. 7, about Corange Ltd.'s agreement to invest in Cellpro Inc., described Corange's previously announced plans to invest in Protein Design Labs Inc., incorrectly.Corange said it would invest up to $75 million in Protein Design, not $131 million.


Economy Is Humming, But Who Wrote Tune?
Presidencies rise or fall on the strength or weakness of the economy.
So it is not surprising that with almost all economic signs looking good nowadays, President Clinton and his advisers have begun to crow.
"Look at the direction we're going in," the President told a group of supporters early this month.
"We have unemployment down, investment up, no inflation and low interest rates. We are moving in the right direction."


John W. Eckman Is Dead at 74; Dean of Pharmaceutical Industry
John W. Eckman, former chairman and chief executive of the Rorer Group, the drug and medical products manufacturer, and a director of its successor company, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, died Friday at Devon Manor Nursing Home in Devon, Pa.
He was 74 and lived in Chester County, Pa., and Nantucket, Mass.
He died of cancer of the lymph system, his family said.


D.M.B.&amp; B. Wins Blockbuster Account
Blockbuster Entertainment has awarded its account to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in St.
Louis, Mo., after a four-month review, according to advertising executives who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
Billings were estimated at $40 million to $50 million.
The choice of D.M.B.&amp; B. was unexpected because there had been widespread speculation the account would be awarded to Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago.
D.M.B.&amp; B. and Burnett were finalists in the review with Bernstein-Rein in Kansas City, Mo., which has handled the company's Blockbuster Video account.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Careline Inc., Irvine, Calif., an initial public offering of 5.7 million shares.
Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co.


Hungarians Mourn Their Prime Minister
To the Editor:
Jozsef Antall, the Prime Minister of Hungary, was a man for whom I had great respect and whom I was honored to call friend.
I, with many millions in Hungary and around the world, mourn his death.
Your Dec. 13 obituary article is filled with inaccuracies and borders on slander.
You state that Roman Catholic religious instruction was introduced by Dr.
Antall in the public schools, even though one-third of the population is not Catholic.
Nothing could be further from the truth.


A Smart Move by United
The tentative agreement by United Airlines to sell a majority stake of the carrier to its employees is an attractive solution to a seemingly unsolvable financial problem.
Indeed, it could spread to the other major carriers and beyond.
Over the last three years, as the economy has sagged, airline carriers have lost more than $10 billion; United alone has lost more than $1 billion.
A major problem is that the large carriers, like United, Delta and American, carry huge debt and other fixed costs that don't go away when business falls off.
No matter how few passengers United carries, it still must pay interest to creditors and run its gargantuan hub-and-spoke operations.


There's Plenty of Pain as Islanders Gain
In the Islander locker room after tonight's game, Dennis Vaske walked on crutches with a broken right foot, Uwe Krupp limped with an injured hamstring and a dazed Ray Ferraro tried to answer questions with a fat bottom lip that was sewn together with 23 stitches.
Their pain, real as it was, couldn't take the smiles off the faces of their teammates.
By beating the Pittsburgh Penguins, 6-3, the Islanders extended their winning streak to four games and their undefeated streak to five.


Evan N. Pickus and Jennifer Zangwill
Jennifer Beth Zangwill, a daughter of Theodore and Myrna Zangwill of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married yesterday to Evan N. Pickus, the son of Martin and Francine Pickus of Marlboro, N.J.
Rabbi George Schlessinger officiated at the Water's Edge in Long Island City, Queens.
Mrs.
Pickus, 25, is the account services coordinator at Waverly Place, a textiles manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from the State University College at Oneonta, N.Y.


Welfare Recipients Are Victims, Not Criminals
To the Editor:
President Clinton's task force on welfare reform has outlined a plan with frightening implications.
Mr.
Clinton's own election-year plan for reducing the welfare rolls included a two-year time limit on receiving benefits.
His advisers are apparently retaining this as a policy goal, as you report in "Clinton Welfare Planners Outline Big Goals Financed by Big Saving" (front page, Dec. 3).
This "up and out" policy is short-sighted and will punish children for the inability of parents to find a job.


Voucher Plan To Aid Beggars Is Put in Place On West Side
A community group seeking a solution to panhandling on the Upper West Side yesterday announced the city's first program in which residents can give vouchers -- redeemable for food or personal items -- instead of money to beggars.
Following the lead of Berkeley, Calif., which started the nation's first voucher program in 1991, the group, West Side Cares, began its effort this weekend as a way to "stop feeding the drug dealers and start feeding people in need," said Laura Friedman, a coordinator of the group, which includes merchants, charitable organizations and residents.


In a Squeaker, Nets Squeak
On Saturday night, the Nets once again found themselves in a tight game on the road.
And once again they failed down the stretch.
Tied at 90-90 in Indianapolis with less than four minutes to go, the Nets only mustered one more field goal the rest of the way as Indiana pulled away to win, 108-98, at Market Square Arena.
It was the seventh consecutive road loss for the Nets, who dropped to 8-14 for the season.


&gt;Pulse; Suburban Crime
The crime rate in four suburban counties - Hudson, N.J., Westchester, N.Y., Nassau, L.I. and Fairfield.
Conn. - in the New York region a year ago dropped to its lowest level in four years, according to the F.B.I.'s index crime statistics.
The decline largely reflected a continuing decrease in property crimes like burglary and larceny.
Violent crimes like murder, robbery and aggravated assault are roughly what they were five years ago.
The suburban figures show a pattern similar to New York City's: Reported crimes moved to record heights in 1989 or 1990, then fell off slightly in the last two years


Open Up on Madison Guaranty
Much as President Clinton might wish, the curious saga of his and his wife's dealings with the owner of a failed Arkansas savings and loan association just won't go away.
It keeps popping up in Congressional inquiries and newspaper accounts, each time with a new and unsavory detail added to an already unflattering portrait of the cozy relationship between money and politics in Arkansas.
An important detail, disclosed by The Times's Jeff Gerth and Stephen Engelberg, is that the owner of Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan, James McDougal, helped Mr. and Mrs.
Clinton repay a $50,000 personal debt just when Mr.
McDougal needed favorable treatment from state banking officials to stay in business.
Mr.
McDougal did stay in business, his problems got worse, and in 1989 the bank was taken over by the Federal Government, at a cost to taxpayers of $60 million.


In Brothers' Lurid Trial, One Woman Dominates
Admired or detested, Leslie Abramson is a lawyer who is always noticed.
She dominates a courtroom, fired with moral indignation, rolling her eyes, tossing her wild yellow hair, shrugging, scribbling, whispering, raising objections.
Separate juries are deliberating now in the biggest case of her career, the trial of Erik and Lyle Menendez, brothers charged with first-degree murder in the shotgun killings of their parents.


Accounts
*
Hawaii Visitors Bureau, Honolulu, to the Honolulu and Los Angeles offices of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide.
Ogilvy was awarded the account, with billings estimated at more than $10 million, after a review in which the other finalist was the incumbent, Milici Valenti Gabriel DDB Needham Worldwide, Honolulu.


East New York Homicide Breaks a Deadly Record
The death yesterday of a 41-year- old armed security guard from Long Island was not an uncommon occurrence in East New York.
Indeed, it followed 13 other killings in the 75th Precinct in the last nine days.
What was uncommon about the killing was that it broke a 20-year record for homicides in a single precinct, although with a footnote.
Maurice Matola, the victim, was by unofficial count the 124th person killed this year in the 75th Precinct, which encompasses a Brooklyn neighborhood that is one of the poorest in New York City.
Last night, a shooting on Georgia Avenue made Anthony Broadnax, 17, the 125th person killed.


Breaking the Mold in Mexico City
At least 33 daily newspapers are published in Mexico City, but when the newest, Reforma, first hit the streets last month, it was all alone.
On that day, Nov. 20, Mexico commemorates the start of its 1910 Revolution.
Newspapers are neither published nor distributed.
Newsstands are not even open.


Topics of The Times; Nixonian Cheer
The glut of Christmas catalogues this year includes a pleasant surprise: the Richard Nixon Presidential Library &amp; Birthplace Gift Catalogue.
This modest publication -- it's actually more of a leaflet -- offers the standard autographed curios, videos and coffee-table books.
But there are also more creative offerings.
The best by far is a T-shirt with the famous Oval Office photo of the strait-laced Mr.
Nixon -- shaking hands with an obviously stoned-to-the-gills Elvis.
The caption reads: "The President and the King." Another T-shirt features a beaming Mr.
Nixon giving his trademark thumbs-up, with the words: "Nixon in '96 -- Tan, Rested &amp; Ready!"


Stock Buys Defended By Viacom
On the eve of a deadline for sealed bids for the acquisition of Paramount Communications Inc., the chairman of Viacom Inc. yesterday aggressively defended his purchases of Viacom stock as well as those made by a company in which he is the largest shareholder.
The chairman of Viacom, Sumner M. Redstone, issued a detailed four-page statement yesterday on his Viacom stock purchases and those by WMS Industries, a company in which he owns a 24.9 percent stake.
Several investors and people involved in the auction for Paramount said the statement was unusual.


Television; Cable Channels Providing New Life for Network Flops
Remember "The Immortal," a series about a race-car driver whose antibodies made him immune to aging?
How about "The Duck Factory," about a wacky group of animators who produced a cartoon show called "Dippy Duck"?
No?
Well, there's a good reason.
Both of these television series were canceled within a year and, by most viewers at least, probably weren't missed.
Now, however, like Stephen King characters who refuse to stay dead, these series are back, revived not so much by popular demand as by new cable channels frantic for programming.


Split Over Rates Ends Clinton-Fed Honeymoon
It was sweet for 11 months, but the honeymoon between President Clinton and the Federal Reserve has finally come to an end.
The beginning of the end came with bickering over the President's proposal to have just one agency regulate the nation's banks, a move that would take away some of the Federal Reserve's power.
And now it seems President Clinton could sue for divorce if the central bank raises interest rates early next year to fight inflation, as some rumblings from within the Fed suggest.


A Bar for Wild Ones, and for Domestic Ones
The kitsch-crowned Dinosaur Bar B Que here is where Armani meets heavy leather -- all right, since this is a town that avoids affectation, it's where "off the rack" meets heavy leather.
Just five years after the Dinosaur was opened by Harley-Davidson riders, the blues bar for bikers has emerged as a melting pot where the heirs of the "The Wild One" rub shoulders with people who bought their children the video.


Prize for School Project Bridges Old Gender Gap
The five engineers on the winning team in the nationwide design competition were celebrating their victory, partying hard on Haagen-Dazs and Nestle bars in their top-floor headquarters, standing around the soaring creation that had absorbed so much of their time and imagination, and boasting that no one else could have done the job.
"Especially not boys; boys are too picky," said 12-year-old Melissa Rivera.
Boys want everything their own way, Melissa said, and they don't make good team players.
Girls, simply put, can do just as well, maybe even better, she said.


Plotting Fed Rate Move: Yes, but . . . But Then . . .
For now it seems that long-term interest rates have seen their lows.
But the debate over what the Federal Reserve will do next year, and when it will do it, is picking up.
Most experts think that the yield on the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond has reached its lows for now.
Should it somehow breach the 5.78 percent level reached on Oct. 15, a 25-year closing low, such an event would happen far enough into next year for analysts to point to a new set of circumstances to explain the drop -- like an unforeseen decrease in inflation or a lowering of inflationary expectations.


Corrections
A television review on Dec. 10 about the CBS movie "Gypsy" described Ethel Merman's role in the original stage production incorrectly.
It was not her last role on Broadway.


In Norway, Israel and P.L.O. Fail to Close Deal
After two days of secret talks in a secluded country house, Israeli and Palestinian negotiators failed today to break the deadlock that has imperiled the peace accord the two sides signed in September.
But in a statement issued by the Norwegian Foreign Ministry, they said they would meet again "in the next few days," at an undisclosed location, and a spokesman for the Government here suggested some progress had been made during the sessions.


Woozy Montana Rallies Chiefs
Chiefs 28, Chargers 24
Still woozy from a hit on the previous play, Joe Montana hit J. J. Birden for the go-ahead touchdown in the third quarter yesterday, and Kansas City beat San Diego, 28-24, at Arrowhead Stadium.
The Chiefs erased a 17-0 deficit to beat the Chargers, remaining tied with Buffalo and Houston for the home-field advantage in the American Football Conference.


Phyllis Gerrity; Philanthropist, 74
Phyllis Van Buren Richard Gerrity, a philanthropist and sportswoman who was prominent in nonprofit institutions involving children and young people in the Albany area, died on Saturday at her home in Loudonville, outside Albany.
She was 74.
She had had a long illness, her family said.


How I Got My Start In Reference Books
To the Editor:
"Tokens of a Somebody" (Topic of The Times, Dec. 9), on the doodads offered by the publishers of Who's Who in America, reminds me of how I became a biographee.
In the 1970's, I received a background questionnaire and a letter congratulating me on nomination for Who's Who in the East (same publisher).
I don't see myself as "a modest man with much to be modest about," in the Churchillian phrase, yet wrote back that I didn't think I had done anything to deserve inclusion.


With No Offense in Sight, the Jet Defense Bends
A day after the Jets were trampled, 28-7, by the Cowboys, Jets Coach Bruce Coslet didn't try to conceal his disappointment.
The offense needed to show some spark going into the final stretch of the season to buoy the team's playoff hopes.
Instead, it fizzled badly.
"You expect so much more," Coslet said about his team's poor performance at Giants Stadium.
"We knew we'd have to play at the top of our game to beat these guys. We didn't do that. I can't pinpoint the reason. The plays are there. We just aren't making them."


Rome Journal; On Italy's Burning Deck, He's in Line for Captain
It is sometimes said that Achille Occhetto, the leader of Italy's former Communists, is indecisive.
These days, as he contemplates a twist of fortune that may turn him into his country's next Prime Minister, it might be more accurate to say that it is not yet the time to make up his mind.
Slouched in a black leather armchair at offices that once represented the closest Western Europe came to its own Red Menace, Mr.
Occhetto casts himself these days as the rallying point of what he terms "the New Left," an ill-defined amalgam of social benevolence and market forces, free enterprise and environmental concerns that captured a yearning for renewal in the Italian spirit in mayoral elections this month.


Inman's Business Record Includes Bankruptcy of Defense Contractor
At his introduction in the Rose Garden last week as the nation's next Defense Secretary, Bobby Ray Inman promised to apply the experience he had gained in corporate America to the Pentagon, in the hopes of bringing what he called the "best business practices" to the Government and getting "a dollar value for a dollar spent on defense."
But during the 1980's, Mr.
Inman presided over a costly business debacle, a leveraged buyout that resulted in the bankruptcy of Tracor Inc., a Fortune 500 military contractor that made submarine and aviation weapons systems.


Graham Fills Vikings' Prescription
Vikings 21, Packers 17
The Green Bay Packers' post-season push was muddled by their nemesis Jim McMahon, whose passing revived the Minnesota Vikings' chances of repeating as National Football Conference Central Division champions.


Ex-Chief Rabbi Says Troops Mustn't Move Settlers
Asserting that the Law of Moses overshadows Government policies in the Jewish state, a former Chief Rabbi of Israel said today that Israeli soldiers must disobey any order to evacuate Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
The call from Rabbi Shlomo Goren, who was Chief Rabbi of the Ashkenazim in the 1970's and chief military chaplain before that, was denounced by Cabinet ministers at their weekly meeting, and some demanded a formal inquiry with an eye toward a possible court-martial.
Rabbi Goren, who 76, is a major general in the army reserves.


PREMIER OF HAITI CRITICIZES ARISTIDE
Three days after formally resigning, the handpicked Prime Minister of Haiti's exiled President lashed out this weekend at the man who appointed him, describing the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide as an erratic figure and questioning his willingness to return to office under internationally negotiated conditions.
The departing Prime Minister, Robert Malval, spoke on Saturday, shortly after returning from a two-week trip abroad during which he tried and failed to organize a national conference in Haiti to break the country's political stalemate.
The idea was rejected by Father Aristide, who said that the security of his supporters could not be guaranteed inside Haiti.


Sports of The Times; Soccer Junkie Files His World up Flight Plan
ALREADY, my heart is broken.
I cannot do it all.
The World Cup draw has been official for only a few hours, but already I am in a high state of anxiety.
I want to be here.
I want to be there.
I want to be everywhere.
Up to now, it was just a bunch of cities on a schedule.
But now the slots have been filled with 24 teams.
The entire world is coming to the United States from June 17 to July 17, but they play some of the games on the same day in cities hundreds and thousands of miles apart.
What am I going to do?


Review/Dance; Ailey Troupe Takes Up A Robbins Challenge
Something funny happened not on the way to but inside City Center when the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater performed a classic by Jerome Robbins for the first time on Friday night.
When Mr.
Robbins created the premiere of "N.Y. Export: Opus Jazz" in 1958 for the first Festival of Two Worlds in Spoleto, Italy, the ballet caused an utter sensation.
Choreographers all over the world began to imitate Mr.
Robbins's finger-snapping jazz-propelled dancers, who had seemingly burst out of "West Side Story," the choreographer's Broadway show of the year before.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Frank Lowe is proud he's not just another name on the door.
A MORDANT new commercial by Goldsmith/Jeffrey in New York, promoting its services to potential clients, is set in a cemetery.
As the birth and death dates of legendary agency founders flash on screen -- Leo Burnett, Raymond Rubicam, J. Walter Thompson -- Gary Goldsmith, the chairman and creative director, asks, "Wouldn't it be nice to work with an agency where the name on the door is not just a name on the door?"
When it comes to names on the doors at larger agencies, one very much still alive -- and then some -- is Frank Lowe.
Rather than pushing up daisies, Mr.
Lowe, the chairman and chief executive of the Lowe Group in London, has been tearing up the pea patch, to echo the colorful words of Red Barber.


Computer Services Seen As a Sales Tool for Books
Because many book publishers are traditionalists who prefer books on a shelf to books on a computer terminal, the publishing industry has not known quite how to capitalize on the burgeoning number of on-line computer networks that link people to each other and to enormous caches of information.
But in the last six months or so, more publishing companies have begun experimenting with these services to promote books, authors and literary discussions, and, in some cases, to sell electronic books whose words pop up on users' computer screens.


Magazines Create On-Line Salons
Ever on the lookout for new readers, the magazine industry seems to have hit paydirt.
It has discovered electronic publishing.
Almost 100 magazines have signed up with on-line computer services in the last six months and others are joining at the rate of two or three a week.
At the same time, a sigh of relief is sweeping the industry because the availability of on-line magazines does not seem to be hurting traditional subscriptions and newsstand sales.


Agency Is Sought For Trade Center Job
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is seeking an agency to handle its World Trade Center account, with billings of $3.4 million.
Included in the account, which has been handled by Keyes Martin in Springfield, N.J., since 1990, are efforts to encourage the leasing of office space, tourist visits and the use of the shops and restaurants at the complex.
"We've gone through a time of great crisis here," Allen Morrison, a spokesman for the Port Authority said on Friday, referring to the bombing in February that killed six people and disrupted operations for months.
"Yet we've been very fortunate for the support of our tenants, and we want to promote visitation here."


New Florida Theme Park Based on Chinese History Opens to Protest


Burger King Widens Role for Uniworld
The Burger King Corporation said the Uniworld Group, the agency handling its advertising aimed at black consumers, would assume, on an interim basis, the national creative assignment on its entire account as a review on that account continued.
Cori Zywotow, a spokeswoman for Burger King in Miami, confirmed a report in New York Newsday on Uniworld's appointment, adding that television commercials created by Uniworld would begin running in the next month.
She said on Friday that the decision was unrelated to the unexpected departure last week of Sidney J. Feltenstein, the chain's executive vice president of worldwide marketing, who had been supervising the review.
Paul Clayton, Burger King's vice president of United States marketing, has assumed Mr.
Feltenstein's duties.


Washington Memo; Clinton Health Plan Heads for Rapids Without Guide
An urgent plea for health care reform is still a reliable applause line, and the conventional wisdom in Washington continues to hold that some form of health care restructuring is likely to pass the Congress next year.
But even the most ardent advocates of reform get panicky when they look at the calendar ahead.
The apprehension is stoked by a simple question on Capitol Hill: Is the White House ready for this?


Essay; Reading Yeltsin's Mind
The referendum and elections worked out as I had planned: I, Boris Yeltsin, am now the most powerful Kremlin leader since Yuri Andropov, and -- at the same time -- I am the only hope of the Western world.
Not an easy combination to bring about.
First I had to show my democratic reformers -- mostly intellectuals who think me a brave simpleton -- how dependent on me they are.


Heroin Seizure Gives Investigators New Knowledge About Influx of the Drug
The discovery of 400 pounds of heroin in a luxurious Manhattan apartment tower this month, the authorities say, provided illuminating new insights into the workings of the nation's biggest drug market, including indications that they had underestimated both the volume of heroin pouring into New York City and the degree of involvement of traditional organized crime families.
Before the capture of what the authorities described as a sophisticated European smuggler, with world-wide connections, investigators had believed that the New York heroin business was overwhelmingly controlled by Chinese, with some smuggling by Nigerians and an increasing amount by Colombians branching out from the cocaine business.


It's Mize, And Field A Fairway Behind
Larry Mize has never been regarded as a dominating player.
He has never been considered to be the type of golfer who can grab a tournament by the throat and strangle it, discard the remnants of the field and bury everyone by, oh, 10 strokes.
Until now.
Today, at Tryall Club, a newly aggressive Mize did a reasonable impersonation of Greg Norman, the man he replaced in the field here at the $2.7 million Johnnie Walker World Championship.
He shot a faultless final-round 65 for a total of 266, 18 under par.
That was 10 strokes better than Fred Couples, who closed with a 64 but was never a factor.


Tears, Hugs and Hopeful Words; Party Is Bittersweet Reunion for Foster Children and Natural Parents
For all the years and all the pain, and now for the coalescing hope of some happiness, the tears flowed.
Francis and Anita Woodyear and their daughter, Athenia, who is 9 years old, held one another and cried, all three of them.
The Woodyears' is a complicated story, but at this Saturday-afternoon Christmas party for parents and for children in foster care, all the stories were complicated.
It was held in the hall of Holy Family Roman Catholic Church at 315 East 47th Street, between First and Second Avenues, and 186 children and perhaps 120 parents attended.
The party was for natural parents only.


Michele Wiener, Steven Friedman
Michele Karyn Wiener, a daughter of Joan and Arthur Wiener of Hackensack, N.J., was married yesterday to Steven Howard Friedman, a son of Eileen and Lawrence Friedman of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Andrew Warmflash officiated at Temple B'nai Tikvah in North Brunswick, N.J.


A Deadly Record
The shooting death yesterday of a 41-yar-old security guard gave East New York the unenviable distinction of being the city's deadliest police precinct, breaking a record set 20 years ago in Harlem.
Article, page B3.


Abroad at Home; News From Nowhere
The story has moved off the front page.
It is approaching the limits of the public's attention span for even the most unrelenting horrors.
The United States Government has made a policy decision to ignore it.
But Serbian fascism is still taking its toll in Bosnia.
Serbs are shooting other human beings, shelling them, starving them and seeing that they die of the cold, for only one reason: because they are not Serbs.


The Puck Stops Where? On Terreri's Home Ice
The Devils will enjoy their Christmas party a great deal more Monday after rallying from a two-goal deficit tonight for a 4-2 triumph over the Flyers.
Chris Terreri continued his domination over Philadelphia with his third victory in as many games this season and 15th in 21 career games (15-3-3) against the Flyers.


All 11 Free Agents Say No
Thanks but no thanks, free agents told their former clubs yesterday.
Facing a deadline at midnight last night, all 11 unsigned free agents whose clubs had offered salary arbitration rejected the offers.


Dance in Review
Jelon Vieira and DanceBrazil  Danspace St. Mark's Church
Jelon Vieira and his DanceBrazil company took on a difficult task in "Pivete," presented on Friday night by the Danspace Project.
The full-evening theater and dance work is based on a novel by Jorge Amado, "Capitaes da Areia," that also served as the inspiration for "Pixote," Hector Babenco's stunning classic film about Brazilian street children.
And the capoeira, the Afro-Caribbean martial art and dance form from which Mr.
Vieira draws his choreography, is rather limited for this task.


Review/Pop; Wrapped in Song and Spectacle, Janet Jackson Plays the Garden
The video-age arena spectacle is in good hands with Janet Jackson.
Her current tour, which started a four-night run at Madison Square Garden on Friday night, piles on the production values: music, dancers, costumes, moving sets, video, lights, fireworks, everything but confetti and balloons.
There's not a spontaneous moment in its 110 minutes of hits and would-be hits.
Calculation and planning informed every word and gesture on Friday night, including her supremely non-committal request to "say a silent prayer for my brother Michael." But Ms.
Jackson comes across as likable, diligent and able to deploy a small army shrewdly in the pursuit of pop pleasure.


Sometimes Two Juries Are Better Than One
For years, multiple jury trials were a rarity.
Judges, lawyers and appellate courts feared that using two, sometimes three juries when more than one defendant was on trial could be cumbersome, unfair and vulnerable to being overturned.
But the murder trial of Lyle and Erik Menendez, in which final arguments began last week, is the most recent example that these trials are having their day in court.
The practice, court administrators say, saves time and money.
Legal scholars say it protects defendants' rights as well.


Americans Filching Free Health Care in Canada
Lacking a national health care system of their own, thousands of Americans are tapping into Canada's -- illegally.
"It's not an epidemic in any one person's practice," said Keith MacLeod, an obstetrician in Windsor, Ontario, across from Detroit, "but I would estimate that from 12 to 20 of my patients at any one time are ineligible Americans. And I'm just one of 520 doctors in Windsor, 23,000 in Ontario."


Oilers Ask No Pity and Show None to the Steelers
With the lingering specter of teammate Jeff Alm's suicide immediately behind them and with the exhilarating anticipation of a divisional crown at their fingertips, the Houston Oilers forged ahead, not backward, and made this afternoon at Three Rivers Stadium special for all of the right reasons.
They dispatched the Pittsburgh Steelers by 26-17 with a quick start and a strong finish and afterward said they would send a game ball to Alm's parents.


German Neo-Communist Runs Strongly but Loses
A joint campaign by Germany's traditional political forces succeeded in preventing the election of a former Communist as Mayor of Potsdam today, but he took 45 percent of the vote and promised to lead a tough local opposition.
"Things can't go on as they have up to now," said the defeated challenger, Rolf Kutzmutz.
"We want to be a constructive opposition, but we will be stronger than before."


NEW SUMMARY
International A3-12 HURDLES FOR JAPAN'S PREMIER  The programs on which Japan's Prime Minister has staked his leadership have bogged down, and he is beginning to become engulfed by Tokyo's back-room deal-making.
A1  ARISTIDE ASSAILED BY EX-PREMIER  Three days after resigning as Prime Minister of Haiti, Robert Malval accused the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide of hampering efforts to resolve Haiti's political crisis.
A1  AMERICANS TRY CANADA MEDICINE  In Ontario -- from August 1992 to February 1993 -- 60,000 medical claims were made on behalf of patients with U.S. drivers' licenses, the Health Minister said.
A1  SERBIA PARTY LAGGING IN VOTE  Initial results in Serbian elections appeared to indicate that President Slobodan Milosevic's Socialist Party is in trouble, with opposition parties drawing strong votes.
A3  SOUTH AFRICA TALKS PLANNED  The South African Government, the African National Congress and the right-wing Freedom Alliance agreed to their first talks on agreement for the transition to majority rule.
A9  IMPASSE IN MIDEAST TALKS  Israeli and Palestinian negotiators, meeting in Norway, failed to break the deadlock that has imperiled the accord the two sides signed.
A10  A rabbi said troops must disobey orders to evacuate settlers.
A11  49 MISSING IN MALAYSIA WATERS  Forty-nine Indonesians were missing after two fishing trawlers collided amid high waves and one of them sank off the southeastern coast of Malaysia, the police said.
A12  Rome Journal: Achille Occhetto's role in Italy's "New Left." A4  An ex-Communist got many votes in a German mayoral race.
A5  Five people were treated for shock after a bombing in Ulster.
A6  A search for M.I.A.'s in Indochina ended with mixed results.
A8 National A14-15, D9-10 COMMUNICATIONS ROAD MAP  The Clinton Administration is poised to make broad changes in communications policy and will support legislation that would break down the legal barriers that separate the telephone and cable television industries.
A1  DEFENSE PICK'S BUSINESS RECORD  As the next Defense Secretary, Bobby Ray Inman has promised to apply to the Pentagon the experience he gained in corporate America.
But during the 1980's, Mr.
Inman presided over a costly business debacle, a leveraged buyout failure.
A1  MEAT STILL LACKS LABELS  Nearly a year after the deaths of three children drew attention to the dangers of improperly prepared meat, an effort to tell consumers how to handle beef have been stymied by legal challenges.
A1  POWER-SHOPPING IN RETAIL HEAVEN  Thousands of people flew to Bloomington, Minn., on the last Saturday before Christmas for one reason only: the Mall of America, the biggest in the country.
A1  WHO DESERVES THE CREDIT?
President Clinton has begun to take credit for the upturn in the economy, but some economists -- even those who argue that his policies promise improvement -- say he does not deserve nearly so much credit as he is claiming.
A14  LOOKING AHEAD AND WORRYING  Even the most ardent advocates of health care reform get panicky when they look at the calendar ahead.
Their question: Is the White House ready for this?
A14  A SHOWCASE FOR A LAWYER  Defending Erik and Lyle Menendez, two brothers charged with first-degree murder in the shotgun killings of their parents, Leslie Abramson has shown herself to be one of California's premier capital defense lawyers.
D9  A TRIAL WITH TWO JURIES  The Menendez murder trial is the most recent example that multiple jury trials are having their day in court.
D9 Metro Digest B1 CUOMO'S ANTI-CRIME PROPOSALS  Governor Cuomo has begun outlining a broad package of anti-crime proposals that range from ending parole for repeat violent offenders to requiring weapons training for gun license applicants.A1  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  Roddy Doyle on the verge of fame.
C11  "Schindler's List" and the box office.
C16  Music: Janet Jackson at the Garden.
C11  Ralph Kirshbaum, cellist.
C13  Dance: The Ailey takes on a Robbins classic.
C11  Books: Three mysteries.
C15  Television: "Merry Christmas, Mr. Bean." C18  Watchdog group accuses "20/20." C18  Sports C1-9  Basketball: Knicks add guard.
C2  The N.B.A.'s worst team.
C2  Columns: Vecsey on World Cup.
C4  TV Sports C5  Football: Oilers clinch divisional title.
C1  49ers win division easily.
C7  The Jets' lost offense.
C5  Flu hampering Giants.
C7  Golf: Mize dominates.
C3  Hockey: Rangers' Richter reaps record.
C9  Islanders keep winning.
C9  Devils defeat Flyers.
C9  Soccer: U.S. in bracket with Colombia, Romania, Switzerland.
C1  Business Digest D1  Neediest Cases B11  Obituaries D11  Moses Gunn, actor.
John W. Eckman, former chairman of Rorer Group.
Wallace F. Bennett, former Republican Senator from Utah.
Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  Open up on Madison Guaranty.
A smart move by United.
Topics: A welcoming space.
Letters  Anthony Lewis: News from nowhere.
William Safire: Reading Yeltsin's mind.
Angela Stent: Treacherous transition.
John Huey: Billy's Olympic dream park.
Bridge C13 Chronicle B11 Crossword C15


United States Finds That the Fix Isn't In
If soccer's World Cup draw is indeed rigged, as many have supposed through the years, it was definitely not fixed in the favor of the host United States or perennial favorite Italy.
As the 24-team field was divided into six, four-team groups today, the Americans were placed with Colombia, which defeated Argentina, 5-0, in Buenos Aires during qualifying; with Switzerland, which defeated and tied Italy, and with Romania, which has none of the glamour but all of the potential threat of higher-profile European teams.


Officer Is Arrested in Brooklyn on Drug Charges
A police officer was arrested in Brooklyn yesterday by Federal and local authorities on charges of trying to sell cocaine, the police said.
The officer, Fernman E. Jones, 32, was immediately suspended from active duty after 11 years on the police force, nearly all of it spent in the 90th Precinct in Brooklyn.
Officer Jones was arrested shortly before 10 A.M. in his home on Pennsylvania Avenue by agents of the Public Corruption Unit of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and by officers in the Internal Affairs Bureau of the New York Police Department, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.


Listen, New York Needs Rail Freight Access
To the Editor:
Re "A Senator Paralyzes Transit Planning" (editorial, Dec. 10):
State Senator Norman J. Levy of Long Island is right.
Lack of freight access to New York City and its Eastern suburbs is the major impediment to our economic recovery, particularly in the manufacturing and wholesaling segments of our economy.


Review/Television; Mr. Bean, Bumbler With an Eerie Edge
Mr.
Bean is British.
Mr.
Bean is an eccentric.
Nothing unusual about that.
The British tend to treasure eccentricity.
But there is something quite unusual about Mr.
Bean.
He's lovable and, at the same time, ever so slightly creepy.
Created by the actor Rowan Atkinson ("Blackadder"), Mr.
Bean is a comic thing unto himself, as is readily apparent in his latest series of half-hours, the equivalent of old-fashioned one-reelers, acquired by Home Box Office.
Last week's installment, the first of three in the current run, didn't work.
In "Mind the Baby, Mr. Bean," our odd hero mistakenly wandered off through an amusement park with a baby.
Missing babies, no matter the circumstance, don't lend themselves to comedy routines.
In tonight's caper at 7:30, "Merry Christmas, Mr. Bean," Mr.
Atkinson recovers splendidly.


Bridge
The international challenge match played on Thursday and Friday at the Town Club, at 9 East 86th Street, won $50,000 for the American foursome of Jeff Meckstroth, Eric Rodwell, Bob Goldman and Paul Soloway.
But $30,000 went to their backers, who would have been responsible for the whole amount if the match had been lost.
The American margin of victory was 50 imps.
The big loser was Leandro Burgay of Turin, Italy, a television producer, who financed his European teammates, Soldano De Falco of Padua, Italy, and Herve Mouiel and Alain Levy of Paris, in the hope of proving that his methods of responding to one no-trump would demonstrate their superiority to those of the Americans.


U.S. READY TO EASE ITS LEGAL BARRIERS IN COMMUNICATIONS
The Clinton Administration is poised to make broad changes in communications policy and will give its support this week to legislation that would break down the legal barriers that currently separate the telephone and cable television industries.
On Tuesday, Vice President Al Gore plans to give the first of two major speeches outlining this and other principles in the Administration's plan for a "national information infrastructure."


Donations to Charity Follow Family Tradition
For many people, giving money to charity is an impulsive act, a largely emotional response to a plea for help, such as the outstretched hand of a homeless person.
But for others, writing a check to charity at this time of the year is a family tradition, passed like an heirloom from generation to generation.
A father gives in memory of his mother, whom he remembers counting change at Christmastime to send to a good cause; in turn, his son continues to give, if only because he remembers that it was important to his father.


The Marketing of Kwanzaa; Black American Holiday Earns Dollars, Causing Concern
The four attendants at the ice cream stand held hands, as one of the them prayed.
"Lord, give everyone who comes a hungry thirst for this ice cream," he said.
So began the Kwanzaa Holiday Expo for the Ben &amp; Jerry's store in Harlem, one of about 300 businesses whose presence at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center over the weekend offered a convincing sign of the commercial potential of the black American holiday.


Napco Security Systems Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crack Down on 'Squeegees,' Those Street-Corner Extortionists
To the Editor:
As a 25-year Manhattan resident, I've followed with interest the discussion of the "squeegees," men and women who wipe the windshields of motorists waiting in traffic.
The Dec. 12 letter from Lyle Kessler, a Santa Monica movie producer, who espouses their cause, suggests he is a little too grounded in fiction.
Consider the victim's perspective -- a victim being a driver who refuses to be intimidated into giving money to these hoodlums.


Max &amp; Erma's Restaurants Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


What to Take When the World's Hard to Take; Not Poison or Panacea
To the Editor:
Re "With Millions Taking Prozac, a Legal Drug Culture Arises" (front page, Dec. 13): Since its release Prozac has been called a poison capable of causing a homicidal rampage and an elixir capable of curing all manner of psychological illness.
These extreme views obfuscate the debate.


For a Humane Haitian Refugee Policy
To the Editor:
John Shattuck, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, is right to call for a policy review of the program of returning boat people to Haiti without any inquiry into their claims of persecution (news article, Dec. 15).


National Trustco reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


TRO Learning Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Time to Move on the Coliseum
It was 1985 when Mortimer Zuckerman won the right to build on the site of the old Coliseum at Columbus Circle in Manhattan, but so far nothing has happened.
Legal impediments arose, but they were resolved in September 1992 and still the old building sits there, largely unused.
Will Columbus Circle ever be developed?
New York City and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority gave Mr.
Zuckerman a prod recently by setting a 90-day deadline for him either to close the deal or forfeit his $33.8 million down payment.
He cried foul, suggesting that the Dinkins administration was punishing him because the newspaper he owns, The Daily News, had endorsed his opponent Rudolph Giuliani.
City Hall denies that, and says the deadline is meant to pressure Mr.
Zuckerman into moving ahead.


Nike Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Another Visit From St. Nicholas
'Twas the Sunday before Christmas.
Jock Elliott sat in the chancel of St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in New York City, reading aloud "A Visit From St. Nicholas." His recitation capped a tribute to the church's famous parishioner, Clement Clark Moore, a distinguished theological scholar who is far better known for 58 lines of verse.
Professor Moore, also a part-time poet, considered his little piece rather trivial.
How terribly wrong he was.
Composed in 1822, it possessed charm for the young that thrives to this day.
Indeed, according to Mr.
Elliott, were it not for this poem the legend of St.
Nicholas might have died away long ago.


Modest Advances Seen With 2 AIDS Drugs
RESEARCHERS reported modest gains in drug therapy against two common and serious complications of AIDS at a scientific meeting in Washington last week.
The complications are infections caused by a variety of fungi and a potentially blinding eye infection caused by cytomegalovirus.


Japan Losing Lead in Autos
For the first time since 1980, car and truck production in the United States next year will exceed vehicle production in Japan, according to a forecast by an automotive trade journal.
Citing the weak market in Japan and increased production by Japanese factories in the United States as key causes, Automotive News reported today that production in Japan was expected to decline almost 1 percent in 1994, to 11 million units, while production in the United States will climb 4.6 percent, to 11.2 million units.


Transactions
American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Failed to offer a 1994 contract to Todd Frohwirth, pitcher.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.94
3.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.02
3.23
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.21
3.20
3.42
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.33
5.29
6.38
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.30
6.27
7.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.31
7.33
8.39
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.56
5.58
6.42
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Paramount Bid Raised
QVC Network raised the cash portion its bid for Paramount Communications by a slender $2 a share, or $100 million.
Still, QVC said its new bid was higher than any revised new offer by Viacom.
QVC's total bid is now worth about $10.4 billion, nearly $500 million more than Viacom's bid.
Business Day, page D1.


Dow Rises On Trendless Trading Day
Stocks closed mixed after an opening selloff yesterday, as trading moved in a trendless fashion familiar to the end of the year.
Traders said the mood of the market included some optimism about inflation, which appeared to be controlled under the Fed's watchful gaze, and greater optimism about corporate profits.


Far Under Icecap and Ocean, Teams Seek Sign From Stars
HOPING to capture ghost-like neutrino particles that reveal hidden features of black holes, galactic cores and other cosmic enigmas, astrophysicists have begun installing a pair of peculiar "telescopes" -- one at the bottom of the Pacific Ocean and the other under a half-mile of ice at the South Pole.
Unlike conventional telescopes that gather and analyze visible light or radio waves, the new telescopes will look for neutrino particles, tiny packets of energy with neither electric charge nor measurable mass, which, although ubiquitous, are so elusive that they remained undetected until 40 years ago.


Arthur Cort Holden, Architect, 103, Dies
Arthur Cort Holden, an architect who also wrote extensively about housing and urban design, died on Saturday at his home in Washington, Conn.
He was 103.
Mr.
Holden, who was born in New York City, held degrees from Princeton University and Columbia University.
After Army service during World War I, he joined the firm of McKim, Mead &amp; White before founding his own architecture firm, Holden, McLaughlin &amp; Associates, in 1920.
During the Depression years he worked on committees for the National Recovery Administration and the Work Progress Administration.


No Headline
"Janie works hard, of course, and she's a good wife and a good mother, but do you know she's never once made a gingerbread house with her children?" -- MILDRED HASTINGS, speaking of her daughter, a 43-year-old insurance broker who has three children.  [ A1:4. ]


St. Mary Land &amp; Exploration Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Q&amp;A
Animal Color Vision
Q.  How do scientists find out whether animals have color vision?


Esterline Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


By Design: The Suspended Look
Suspenders, or braces, as the British call them, have entered the realm of high fashion for women.
In Chanel's spring show, Karl Lagerfeld put them on everything from jeans to tweed skirts.
In New York, they held up pants in the spring shows of Ralph Lauren, Isaac Mizrahi and Anna Sui (who sometimes left them hanging down, more for effect than for utility).
Joan Kaner, the fashion director of Neiman Marcus, thinks that adding suspenders is a great way to update a classic pants-and-shirt or pants-and-T-shirt outfit.
In February or March, Neiman's will have Chanel's version, with C-H-A-N-E-L crawling up the front and down the back.


Gregory A. Mancini Developer, 47
Gregory A. Mancini, a Long Island developer, died on Friday at his home in Dix Hills.
He was 47.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Albany Panel Asks Changes For Schools
Citing "wide disparities" between rich and poor schools, a special state commission appointed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has decided to recommend school reforms that include allowing the state to run failing schools and redistributing commercial property taxes to aid poor districts.
The commission, which plans to present its report to the Governor tomorrow, also calls for allowing the state's five largest urban school districts, including New York City, to set their own budgets and levy taxes.
And it recommends a reorganization of special-education services, which have received large increases in school aid without demonstrating improvements in student performances, the report says.


Bridge
A triple that is believed to be unique was completed early this month.
Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., won the New Jersey Bridge League's Double Knockout Team Championship, and had earlier won similar titles in North Jersey and Westchester.
The other winners were David and Lisa Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., and Bob and Barbara Sartorius of Lake Hiawatha, N.J.
The trophy memorializes Sartorius's first wife, Linda.
The final was won by 21 imps against a group comprising Bob and Joann Glasson of Pennington, N.J., Jay Korobow of Princeton, N.J., Steve Williams of Lawrenceville, N.J., and Carl Berenbaum and Rich Rothwarf, both of Philadelphia.


5 Students Held in Melee
Five students at the School of the Future, a small intermediate and secondary school at 127 East 22d Street in Manhattan, were arrested yesterday amid a melee set off by the arrest of a student for robbery, school officials said.
The owner of a newspaper stand near the school reported to a transit police officer that he had been robbed by a student, and later identified the student to the officer as the 15-year-old youth emerged from the building when school ended.
Students who saw the arrest surrounded the officer's car and threatened the officer, school officials said.
The police arrested five students who participated in the disturbance.


Cellular One Account To Ammirati &amp; Puris
Cellular One of New York and New Jersey in Paramus, N.J., said yesterday that it had selected Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York to handle its account, previously handled by Gillespie Advertising in Princeton, N.J.
Billings have not been determined.


Mobil Wins Right to Drill for Oil Off Vietnam
The Mobil Corporation said yesterday that it had become the first United States oil company to win the right to drill for oil offshore of Vietnam.
But an 18-year-old United States embargo against trade with Vietnam would prevent the company from exploiting the field if oil or gas was found.
Mobil said yesterday that it was part of a consortium with three Japanese companies that had been awarded an interest in a block called the Blue Dragon for undisclosed terms.
Mobil had drilled there before it was forced to abandon its effort when the United States military and businesses left Vietnam in 1975.


Eagle Hardware
Shares of Eagle Hardware and Gardens Inc., an operator of home improvement centers in the Pacific Northwest, were hammered after the company warned that near-term same-store sales growth would be below historical levels.
The company, based in Tukwila, Wash., also said it had filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a convertible debt offering.
Some investors said they saw the offering as a source of possible earnings dilution if debt holders exercised the option to convert to equities.


Japanese Project Aims To Harness Heavy Ions To Kill Malignant Cells
TEN months after the United States virtually abandoned a potentially powerful but extremely expensive approach to fighting cancer, Japan is completing a huge construction project here to put the technique to use.
The procedure, known as heavy-ion treatment, involves bombarding cancer cells with ions of carbon, neon and other elements whose electrons have been stripped off, leaving only the positively charged nuclei.


Executive Changes
AETNA LIFE AND CASUALTY, Hartford, promoted Robert E. Broatch to senior vice president for finance from vice president and corporate controller AMERICAN NATIONAL CORP., Chicago, promoted Alan F. Delp, its president, to chief executive of the company and its main subsidiary, the American National Bank and Trust Company of Chicago.


Just Winning Isn't Enough for the Jets
If you saw the way the Dallas Cowboys smothered the Jets' offense Saturday, you might not believe this.
But the National Football League's computer playoff experts, who live for this moment, said yesterday that the Jets (8-6) could not only still make the playoffs, they could win their division title.
It's a harrowing task.
First, the Jets would have to win their two remaining games on the road against the Buffalo Bills (10-4) and the Houston Oilers (10-4).
If the Bills lose to the Jets and then lose to the Indianapolis Colts the following week, and the Miami Dolphins (9-5) lose their final two games, at San Diego and New England, the Jets and the Bills will be tied at 10-6.
The Jets will win the title on the third tie breaker, conference record (8-4 to the Bills' 6-6).


Drug Emporium (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sam &amp; Libby Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 2


Corrections
An article on Dec. 15 about the biotechnology industry in New York City described the status of one company, Hemazyme, incorrectly.
The company changed its name to ZymeQuest Inc. in May but retains its corporate offices and research laboratory in Manhattan; it is not among the biotechnology companies that have left the city or gone out of business.


Nixon Griffis Dies; Conservationist, 76, Had Led Brentano's
Nixon Griffis, a conservationist, trustee of the New York Zoological Society and former owner of Brentano's book stores, died on Friday at Hamot Medical Center in Erie, Pa.
He was 76 and lived in Naples, Fla., where he had moved from Manhattan about four years ago.
He had had a long illness, his family said.


Rostenkowski Inquiry Is Said to Widen
A grand jury investigation into the financial dealings of Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, has widened to include accusations that his Congressional office paid family acquaintances, full-time city employees and people who had not worked for him in years, according to a recent report by The Chicago Sun-Times.
The possible ghost employees include an alderman's wife who stayed on the Congressman's payroll for five years after she purportedly quit her job in 1987 to stay home and start a family, The Sun-Times reported.


'The Quickest Way for Me Is Up on the Housetops'


Cuomo Asks Lawmakers for Gun Vote On King Day
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo called today for the State Legislature to meet on Martin Luther King Jr.
Day, the Jan. 17 holiday, to pass a package of gun control bills that would ban assault weapons and increase penalties for gun traffickers.
The Democratic-controlled Assembly, which approved an assault weapons ban this year, quickly accepted the Governor's invitation.
But leaders of the Republican majority in the State Senate said they would not return that day.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about efforts to restore water quality in the Everglades rendered a percentage incorrectly in a quotation from George Frampton, an assistant Secretary of Interior, about a decline in sugar production that might result from these efforts.
In suggesting that any decline could not be predicted precisely, he said, "It might be 10 percent, or 20 percent, or 25 percent, or 28 percent less in 20 to 25 years." He did not use a 75 percent figure.


Salton/Maxim Housewares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


W. Edwards Deming, Expert on Business Management, Dies at 93
W.
Edwards Deming, an expert on business management who advised Japan on how to rebuild its shattered industries after World War II and urged American corporations to treat their workers as associates rather than adversaries, died early yesterday at his home in Washington.
He was 93.
The cause was cancer.
Although he was ill in recent years, Mr.
Deming continued to work, conducting the last of his four-day seminars on quality-management in the Los Angeles area from Dec. 7 through Dec. 10.


It's a Wedding Blitz for Trump and Maples
Marla Ann Maples, the daughter of Ann Ogletree and Stanley Maples, both of Dalton, Ga., was married last night at the Plaza Hotel to Donald John Trump, a son of Mary and Fred Trump of Jamaica Estates in Queens.
The bridegroom's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Lowrance Electronics Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


The Car's the Star, on Fridays at 8
"That thing don't look like no cop's car," the carjacker growls, climbing from his stolen convertible and staring at the bullet-shaped silver machine that just outraced him and pulled him over.
"I traded up," replies the maverick hero officer, leaning over the car's roof with gun drawn.


People
*
Michael J. Boyle was named senior vice president and director of creative services at FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York, succeeding Gary Shillet, who left to join the School of Visual Arts, New York.
Mr.
Boyle was previously a vice president and director of operations at Clarion Marketing and Communications, Greenwich, Conn. *
Diane Bulmer was named advertising director at YM magazine, New York, succeeding Lori Burgess, who left to join Seventeen magazine, New York, in a similar capacity.
Ms.
Bulmer was previously advertising director at Prevention magazine, New York.


Lynton Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mets Get a Catcher, Seek a Shortstop
If there's one thing in abundance in Flushing these days, it's the number of convoluted situations surrounding various positions for the Mets.
Who's on third, what's on second and, most important, who can play shortstop are just a few of the enormous questions.
Yesterday, none were answered, but the Mets did plug at least one roster position.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  'LESS SHOCK, MORE THERAPY' Too much emphasis on the Russian economy and too little attention to improving the daily lives of its people drove voters to support anti-reform candidates, the State Department's Russia expert said.
A1


Richard Dicker, 79; Headed Penn Central
Richard Dicker, a former chief executive of the Penn Central Corporation, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 79 and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He had a brief illness, the company reported.


Inconsistent Tar Heels on the Up and Up
Although his team has stumbled only once so far this season, Dean Smith complained before tonight's game with Pittsburgh that the North Carolina Tar Heels have been inconsistent this season: up one game, down the next.
The defending national champions were definitely up this evening.


Core Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cancer Data Are Revised
HARVARD researchers have revised a statistic in a study about the genetic contribution to a woman's likelihood of developing breast cancer.
In the study, published on July 21 in The Journal of the American Medical Association, the researchers said that only 2.5 percent of the 2,389 breast cancer cases that developed among the more than 117,000 women in the study could be attributed to a family history of the disease.
But recently, the research team, led by Dr.
Graham Colditz of the Channing Laboratory at Harvard, increased the percentage of cases linked with family history to 6 percent.
The change was published as a correction in the journal.


Giants Give the Saints a Look at a True Contender
Coming into this game, the idea for the Giants was to run the ball down the throats of the New Orleans Saints.
No need.
The way the Giants dominated them tonight, they could have run, passed or taken the ferry past the once awesome Saints' defense.
This was no contest.
It was also a hard-hitting game that saw players get their helmets knocked off and Saints quarterback Wade Wilson almost get his knee taken off on a low hit by defensive end Mike Fox.
The Giants, however, saw their chances of securing home-field advantage soar with the 24-14 victory over the Saints at the Superdome.


3 Choices For Your Drawing Board
NOT many of us are talented enough to produce acceptable drawings, even if we occasionally need them for school or business reports or just for a sign to hang in the shop window.
Three programs, two of them new and one an old friend, leave the hard work to the computer.
Brushstrokes, a Claris Clear Choice program for most Macintoshes, would once have been a top-of-the-line professional collection of graphic tools.
Today it is a program with an official retail price of $139 (in the real world, less than $100) that your 10-year-old or you can handle.


PLM Equipment Growth Fund L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; Playboy Seeks a Place in the Electronic Future
The Playboy bunny may be one of the world's best-known symbols, but shares of Playboy Enterprises Inc., so few in number, rarely gain much attention on Wall Street.
Yet investors have been pushing up shares of this thinly traded stock, and the meshing of Playboy bunnies and emerging telecommunications systems may be what is on their minds.
Despite lackluster earnings, investors have been warming to Playboy on the belief that there are profits to be made selling the company's trademark brand of entertainment on the soon-to-be-merged telephone and cable technologies.


Child-Killer Diseases on Decline, Unicef Reports
Striking an upbeat note about its struggle to reduce infant mortality, Unicef says "a final offensive" may now be under way against the biggest killers of small children in the world.
Its annual report, titled "The State of the World's Children," says that the press tends to dwell on bad news from the third world rather than the good.
The report notes that infant deaths from pneumonia, diarrhea, measles, tetanus and whooping cough are all in retreat and that severe malnutrition is being reduced despite a 20 percent rise in the number of children under 5 in the last decade.


Books of The Times; An Israeli's Vision, of Both Recent Past and Future
The New Middle East  By Shimon Peres with Arye Naor Illustrated. 224 pages.
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $25.
In less than half a century, Israel has produced many remarkable leaders who have been soldiers, diplomats and orators, sometimes all at once.
Among those present at the creation were Yitzhak Rabin, now Prime Minister, and Shimon Peres, now Foreign Minister.
Both played major roles in the handshake last September between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization on the South Lawn of the White House.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FOSTER WHEELER CORP., Clinton, N.J., said its Foster Wheeler USA unit had been awarded a contract for engineering and designing a five-story, $150 million pharmaceutical manufacturing building for Eli Lilly &amp; Co.
The terms were not disclosed.


Inman's Careful Career Of the Unexpected Move
Truly voluntary resignations in Washington are as rare as camera-shy lawmakers, but Bobby Ray Inman, chosen by President Clinton last week to be Secretary of Defense, once racked up two in a year.
Those departures, in 1982, were bipartisan.
Mr.
Inman quit as the Reagan Administration's Deputy Director of Central Intelligence after clashes with William J. Casey, the Director.
Shortly afterward, he accepted and then resigned from a post as consultant to the House Intelligence Committee, charging that the panel, which was controlled by Democrats, had issued a partisan staff report on El Salvador.


Miscellany
*
J.
Walter Thompson Europe has acquired a 50 percent stake in Parintex, an affiliated agency in Warsaw that is being renamed J. Walter Thompson/Parintex. *
Richard Avedon, the photographer, has been selected to create advertising for the Princess Marcella Borghese cosmetics and treatment lines, working with the brand's agency, Lowe &amp; Partners SMS, New York.


Military Chaplain Fights A Battle Over Loyalties
The end to Chaplain Garland L. Robertson's distinguished 20-year Air Force career can be traced to a moral dilemma: God or country?
Chaplain Robertson, who had consistently received outstanding evaluations, is a man of high ethical standards, his associates here at Dyess Air Force Base say, a straight-arrow who does not smoke, drink or swear.
Before becoming a chaplain, he was a decorated pilot in Vietnam.


A Private Gift for Public Education
Walter Annenberg, who donated $365 million in June to three universities and a New Jersey prep school, has now targeted his wealth at the lower rungs of the education ladder.
His latest donation, a staggering $500 million, is aimed at improving elementary and secondary education, where America is acknowledged to be much weaker than in higher education.
Mr.
Annenberg says he wants to help stem the growing tide of violence in schools.
His gift will be doled out over five years in challenge grants to educators who are developing innovative programs that, they hope, can be replicated across the country and thus reshape the way children are taught.


For Yankees, A Familiar Yet Surprising Face: Polonia
A Yankee off season that has been filled with confusion, unexpected twists and scant improvement in the roster took another interesting turn last night when the team signed the free-agent outfielder Luis Polonia to a two-year, $3 million contract.
After Rickey Henderson rebuffed their offer to return to New York as the leadoff hitter and left fielder last Thursday, the Yankees acted swiftly and settled on another former Yankee in Polonia to fill the void.
Polonia, who bats and throws left-handed, could earn an additional $500,000 in each season if he accumulates more than 620 plate appearances.
But even if he reaches the incentives, he will still cost the Yankees less than half of the $8.6 million Oakland invested in Henderson.


Midwesco Filter Resources Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Prayer in the Schools Is an Individual Matter
To the Editor:
How can voluntary prayer in public schools -- the subject of "Mississippi Fights Ban on Prayers in Schools" (news article, Dec. 7) and "The Myth of 'Voluntary' School Prayer" (editorial, Dec. 8) -- rouse so much controversy in this of all countries?


Health Costs Vary Greatly By Industry, a Survey Finds
Employers and employees in private industry and state and local governments spent $258.5 billion for workers' health insurance last year, the Labor Department reported today in the first Federal survey of such spending.
Employers accounted for 86 percent of the total.
They spent $221.4 billion for employee health benefits, or nearly six times as much as the $37.1 billion spent by workers.


CHRONICLE
For the price of a $5 raffle ticket, PETER LIMBURG, an author of science books, will sit down to lunch with HAROLD EVANS, the publisher of Random House.
Mr.
Limburg was one of five winners of a raffle held last week by the American Society of Journalists and Authors to benefit the Llewellyn Miller fund, which provides grants to needy writers.
Raffle buyers at the holiday party could choose tickets designated for lunch with one of five editors.


Accounts
*
Winterbrook Beverage Group, Kirkland, Wash., to Cole &amp; Weber Advertising, Seattle, to handle advertising for the marketer of brands like La Croix waters and Winterbrook seltzer, previously at Barnes Advertising, Seattle.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Bagir International, New York, to Cadwell Davis Partners, New York, to handle the men's apparel manufacturer's American account, which the agency previously handled on a project basis.
Billings were not disclosed.


President Steps Up Anti-Crime Drive


2 Men Killed and 2 Are Hurt in a Shooting
Two men were shot dead and two others were seriously wounded about 3 P.M. yesterday in a Washington Heights apartment by three assailants who escaped, the police said.
The motive for the shooting was related to drug dealing, investigators said.
The slain men, both shot in the head, were found in the living room of a sixth-floor apartment at 681 West 193d Street near Broadway Terrace, said Lieut.
John Fahey of the 34th Precinct.
They were later identified as Luis Alberto Tamarez, 32, and Felix Estaillat, 34.


Disco Fire in Argentina Kills at Least 17


Transcripts in Bomb Case Scrutinized for Meaning
With the jury given the day off, the judge and the lawyers in the World Trade Center trial yesterday poured over transcripts of translations of telephone conversations in Arabic made by one of the defendants, discussing the meaning of Arabic words and deciding how disputed translations will be presented to the jurors when they return to the trial today.
The long and often tedious conversation, filled with expressions like "two unknown males, up from the bottom of page 13, 'I don't know' (unintelligible)" seemed to underline the inherent difficulties of understanding exactly what was meant when conversations in foreign languages are reproduced in transcripts.


Suspect Is Sought in 20 Sexual Assaults
The police said yesterday that they were seeking a rape suspect who they believe has committed more than 20 sexual assaults in Queens over the last four years.
Most of the rapes have occurred in the Far Rockaway section of Queens, but the police say that three in Nassau County may also have involved the suspect, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.


Applied Power Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Patterns
Tightening Small Belts
The baby-boomer may be a somewhat less indulgent parent than designers have been led to believe.
At the end of January, Giorgio Armani's children's collection, Armani Junior, will no longer be sold at Emporio Armani stores in the United States, although in Italy, the still popular collection has its own boutiques.


Corrections
An article on July 21 about a study of the risk of breast cancer, published in The Journal of the American Medical Association, included an incorrect figure from the researchers about the percentage of cases that could be attributed to a family history of the disease.
A corrective article appears today on page C13.


Iranians Approve Death Penalty For Makers of Video Pornography
The Iranian Parliament has approved legislation providing for capital punishment for producers and distributors of pornographic video tapes, saying it is an effort to protect Islamic sanctity, the official press reported today.
The bill, which provides a maximum five years' prison term and $100,000 in fines for first offenders, said the principal promoters of pornographic videos, "found to be Corrupters on Earth, can receive the death penalty," according to The Teheran Times.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in the Metro Section yesterday about suburban crime misstated the rate of motor vehicle theft in Fairfield County, Conn.
The correct rates were 807 per 100,000 residents in 1988, 1,018 in 1989, 1,067 in 1990, 1,166.3 in 1991 and 976.6 in 1992.
Those figures exceeded the rates in Westchester County, N.Y., and Nassau County, L.I., but were lower than those in Hudson County, N.J., and New York City.


Appraising the Warhol Appraisals
Appraising artworks is not an exact science.
That was underscored in Manhattan Surrogate's Court last week as Martha Baer, the director of 20th-century fine arts for Christie's, the auction house, underwent hours of intense questioning in the prolonged court battle to determine the value of Andy Warhol's estate.
Underlying the case, which has been in the courts for more than a month with no end in sight, is a surprising amount of confusion and contradiction about events surrounding Christie's appraisals for the Warhol estate and the fact that an appraisal is in the eye, and at the discretion of, the appraiser.


Nutrition Management reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The English Are Talking Funny Again
If Henry Higgins were to stroll past the flower vendors in Covent Garden today, he might well catch an accent that would send him scurrying back to his phonetics laboratory.
What manner of accent is this?
A bit of the East End, surely.
Listen to those diphthongs.
But what can one make of that disappearing "L" sound?
And the "R" that sounds like a "W"?


Dinkins, in Labor Rebuff, Blocks Council Bill as a Curb on Giuliani
Mayor David N. Dinkins, rebuffing his longtime allies in the municipal labor movmement, yesterday blocked efforts in the City Council that he said would have inappropriately tied the hands of the new mayor.
The unions said they felt betrayed.
But Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani, who has had several run-ins with Mr.
Dinkins over decisions Mr.
Giuliani viewed as pre-empting him during the transition, praised Mr.
Dinkins highly for yesterday's actions.


Good Year Is Seen for Municipals
The main reason that the municipal bond market looks so attractive next year is that the flood of new issues that marked 1993 is expected to slow substantially in 1994.
This decline should relieve the downward pressure on prices that analysts contend is the reason the municipal bond market has underperformed the Treasury market this year.


Italians Plan to Avoid Their Madding Crowd
For security reasons, the Italian national soccer team has chosen a prep school and a small, isolated hotel in New Jersey for its base camp during next summer's World Cup.
It's not terrorists that the Italians want to be protected against, it's their own fans.
Local organizers offered Princeton and Rutgers universities as training sites, among others, and the New York City area offers some of the world's most lavish hotels.
No thanks, the Italians said.
They chose instead to train at The Pingry School in Martinsville, N.J., and took all 110 rooms at the Somerset Hills Hotel in Warren, setting up camp some 45 minutes from Giants Stadium, where the Azzurri, as they are called, will play two first-round games.


INSIDE
Beirut Phalangists Bombed
Two people were killed and 90 hurt when a bomb struck the east Beirut headquarters of the main Christian political party in Lebanon.
Page A6.
When God and Country Clash
An Air Force chaplain is challenging his ouster for writing a letter before the Persian Gulf war questioning the use of force against Iraq.
Page A20.
Talk About Talks, Not Bombs
South Korea is playing down any nuclear threat from the North, for fear of jeopardizing talks about ending the nations' armed standoff.
Page A8.
Wedding in Manhattan
Marla Ann Maples, daughter of Ann Ogletree and Stanley Maples, was married to Donald John Trump, a son of Mary and Fred Trump.
Page B1.


Davis Water &amp; Waste Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Plaza Home Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Now He's a Runaway Loser
Cox's Sword got caught in traffic again yesterday, but at least this time he was running among horses and not automobiles.
For the first time since he escaped from the Belmont Park training track and sped westbound on the Hempstead Turnpike nearly two weeks ago -- a trek that covered two miles and took him into two counties -- Cox's Sword returned to safer racing at Aqueduct, finishing third in the third race at the track.


Integrated Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Ship's Captain to Cooperate In Case of Immigrants' Deaths
The captain of the Golden Venture, the freighter that ran aground off Queens last June with nearly 300 illegal Chinese immigrants, has agreed to plead guilty and to cooperate with Federal authorities investigating the ill-fated trip, the captain's lawyer said yesterday.
The lawyer said that in return for leniency, his client, Amir Humuntal Lumban Tobing, was prepared to testify against eight Chinese men facing trial on charges of having acted as enforcers on the ship on behalf of those who arranged the trip.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is offering $343.5 million of notes in three parts.
The first part consists of $254.5 million of notes due in 1996 at 100 to yield 4.57 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
The second part consists of $50 million of notes due in 1998 at 100 to yield 5.19 percent through Lehman Brothers Inc.
The third part consists of $39 million of notes due in 1998 at 100 to yield 5.265 percent through Aubrey G. Lanston &amp; Company.
The three issues are noncallable.


Just Winning Isn't Enough for the Jets
If you saw the way the Dallas Cowboys smothered the Jets' offense Saturday, you might not believe this.
But the National Football League's computer playoff experts, who live for this moment, said yesterday that the Jets (8-6) could not only still make the playoffs, they could win their division title.
It's a harrowing task.
First, the Jets would have to win their two remaining games on the road against the Buffalo Bills (10-4) and the Houston Oilers (10-4).
If the Bills lose to the Jets and then lose to the Indianapolis Colts the following week, and the Miami Dolphins (9-5) lose their final two games, at San Diego and New England, the Jets and the Bills will be tied at 10-6.
The Jets will win the title on the third tie breaker, conference record (8-4 to the Bills' 6-6).


Ingles Markets Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Planning Panel Approves New Zoning Rules for High-Rises
Future high-rise residential towers in Manhattan would be squatter and shorter than many constructed in recent decades, under new zoning regulations approved yesterday by the New York City Planning Commission.
The changes, which will now go to the City Council for a final vote early next year, would do away with a 20 percent zoning bonus that has been awarded by developers who build tall, thin apartment towers with large plazas on the street level.


Metropolitan College Report
Ivy League  Penn and Princeton are expected to battle for the conference championship, just as they did in the football season.
The Quakers (4-1) opened the season at Southern Cal and won, 77-62, behind junior guard Matt Maloney, who scored 19 points.
Their only loss was to Ohio State.
Senior forward Barry Pierce is averaging 20 points and 4.8 rebounds, but the team has little depth.
Senior forward Andy Baratta is sidelined with a torn anterior cruciate ligament, so Penn will rely on a seven-man rotation.
The Tigers (5-3) finished fourth last season but Coach Pete Carril's club will be better with 6-foot-9-inch junior Rick Hielscher, the league's rookie of the year in 1991-92.
Harvard (5-2) is also off to a fast start.
The Crimson's latest victory came Sunday night when they defeated Vermont, 92-64.
Michael Gilmore, Darren Rankin and Kyle Snowden each scored 13 points, and Tarik Campbell had 14 assists, one shy of the school record.
Manhattan  Jason Hoover of Queens was named Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference rookie of the week after he replaced the injured Jamal Marshall Saturday against Hofstra.
The Jaspers won by 75-59 at Nassau Coliseum and Hoover, a 6-5 forward, scored 15 points, shooting 5 for 7 from the floor and 5 for 6 from the free-throw line.
He also collected a game-high 17 rebounds, and leads the league in that category.
Buffalo
It hasn't been an easy transition since the Bulls jumped to Division I three years ago.
Their latest loss, to Miami by 63-57 Sunday night, dropped the Bulls to 3-5.
Last season they finished 5-22.
The Bulls will rely on Modie Cox, a 5-11 point guard.
He leads the team in assists, is the second leading scorer (12.7) and is third in rebounding.
Forward Myron Banks leads the team with 13-point and 7-rebound averages.
But Buffalo should expect more from 7-foot sophomore center Kris Roets, who is getting 2.7 points and 1.3 rebounds in limited playing time.
Freshman Rasuan Young, New York's top high school scorer a year ago, is contributing, with a team-high 12 points against Miami.
The Bulls face Duquesne (3-3) tomorrow.
The spotlight is on the first-year coach, Tom Cohane.
After he was fired by Dartmouth in 1983, he left coaching and started a trading company on Wall Street.
In 1988, while he ran the business, he voluntarily coached the Merchant Marine Academy and led the team to its first appearance in the Division III National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
In 1990, Cohane left his firm and went to Boston College as an unpaid assistant.
Siena  Siena sits atop the M.A.A.C.at 6-2, and Doremus Bennerman is one reason why.
The point guard averages 25.4 points a game, which leads the conference.
That hasn't given his backup, freshman Harel Gadot, a lot of time to play.
Gadot only averages 2 points and 5 minutes per game.
But he is still making progress on this team.
A year ago, he was in the Israeli Army.
One of the reasons he wanted to play in the United States was fellow Israeli Doron Sheffer, also a former soldier, who averages 10 points as a freshman point guard for UConn.
Monroe
In only its second year in Division III, the Mustangs (9-2) have jumped into the national rankings.
They are ranked eighth in the National Junior College Athletic Association, the only school in the Tri-State area to crack the top 10.
They got there by defeating then-No. 8 Suffolk Community College and Rockland Community College last week.
The Mustangs then fell to Queensboro College, 88-83, committing 31 turnovers.
They are led by forward John McCord's 16 points a game.
St.
John's Women
The Express (3-4) beat Manhattan, 76-61, last Saturday, thanks to the leading scorer, 5-10 senior forward Pam Odom, who is averaging 17.7 points and 6.6 rebounds.
The name of the week belongs to her teammate, a junior guard averaging 15.2 points and 3.2 assists: Grace Kelly.
The Express will face Coppin State at Alumni Hall next Dec. 28 in the annual Christmas Invitational.
It was also announced that starting this season, one women's game will be featured every Sunday as the Big East game of the week.
The Express will appear on television (the conference has not yet announced which network) at noon on Feb. 6, against Providence.


Corrections
A map yesterday with an article about elections in Serbia mislabeled the nation of Macedonia in some copies.
It is a former Yugoslav republic bordering Serbia; the region that is also called Macedonia is part of Greece.


Hurley Is Removed From Intensive Care
BOBBY HURLEY, the Sacramento Kings guard, was removed from a hospital intensive care unit one week after suffering near-fatal injuries because of a car crash, doctors said yesterday.
Officials at the University of California Medical Center in Sacramento said the 22-year-old Hurley was moved to a regular floor Sunday night.
He has begun eating a normal diet, and his condition has been upgraded from serious to fair, the officials said in a statement.
Hurley, a two-time All-American at Duke, was injured on Dec. 12 when a station wagon collided with his vehicle following a Kings' home game.
He suffered numerous injuries, among them collapsed lungs.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Better 2d Time Around
U.C.L.A.'s second trip to Houston in almost a quarter century was more successful than its first, as brothers Ed and Charles O'Bannon sparked a 93-72 victory over Houston last night.
U.C.L.A.'s previous visit to Houston was for the "Game of the Century" on Jan. 20, 1968 when the Elvin Hayes-led Cougars defeated U.C.L.A. and Kareem Abdul Jabbar (then Lew Alcindor), 71-69.
The two O'Bannons scored 13 of UCLA's first 17 points of the second half as the Bruins (6-0s) took control.
Ed, a junior, scored 18 points and Charles, a freshman, finished with 16. (AP)


Intel, Battling Rivals, Cuts Its Prices
Upping the ante in its battle with rival chip makers, the Intel Corporation said today that it was cutting prices and increasing production of its Pentium microprocessors.
The price reductions of 14 percent to 18 percent take effect in the second quarter of 1994.


Changes in Store For Clio Awards
The new owner of the Clio Awards is making several big changes in the competition's operations for 1994.


Kiev Acts Quickly on Pledge To Disarm Nuclear Weapons
Ukraine's President has told President Clinton that Kiev is prepared to deactivate its nuclear arsenal, including its entire force of modern SS-24 missiles, Clinton Administration officials said today.
The assurance was conveyed last month by President Leonid Kravchuk in a telephone conversation with Mr.
Clinton, the officials said.


By Design: The Suspended Look
Suspenders, or braces, as the British call them, have entered the realm of high fashion for women.
In Chanel's spring show, Karl Lagerfeld put them on everything from jeans to tweed skirts.
In New York, they held up pants in the spring shows of Ralph Lauren, Isaac Mizrahi and Anna Sui (who sometimes left them hanging down, more for effect than for utility).
Joan Kaner, the fashion director of Neiman Marcus, thinks that adding suspenders is a great way to update a classic pants-and-shirt or pants-and-T-shirt outfit.
In February or March, Neiman's will have Chanel's version, with C-H-A-N-E-L crawling up the front and down the back.


Classical Music in Review
Anonymous 4  St. Michael's Church
Whatever the short-term benefit of hootenanny Masses, the Roman Catholic Church might have done better in the long run to stick to its Gregorian guns.
The best singers of ancient chant and rudimentary counterpoint are suddenly drawing great churchfuls of mostly young listeners, evidently attracted by the music's kinship with the latest varieties of mystical Minimalism.


Altlandsberg Journal; If Germany Has a Fever, Can This Doctor Help?
Even before this week, Dr.
Ravindra Gujjula was unusual in Germany.
Not many foreigners have come here from faraway lands and risen to positions of professional success and respected community leadership.
On Sunday night, Dr.
Gujjula took a step into German political history by winning election as Mayor of Altlandsberg, his adopted hometown.
At a moment when intolerance and racist violence dominate much of the news from Germany, his election suggested that prejudice has not, after all, consumed the national soul.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
QVC Network said it had raised its bid for Paramount by $100 million in cash.
Its offer is worth about $10.4 billion.
Viacom's new offer was not known.
But QVC asserted that Paramount had said that QVC's bid was higher.  [ Page D1. ]


Teachers Strike at 11 Catholic High Schools
Hundreds of teachers at 11 high schools in the Archdiocese of New York went on strike yesterday, forcing five schools to close, after negotiations over details in a health care plan stalled.
Classes were canceled at Cardinal Hayes and Cardinal Spellman High Schools in the Bronx, Moore Catholic High School on Staten Island, John S. Burke High School in Goshen, N.Y., and Our Lady of Lourdes High School in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.


Review/Film; A Quiet English Setting, 1959: Enter, the Exotic Jeanne Moreau
"The Summer House" might as well be called "The Jeanne Moreau Show." Like a television series tailored to the image of its star, this small-scale English movie presents the actress as a flamboyant, exotic and cynical woman with a rich sexual past.
Her supposed function in the story is to save an unhappy young woman named Margaret from a disastrous marriage to her next-door neighbor, a 40-year-old twit who still lives with his mother.
But her real purpose is to swoop through the film being Jeanne Moreau, in a performance that is over the top and tremendous fun to watch.
She doesn't ever wink at the camera, but she and the audience know exactly what she is up to.
Margaret (Lena Headey, who plays the rosy-cheeked housemaid in "The Remains of the Day") begins the film with an ominous dream about her recent trip to Egypt.
The dream includes a young man and a bloody dagger, and hints at some disturbing reason why she has agreed to marry the dunderheaded neighbor, Syl (David Threlfall).


Nehlen Wins Award
DON NEHLEN, coach of undefeated West Virginia, has been voted the Joseph M. Sheehan Award by the Metropolitan New York Football Writers Association as its Division I coach of the year.
The award is named after a former sportswriter for The New York Times.
The 58-year-old association, the oldest college football writers group, chose AL BAGNOLI, who led Penn to an unbeaten season and the Ivy League championship, as winner of the Scotty Whitelaw Award as Division I-AA coach of the year.


World Voluntarism Group Forms
A new international organization, called Civicus, will try to stimulate philanthropy and community service throughout the world.
The group's organizers see its mission as helping countries cultivate voluntarism and community service to augment the activities of governments.
They say that in many countries private philanthropy either is unknown or is languishing and that private groups can prod governments to do more for their citizens.


North Korea's Nuclear Program Provokes No Panic in the South
In Washington these days, North Korea is often portrayed as the Libya or Iraq of the mid-90's: a lurking, unpredictable regime run by a mysterious zealot, secretly pursuing nuclear weapons and ready to pounce on its neighbors at a moment's notice.
But here in Seoul, within artillery range of North Korea, the North's nuclear weapons project is rarely discussed, or just shrugged off.


Death Ruled Accidental
The death earlier this month of a 300-pound Bronx man who had run naked through his apartment building and fought with the police officers who tried to subdue him was ruled accidental by the city medical examiner yesterday.
Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the medical examiner's office, said that Vital Montilla, 28, died of acute cocaine intoxication on Dec. 2 after a struggle with the police.


Petstuff Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Mitchell and Esiason Frustrated by the Zeros
Bruce Coslet gave the Jets' players Sunday off, but when they returned to the team's complex this afternoon, the sting of Saturday's 28-7 loss to Dallas lingered.
And both quarterback Boomer Esiason and tight end Johnny Mitchell voiced their frustration with the team's lack of offensive production against the Cowboys and in the last four weeks.
Mitchell contended that he was not getting the ball thrown his way enough, making him "like a carpenter working with no tools." He added that the Cowboys aren't that much better than the Jets, and that the Jets need to learn how to play in big games.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Rupert Murdoch is football's newest star, but the price of commercial time may throw him for a loss.
RUPERT MURDOCH, the media titan from Down Under, has turned American sports television upside down with his audacious gamble to pay $1.58 billion to broadcast National Football League games beginning next season.
But how successful will he be in persuading the nation's advertisers to help bankroll his time at the craps table?
The answer will go far in determining whether Mr.
Murdoch's Fox network, in unexpectedly snaring the rights to televise National Football Conference games from CBS, will be taking a worthwhile risk, as it did in scheduling "The Simpsons" against "The Cosby Show," or courting disaster akin to the embarrassing flops of its coverage of the Emmy Awards and its late-night talk shows with Chevy Chase and Joan Rivers.


Union Sues to Bar Rona as Agent
In one of the more intriguing legal battles in a sport whose recent history has been punctuated with courtroom cases, the Major League Baseball Players Association is suing to block one of its former chief adversaries from becoming a player agent.
The players' union filed suit in New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan last Friday seeking to overturn an arbitrator's ruling that would force the union to certify Barry Rona as an agent.
Rona is a former executive director and general counsel of the Player Relations Committee, the owners' labor unit.


Auto Inspection Contract Has Hartford in Uproar; Weicker and ExMotor Vehicles Commissioner Trade Ethics Charges Over Bids
A bitter dispute inside the administration of Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. has flared into full public view over the last week, breaking the holiday torpor of the Capitol with visions of subpoenas and investigations, and threatening to put Mr.
Weicker on the defensive at the beginning of what he has said will be his final and most ambitious year in office.
The central figures are Mr.
Weicker and his once-loyal Motor Vehicles Commissioner, Louis S. Goldberg, whom the Governor dismissed last week, along with two other department officials.
Mr.
Goldberg had openly challenged Mr.
Weicker's account of how an Arizona company was chosen for a $150 million contract to test automobile emissions.


Dwyer Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chess
There is a fine line between having the courage of your convictions and being foolhardy.
There is indeed something grand about playing into your opponent's strength, yet if you keep at it and suffer one loss after another without reprieve, it just begins to look as though you are defiantly impractical.
If the opponent happens to be Jun Xie of China, the 23-year-old women's world champion, good advice would be to confine her to a predominantly positional game of quiet maneuvering.
But Nana Ioseliani of Georgia, her 31-year-old challenger in the women's title match, which ended in mid-November in Monaco, did the opposite.
In game after game, Ioseliani got herself into precarious tactical complications and Jun did not fail to exploit them.


2 Men Tell of Injuries In Police Assault Case
Two immigrants from Northern Ireland told a Federal jury today that two Yonkers police officers spirited them to a deserted train station parking lot and pummeled them with nightsticks for protesting the aggressiveness of the police toward guests who attended a 1991 christening party.
"Blood was gushing from three or four places in my head," testified Patrick McNulty, a 33-year-old Larchmont carpenter who immigrated from County Fermanagh in 1985 and arranged the christening as a symbol of his success in his new land.


DEFENSE NOMINEE DIDN'T PAY TAXES FOR HOUSEKEEPER
Bobby Ray Inman, President Clinton's choice for Defense Secretary, failed to withhold Social Security taxes for the housekeeper he has employed for seven years, and today he paid $6,000 to the Internal Revenue Service to clear his record.
White House officials, who have dropped previous nominees for failing to pay such taxes, said today that they did not find Mr.
Inman's lapse to be "disqualifying" as long as he is now current in his tax obligations.


Son of Surgeon General Is Arrested on Drug Charge


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  RENOVATION FOR GRAND CENTRAL Grand Central Terminal will undergo a long-awaited $100 million renovation as the result of a deal in which its private landlord is to relinquish control of the mid-Manhattan landmark to the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
A1.
NYNEX IS ORDERED TO REDUCE RATES New York State regulators ordered the Nynex Corporation to reduce telephone rates next year by 3 percent, and also to set aside money to improve phone service.
D1.


Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 4


Fire in Upstate New York May Have Been Started by Bomb-Like Device


NBC Gets Final N.F.L. Contract While CBS Gets Its Sundays Off
A new era has arrived for American television viewers accustomed to watching their favorite pro football teams each Sunday afternoon: Fox and NBC are in.
CBS is out.
The absence of CBS from National Football League broadcasts for the first time since 1956 was assured yesterday when NBC retained the rights to American Football Conference games in a four-year deal.
Just three days earlier, the Fox Network knocked CBS out of televising National Football Conference games.


Last-Minute Electronic Shopping
HERE it is, almost Christmas, and you still have not found the right computer game for the DOS-Windows user in your life.
But hey, this is the computer age, in which everything is supposed to happen in two shakes of a reindeer's tail.
There is still plenty of time to go shopping, and you will not even have to leave home.
By the next holiday season, some PC owners will probably be able to get virtually instant delivery of some software titles via modem and telephone lines, or by calling a telephone number to get a key code to unlock the software on a CD-ROM disk that comes with the computer.


Sports of The Times; How Will It End For L. T.?
HE has only had five sacks.
He has been slowed by a damaged hamstring muscle.
While sitting on the Giants bench, he has been caught napping, or, at least, caught with his eyes closed.
In seven weeks, Lawrence Taylor will be 35, not old for a legend who tore an Achilles' tendon a year ago, but old for a linebacker.
He's still a presence, still the pass-rusher that quarterbacks fear, but he's not the player he was.


New York State Tells Nynex to Trim Rates
New York State regulators ordered the Nynex Corporation yesterday to reduce telephone rates next year by 3 percent, or about $170 million, and also to set aside $156 million to improve phone service.
Nynex, the regional Bell company serving New York and New England, estimated that the reductions would lower the average monthly phone bill, of more than $30, by as much as $1.
It was too early, though, to determine the benefits for New York consumers more precisely.


Applied Signal Technology Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Elizabeth Coates, 44, A Connecticut Lawyer
Elizabeth L. R. Coates, a Connecticut lawyer active in community affairs, died on Thursday at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
She was 44 and lived in New Canaan, Conn.
The cause was a viral infection following a bone marrow transplant, said her husband, Charles E. Coates 3d.


Review/Theater: A Community Carol; Dickens Variation for the Inner City
Ebenezer Scrooge makes his living as a loan shark in one of the capital's most disadvantaged neighborhoods.
Bob Cratchit is an out-of-work chef.
It's his wife, Penny, who puts in the long, thankless hours in Scrooge's freezing offices.
Their son T. T. (for Tiny Tim) has been confined to a wheelchair ever since a random bullet struck him in the spine while he was playing in the street.
"A Christmas Carol" may be the traditional holiday offering at countless resident theaters across the nation, but Arena Stage, joining forces with the Cornerstone Theater Company, is giving Charles Dickens's 150-year-old tale a decidedly nontraditional spin.
The co-production, which runs at Arena through Jan. 2, is called "A Community Carol" and does more than just celebrate a "wonderful togetherness." It shows the way.


Rite Aid reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


National Micronetics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Mr. Cuomo's Good Start on Guns
With a theatrical gesture that could signal the approach of an election year, Gov.
Mario Cuomo is calling the New York State Legislature for a special day, just ahead of the regular session, to consider a package of anti-crime proposals.
He wants the Senate and Assembly to take swift action on some gun control measures on Martin Luther King Jr.
Day, Jan. 17.
Mr.
Cuomo is right, both as to timing and subject matter.
Albany needs to continue the momentum against gun violence that energized the U.S.
Senate in the wake of last month's elections in New Jersey and Virginia.
Of course, as he presses for more regulation of firearms he may encounter increased clamor for the death penalty, which he has admirably resisted for a dozen years.


SatCon Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


M.I.T. Suit Over Aid May Be Settled
The Justice Department and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology are discussing an antitrust settlement in which colleges and universities could share some information about candidates for financial aid without running afoul of price-fixing laws.
The negotiations were discussed at a hearing here today in which Judge Louis C. Bechtle of Federal District Court set late March as the time for a retrial of the Government's case against M.I.T.
The Government contends that M.I.T. violated antitrust laws by participating in a decades-long conspiracy with the eight Ivy League colleges and universities to fix the amounts of student-aid packages.


Critic's Notebook; The Heavy Use (Good and Bad) Of Handel's Enduring 'Messiah'
When the audience rises en masse at the beginning of Handel's "Hallelujah" Chorus, as it has habitually for more than 200 years, who is honored?
The custom supposedly began with King George II, who by various accounts was either showing his admiration for the music or arriving late.
In these times, the posture of royalty no longer has such decisive influence.
Nor, in most cases, does a unanimity of Protestant spirit hold sway, as George Bernard Shaw once speculated.
So the object of our veneration must be none other than Handel himself, the composer who stirs our souls from across the centuries.
At least 21 performances of "Messiah" have taken place in New York this month.
In a sense, the numbing repetition of this work is a cause for alarm; it indicates a musical culture governed by habit rather than enthusiasm.
Yet the work has a way of making its power known whether it is done well, badly or criminally.
The ubiquity of "Messiah" may be depressing for various reasons, but it has the virtue of showing the durable force of a true masterwork.


Suspensions Given
DENNIS RODMAN of the San Antonio Spurs and STACEY KING of the Chicago Bulls were each suspended for one game yesterday and fined.


Norwall Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


U.S. Capital Group Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Talks on New South African Constitution at Impasse
Negotiations involving the white minority Government, the African National Congress and black and white opposition groups were deadlocked tonight over steps that might persuade the opposition to participate in multiracial elections next year.
The negotiators were trying to reach agreement on possible changes in the Constitution, due to be adopted on Wednesday, that would provide greater autonomy to South Africa's regions.
The opposition black and white groups are linked by their demand that the new South Africa be a federation of powerful enclaves.


Crack Down on 'Squeegees,' Those Street-Corner Extortionists; Boldness of Aspiration
To the Editor:
I warn those betting on Mayor-elect Rudolph Giuliani and his appointed Police Commissioner, William Bratton, to wipe out the squeegee pests who annoy and harass drivers in Manhattan: History and tradition are on the side of the squeegee men.


ARISTIDE IS URGED TO BACK PREMIER
With their drive to restore President Jean-Betrand Aristide to power at a virtual standstill, diplomats met with the Haitian leader today to urge him to show flexibility in reaching a solution to his country's political crisis.
Diplomats from the United States, France, Canada, Venezuela and the United Nations met with Father Aristide for more than three hours, but participants said later that he did not give them a commitment that he would support a new plan to end Haiti's political crisis.


What to Take When the World's Hard to Take
To the Editor:
When we are in pain, we want relief.
But if that relief does not cure the cause of the pain, it will just recur.


On My Mind; To Russia in Constancy
Sometime soon after the anti-Communist revolution, a new mantra entered international life.
The phrases "free-market economy" and "democracy" became chanted together, an inseparable formula.
Without one, the other could not exist.
In combination they were sung as the only answer to the future of Eastern Europe and Russia.


Isco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Giuliani Picks Dinkins Aide As Housing Commissioner
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday named Deborah C. Wright as Commissioner of the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development.
Ms.
Wright, now a board member of the New York City Housing Authority, is the first black to be appointed to a high-level post in the new administration and the first official from the Dinkins administration to join the Giuliani team.
In other appointments, Mr.
Giuliani is expected today to name his team to lead the Health and Hospitals Corporation, which runs the city's municipal hospitals.
Dr.
Bruce Siegel, Health Commissioner under Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey, is the Mayor-elect's choice to be the corporation president, according to an adviser to Mr.
Giuliani, and Luis Miranda of the Hispanic Federation of New York City is in line to be chairman.
It was not clear last night when Mr.
Giuliani hoped to see Dr.
Siegel assume his new duties.
The current president, Billy E. Jones, has a contract that runs through the spring.
Strongly Recommended
In announcing the housing appointment yesterday, Mr.
Giuliani brushed off a question as to whether he has had difficulty attracting black candidates for posts in his administration.


Homecare Management Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Giuliani Adviser Seeks Agencies' Plans for Cuts
In a preliminary effort to confront projected city budget shortfalls, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani's chief fiscal adviser has asked most city agencies to begin preparing scenarios for cutting their budgets by 5 percent and by 10 percent next year.
The request and the response from the agencies, due by Jan. 1, is an exercise and does not indicate that Mr.
Giuliani and his designated budget director, Abraham M. Lackman, have made any specific decisions on how they will deal with a budget gap of at least $1.7 billion for the next fiscal year, which begins in July.


Emisphere Tech. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Shurgard Sues, Citing U-Haul's Family Feuds
The notorious feuding between members of the Shoen family, which owns the U-Haul rental-truck empire, has become an issue in the battle to control 17 real-estate partnerships run by Shurgard Inc., a self-service storage business based in Seattle.
Shurgard's general partners announced today that they had sued in Federal District Court in Seattle seeking to block an offer by U-Haul International Inc. to acquire the Shurgard partnerships.


Harper Just Might Be Headed To Knicks
Trade talk involving the Knicks and Derek Harper was in the air.
Harper was at Madison Square Garden wearing a Dallas Mavericks uniform, but wistfully thinking about playing for the Knicks.
It was almost enough to make last night's game between the lowly Mavericks and the Knicks a side attraction.


Giuliani Criticizes Times Article on Him
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday called an article in The New York Times on Sunday about his confrontation with an ambulance crew "very distorted," and said "numerous people who supported my account" were not interviewed.
The article described Mr.
Giuliani's encounter last Tuesday with an Emergency Medical Service crew that responded when Matthew Spotnitz, 13, was hit by a taxi.
Mr.
Giuliani intervened when the lieutenant wanted to take the boy to New York Hospital, 16 blocks south, rather than to Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, 80 blocks north, where the boy's father is a heart surgeon and where the boy's mother wanted him to go.


Deal Reached on Restoration Of Grand Central Terminal
Grand Central Terminal is to undergo a long-awaited, $100 million renovation now that its private landlord has agreed to give the Metropolitan Transportation Authority control of the building and to relinquish its right to build a skyscraper over the mid-Manhattan landmark.
The pending arrangement, which officials disclosed yesterday, would be part of a new 110-year lease between the terminal's owner, the Penn Central Corporation of Cincinnati, and the M.T.A., which rents the terminal to the Metro-North Commuter Railroad.


J2 Communications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


When Holiday Styles Are Generations Apart
Jane Eagen, an insurance broker in Cincinnati, received a hefty bonus, a promotion and a raise last week.
But these didn't take the edge off her holiday guilt.
"As soon as I hear that Christmas Muzak, I start thinking about the things I don't have time to do," she said.
Elaborate holiday celebrations may well be receding into the realm of Christmas past.
Less frequent and more casual family gatherings, catered family Christmas parties and mail-order gifts have all become commonplace as a majority of women, who traditionally were the producers of these events, have begun to work outside the home.


Western Ventures Helping East's Phones to Ring
The acquisition of a 30 percent stake in the Hungarian state telephone company for $875 million by an American-German consortium is likely to set the pace for other phone privatizations in Eastern Europe, where decrepit services are woefully inadequate for the expanding numbers of business and personal callers, telecommunication experts said today.
The deal announced in Budapest on Sunday, in which the Ameritech Corporation and Deutsche Bundespost Telekom won the bidding for the interest in the Hungarian company, Matav, is one of the biggest privatization deals in Eastern Europe.
It exceeds the investments by General Electric in the Hungarian light bulb manufacturer Tungsram, and is in the range of Volkswagen's stake so far in Skoda in the Czech Republic.


Nets See Big Game as a Confidence Booster
For Derrick Coleman, it will be just another game.
But when the Knicks visit Byrne Meadowlands Arena on Tuesday night for their first meeting with the Nets this season, there will be more on the line than just bragging rights in the metropolitan area.
At 8-14, the Nets are reeling.
They are just .500 at the Meadowlands (6-6) and have fallen eight games behind the Knicks (15-5) in the Atlantic Division.
A Nets victory Tuesday would go a long way toward restoring a little confidence to a team that has been in almost every game this season but has rarely figured out how to win them.


Liz Claiborne Picks Insider To Run Its Largest Division
Liz Claiborne Inc., whose clothing occupies more department store space than that of any other manufacturer, yesterday named a relatively unknown insider to head its largest division, Liz Claiborne Misses and Petite Sportswear, and announced two other promotions.
Linda Larsen German, who is 42 and has been with the company 13 years, was named president of the unit, effective immediately.
The company said that Hank Sinkel, 48, who had held that job, would be president for domestic corporate sales and that Rob Bernard, 43, would have greater responsibilities as president of the international division.


One Tyson Victory
The Indiana Court of Appeals yesterday granted MIKE TYSON , the former heavyweight champion now serving a six-year sentence in an Indiana prison, a hearing on a legal point in his 1992 conviction for rape.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Daniel S. Goldin; Bold Remodeler Of a Drifting Agency
BORN in the Bronx, street smart and full of energy, Daniel S. Goldin is the kind of person who can get comfortable in a crowded restaurant of booths and counters, of gruff waitresses and $2.50 cheeseburgers.
While in New York on business, he downs a burger, fries and milkshake while recounting the challenges of heading the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Federal Government's largest scientific agency, a faded star whose luster he is trying to restore.
His dark business suit, softened by wire-rim glasses and a battered leather briefcase, somehow fits the restaurant's decor and lunch-hour din.
Suddenly his face brightens.
He leans forward in a confidential manner.
Did you know, he asks, his voice dead serious, about the 15th-century Portuguese navigator who learned to catch prevailing winds halfway across the Atlantic toward Brazil before coming about and heading east, thus avoiding the doldrums and creating an indirect route to Africa that turned out to be much faster?


Bombing of a Lebanese Christian Party Kills 2
A bomb exploded today in the headquarters of Lebanon's largest Christian political party during a leadership meeting, killing 2 people and wounding 90 others.
There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the blast, at the office of the rightist Phalangist Party.


New York to San Francisco, With an Angry Sea Ahead
For the world's best long-distance sailors, the seas of the world are the running lanes of their sport.
But few competitive racers use them in the same way that the French sailor, Isabelle Autissier, has in mind.
Her plan includes a middle-distance practice sprint -- a 14,000-mile voyage from New York to San Francisco -- in preparation for her next marathon, the 27,000-mile BOC Challenge.
The BOC competition, a yacht race around the world for solo sailors, begins next September off Charleston, S.C.


Corrections
A film review in Weekend on Friday about "Beethoven's 2d" misidentified the director of the earlier movie "Beethoven." He was Brian Levant; Ivan Reitman was the executive producer.


Pathe Technologies Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Youth Held In Shooting Of an Officer
A 15-year-old Brooklyn youth was arrested Sunday night in the shooting of an off-duty police officer during the robbery of the officer's sheepskin jacket, the authorities said yesterday.
The youth, Daniel T. Brown of 265 Livonia Avenue in the Samuel J. Tilden Houses in Brownsville, not far from where the shooting of Officer Eddie Vera took place, was arrested in a cousin's apartment in Red Hook shortly after 8 P.M.
Sunday.


This Is the Big Week in the Battle of the Fragrances
The vision goes like this: Thousands of last-minute shoppers rush to fragrance counters and snap up bottles of perfume, toilet water and after-shave for everyone on their lists.
That's what's dancing in the heads of fragrance executives and retailers these days, and it's not entirely far-fetched.
Traditionally, 60 percent of the year's fragrance sales are made between Thanksgiving and Christmas.
And 75 percent of them are to men buying gifts for women.
Maybe he can't afford a diamond ring, but how about a $40 bottle of Elizabeth Taylor's White Diamonds?


PCA International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Classical Music in Review
Angelina Reaux  Soprano Merkin Concert Hall
In its effort to transcend the bounds of conventional concert programming, the New York Philharmonic sponsored a cabaret concert on Sunday evening, the conclusion of its "Brecht, Weill and Berlin: 1929-1935" week.
The orchestra's concerts brought together music composed for the stage by Berg and Weill.
The Sunday evening concert showed another side of the prewar European music scene, the somewhat decadent view of life chronicled in songs mostly from films, radio plays and revues.


Serbia Chief's Party Claims Vote Victory
President Slobodan Milosevic's governing Socialist Party claimed victory today in Serbia's parliamentary elections on the basis of early vote counts.
If the incomplete returns are indicative of the final count, Mr.
Milosevic has strengthened his grip on power by undercutting challengers from the monarchist right who had charged that Mr.
Milosevic, a former Communist who changed his stripes in response to a wave of Serbian nationalism, was insufficiently patriotic and had made a mess of the economy.


Classical Music in Review
Vladimir Feltsman  Pianist 92d Street Y
Pianists who play Bach have been in a peculiar position since the period-instrument movement hit its stride in the 1970's.
On one hand, they faced pressure to surrender the literature to harpsichordists, and although that pressure has abated, the lingering fallout is the notion that piano performances should adopt coloristic constraints in the interest of suggesting a Baroque sensibility.
That impulse, however, negated a long, popular tradition of pianistic Bach interpretation, personified in its most iconoclastic form by Glenn Gould, whose performances argued that the music thrives best when the player's imagination is unfettered by the weight of history.


In Croatia, Ruling Party Reflects a House Divided
After 29 months of intermittent fighting to recover territory seized by its rebellious Serbian minority and to secure parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia is a country divided both geographically and politically.
The physical division, now in its third year, is a result of an undeclared war with the Serbs in which Croatia lost control of one-third of its territory in 1991.
The Serbs' hold on the region, the Krajina, effectively cuts the routes between the heartland and the coast.


Not-So-Swift Ruling
Competitors in the Whitbread Round the World yacht race will have to wait another month before a decision is made on a crucial appeal.
Race officials in Australia said yesterday that they would review the time redress handed to the American yacht Winston, owned by DENNIS CONNER and skippered by BRAD BUTTERWORTH.
Winston was awarded a time adjustment of 21 hours 28 minutes 30 seconds by the race jury for turning back to assist the Italian yacht Brooksfield, which was disabled on Dec. 3.
The redress moved Winston from fifth in its class after the first two legs of the race to second place, behind the overall leader, the Japanese-New Zealand entry Tokio.


Morrison Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 4


What to Take When the World's Hard to Take; Costly and Disabling
To the Editor:
"Drug Works, but Questions Remain" (news article, Dec. 13), on the use of Prozac to treat dysthymia, or chronic depression, states that "to some critics, the idea of people who are not really sick taking potent psychiatric drugs for months or years is a sobering prospect indeed."


CHRONICLE
TIMOTHY McDARRAH, a former writer for Page Six of The New York Post, has been named associate publisher of Dan's Papers, a free weekly newspaper on the East End of Long Island.
Mr.
McDarrah, who has been at The Post since 1985 and has worked on the gossip column for two years, is one of the more than 250 New York Newspaper Guild members out of work since a strike in October, following which staff members were required to reapply for their old jobs.


Haitians Bitterly Accusing Outside World of Desertion
In the crowded alleyways of a public market here, revived from weeks of inactivity by holiday shopping, Jean-Pierre Paul, a vendor of handmade toys and decorations, had a question for a foreigner that many Haitians are asking these days.
"What are you doing to our country?" the thin 26-year-old inquired with a mixture of anger and frustration.
"Either do what is needed to bring our President back, or have the honesty to say that you have failed, and leave us alone."


Review/Music; Making Some Joyful Noises, According to Duke Ellington
Duke Ellington's "Sacred Concerts" present a whole host of problems.
Written, produced and recorded at the end of Ellington's career, they alternate between the unmitigatedly trivial and the gorgeous.
In his use of a gospel choir and his own orchestra, Ellington tried to find common ground between the sacred and the secular, and there's an element of the revue to it, as if Louis Jordan had suddenly stepped in as librettist to make sure things didn't get too serious.
But there are also passages of extraordinary beauty, where Ellington's scoring of the material -- one section harmonized two clarinets with an alto saxophone to create an eerie stillness -- is stunning in its vision.
David Berger's version of the "Sacred Concerts," performed on Monday night at the Manhattan School of Music with the Institutional Radio Choir, Jon Hendricks, Wynton Marsalis, William Warfield and others, also showed how fluid the material can be.
Mr.
Berger modernized the music.
Drawing on the three recorded versions, he cut some selections, added excerpts he'd found in the Smithsonian's Ellington archives, and clipped some of the less felicitous moments.
He added a vocal chorus, featuring Jon Hendricks (who was meant to be the original singer for the work), and he let the soloists stretch.
In a sense the concert became a variety show, with constantly changing textures, improvisers and dancers.


Clinton Fills White House Legislative Post
President Clinton today appointed Pat Griffin, a lobbyist and former top aide to Sen.
Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, to run the White House office of legislative affairs.
Mr.
Griffin, 44, would replace Howard Paster, who is leaving the White House to become chairman of the Hill &amp; Knowlton public relations firm.


Crack Down on 'Squeegees,' Those Street-Corner Extortionists; Brighter Outlook
To the Editor:
I applaud New York's next Police Commissioner, William Bratton, for his plan to address the perception as well as the reality of urban disorder in the city.


Science Group Asks Delay on Gene-Altered Foods
With the first two genetically engineered crops a few months away from American food stores, a scientific policy organization called on the Government yesterday to delay commercial approval until the United States better understands the potential risks the plants may pose to the environment.
In a study intended to provoke the Clinton Administration into reconsidering policies that were instituted in the Reagan and Bush years, the organization, the Union of Concerned Scientists, said that the new plant technologies were not being adequately controlled by the Government.


Drexler Lost 10 Days
All-Star Clyde Drexler of Portland merely sprained his left ankle when he stepped on the foot of another player in the second quarter of Sunday night's Trail Blazer victory against Milwaukee.
Team physician Robert Cook said yesterday that the seven-time all-star could be back in the lineup in as few as 10 days. (AP)


Gain Seen in High-Temperature Superconductors
A TEAM of French scientists has reported that it created a small sample of material that acts like a superconductor of electricity at a temperature of minus 10 degrees Fahrenheit, far warmer than that of previously known superconductors.
The complex material, assembled atom by atom, was capable of transmitting only a minuscule amount of electrical current, much too little to have any practical use.
But the scientists involved, Dr.
Michel Lagues and his colleagues at the Higher School of Physics and Industrial Chemistry of the City of Paris and the University of Paris, say they believe they have taken an important step toward developing the technology of superconductors.


Japan Imports Rice, but Will People Eat It?
Japan is allowing foreign rice into the country, but having brought the rice to the people, can it get them to eat?
Japan's Food Agency, which regulates rice distribution, fears that left to themselves, Japanese consumers will shun the strange-tasting and presumably inferior foreign rice.
So to make sure the imported rice is eaten, the agency is thinking of mixing it with domestic rice rather than selling it separately.


Knicks' Anthony Pushes Over the Pushovers
It was exactly what the Knicks, and particularly Greg Anthony, needed.
New York notched an easy victory against the awful Dallas Mavericks last night.
Anthony got a much-needed boost to his confidence, playing his finest game of the season.
And the Knicks regained some equilibrium after last week's season-ending knee injury to Doc Rivers.
Extending Dallas's losing streak to 19 games, which tied a Mavericks record, the Knicks (16-5) cruised to a 101-92 victory last night at Madison Square Garden.
Anthony ignored not only the trade rumors involving him but also his critics, who doubt he can handle the starting point guard position.
He scored a season-high 18 points on 5-for-5 shooting and played with poise and confidence.


The Politics of Identity
The new Performing Arts Centre in Toronto opened this fall with a revival of Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein's "Showboat." The opening was stormy because of a picket line of protesters, who felt the musical denigrated blacks.
In October, the producers flew in the eminent black American historian Henry Louis Gates Jr., who attempted in a lecture to place the musical in historical context.
Some critics responded with indignation at what they saw as a typical display of American imperialism.
Protesting groups abound, and each claims the exclusive right to speak for the special interests it represents.
Many of the attacks today on books, films and even musicals are launched in the name of the politics of identity, the principle that outsiders should be banned from speaking for any given minority.


No More Running Away From a Life of Depression
One night when Yvette Persod was 11 years old, she walked out of her family's apartment in Brooklyn and wandered off into the darkness.
To this day, she says, she does not know exactly why she did it.
"I just opened the door and I left," she said.
When pressed, she tells of her family's crowded apartment, of beatings from her mother and of the screaming fights between her mother and father.


Healthtrust Inc.-The Hospital Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Whittaker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Quick &amp; Reilly Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Bugs Keep Planet Livable Yet Get No Respect
HUMANS may think they are evolution's finest product, but the creepies, crawlies and squishies rule the world.
Remove people from the face of the earth and the biosphere would perk along just fine, ecologists say.
Remove the invertebrates -- creatures like insects, spiders, worms, snails and protozoans -- and the global ecosystem would collapse, humans and other vertebrates would probably last only a few months, and the planet would belong mostly to algae and fungi.
But does invertebrates' indispensable role in supporting human life earn them any understanding, gratitude, respect or even recognition?
Precious little, according to a new study that explores both the critical importance of invertebrates and people's attitudes toward them.
The study suggests that for the most part people hate the myriad small, spineless creatures on which their very existence depends and would just as soon see them wiped out.


Sports of The Times; How Will It End For L. T.?
HE has only had five sacks.
He has been slowed by a damaged hamstring muscle.
While sitting on the Giants bench, he has been caught napping, or, at least, caught with his eyes closed.
In seven weeks, Lawrence Taylor will be 35, not old for a legend who tore an Achilles' tendon a year ago, but old for a linebacker.
He's still a presence, still the pass-rusher that quarterbacks fear, but he's not the player he was.


CPI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 13


Giuliani Appoints Housing Chief


U.S. IS ABANDONING 'SHOCK THERAPY' FOR THERUSSIANS
The Clinton Administration's top Russia specialist said today that the surprisingly large support for foes of reform in Russia's parliamentary elections last week showed that there had been too much emphasis on remaking the economy of Russia and not enough on improving the daily lives of its people.
Strobe Talbott, the State Department's Ambassador at Large for Russia and other countries of the former Soviet Union, also said the United States was looking to other Russian reformers as well as President Boris N. Yeltsin to bring change to the troubled country, even if they were Mr.
Yeltsin's political enemies. 'Shock Therapy' Has Failed
While Mr.
Talbott was characteristically cautious and noncommittal, his remarks illuminated an important shift in official American thinking: an admission, in effect, that the "shock therapy," the-faster-the-better approach to reform advocated by the West -- and until recently by Mr.
Yeltsin -- has not worked.


QVC Adds To Bid For Paramount
After a day of tension and confusion, QVC Network Inc. said last night that it had raised the cash portion of its takeover bid for Paramount Communications Inc. by a slender $2 a share, or $100 million.
Still, QVC said it had been advised by Paramount that it was the higher bidder.
Details of a revised bid from QVC's rival, Viacom Inc., were not disclosed last night.


Forstmann &amp; Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


I.R.A. Leader Calls for Dialogue; Britain Balks at 'Unconditional'
The leader of the Irish Republican Army's political arm made his first substantive response today to the overtures by Britain and Ireland last week for peace in Northern Ireland, calling for unconditional talks with London and Dublin.
But the Northern Ireland Office of the British Government rejected the proposal.
In the start of what is likely to be a long process of public posturing and political give-and-take, the leader, Gerry Adams, did not directly address the demand by Britain and Ireland that the I.R.A. renounce violence before its Sinn Fein political arm can be included in any negotiations.


Giants Succeed Before Setting The First Block In New Orleans
You've heard stories about pro football coaches who are so dedicated that they sleep on couches in their offices.
Dan Reeves and his staff have yet to adopt any furniture, but no one can ever question their dedication.
It is not unusual for Reeves and his assistants to stay in the offices until the wee hours of the morning strategizing.
Because of that persistence, the Saints were basically beaten before they took the field on Monday night.
Reeves and George Henshaw, the offensive coordinator, put together a game plan that left the Saints' heads spinning.
They were outsmarted and outcoached, and the game wasn't as close as the final score of 24-14 might indicate.


Playing Politics Over Pork Exports
On Monday, the Russian ship Irbenskiy Proliv pulled into the port of Houston to pick up the last of about 24 million pounds of frozen American hog carcasses, cut into thirds and packed in boxes for shipment to Russia as a donation from the United States Government.
The ungainly slabs of raw meat, bones and fat, which cost American taxpayers $25 million, will be sold by the Russian Government to local manufacturers, who will use the meat in sausages to be sold at retail prices to Russian consumers.


Review/Film: Faraway, So Close; Wim Wenders's Angels Drop In for Another Visit
In all the publicity material for all the season's films, this is surely the most peculiar and deadpan star's bio: " 'Faraway, So Close' marks Mikhail Gorbachev's feature film debut." The former Soviet president has a tiny cameo in Wim Wenders's latest film.
And he has a guardian angel looking over his shoulder while he sits at his desk meditating that "a secure world can't be built on blood; only on harmony."
The angel, Cassiel (Otto Sander), is the true star of "Faraway, So Close," a lyrical and profoundly goofy continuation of Mr.
Wenders's 1987 cult hit "Wings of Desire." But in spirit Mr.
Gorbachev presides over the film like the guardian angel of glasnost, for Mr.
Wenders has taken the major characters from "Wings of Desire" and set them down in a unified, and strangely multi-lingual, Germany.


Joseph H. Ball, 88, Republican Senator And U.N. Advocate
Joseph H. Ball, who served eight years in the Senate in the 1940's as a maverick Republican crusading for the United Nations and against organized labor, died on Saturday at the Bethesda Nursing and Rehabilitation Center in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 88.
He had had a stroke, said a daughter, Sara Lister.


Food Notes
No Need to Panic
For many people, the holiday rush has left little time for serious cooking.
All is not lost.
Food for every possible occasion can be obtained from shops throughout the region simply by calling and reserving an order.
An elegant platter of smoked salmon, sablefish and smoked peppered mackerel, about six pounds in all, is $125 at Macy's and needs 24 hours' notice from MACY'S BY APPOINTMENT , (212) 494-4181.
Delivery not available.


Banyan's Shares Lose 40% of Value
Shares in Banyan Systems Inc. lost more than 40 percent of their value yesterday after the company said it would not meet Wall Street analysts' fourth-quarter earnings estimates.
Banyan shares lost $11.125 each, closing at $14.50.
They were the most active shares in Nasdaq trading, with almost 5.5 million traded, and had the biggest percentage decline.


American Recreation Centers Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 24


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  AID MAY FLOW TO RUSSIA  The International Monetary Fund may relax conditions for freeing aid to Russia.
At the same time, officials of the fund pressed President Yeltsin to continue reforms and devote more financial attention to the poor.
A1  NEW SECURITY SERVICE FOR RUSSIA  President Yeltsin dissolved the K.G.B.'s successor and created a third generation to handle internal security, but left as its head a career K.G.B. agent.
A14


Books of The Times; Breathless Messages Of Gossip and Honor
Love From Nancy
The Letters of Nancy Mitford
Edited by Charlotte Mosley
Illustrated. 538 pages. Houghton Mifflin Company. $35.
"Darling Mark. . . .
"I tried to commit suicide by gas, it is a lovely sensation just like taking anesthetic so I shan't be sorry any more for schoolmistresses who are found dead in that way, but just in the middle I thought that Romie who I was staying with might have a miscarriage which would be disappointing for her so I got back into bed &amp; was sick. . . .
"How can I possibly write a funny book in the next six months which my publisher says I must do? How can I when I've got practically a pain from being miserable &amp; cry in buses quite continually? I'm sorry to inflict this dreary letter on you, as a matter of fact everyone here thinks I don't mind at all -- rather a strain but I think the only attitude don't you agree?
"Best love from  "Nancy"  The voice of this letter sounds as far away as an old gramophone record of dance-band music, circa 1925. It is the voice of the society belle or bright young thing of the 1920's and 30's; the voice of the madcap heiress who talks in quick-step time, going from wit to hysteria to perfect manners to perfect rudeness, stopping to punctuate only when she needs to stop for breath.
American theater patented this style in plays for Lynn Fontanne and Ina Claire.
American movies provided Carole Lombard in "My Man Godfrey" and Katharine Hepburn in "Holiday" and "Bringing Up Baby." English theater gave us the plays of Noel Coward, and English literature gave us the novels of Nancy Mitford, supplemented by endless newspaper stories about the entire Mitford family.
There were six girls and a boy, raised in the English countryside by the overbearing 2d Lord Redesdale and his distantly benign wife.
The girls were taught to ride and speak French; they read on their own, and for formal education they depended on the kindness of governesses.
They "came out," partied fervently and turned the heads of England's leading noblemen and writers.
They were the aristocracy's version of what the Jazz Age called the "It" Girl.
Nancy was the eldest and set things in motion by leaving home to dabble in art and journalism, and then to write the novels, essays and biographies that would make her famous.
"People always think I dash off my books with no real work, but it is not so, I very honestly do my best," she told her friend and literary counselor Evelyn Waugh.
Her novels are still fun to read: group portraits of women in the wilds of upper-class family life, making their way to the far-flung and not especially sheltering outposts of marriage or romance.
"The Pursuit of Love," "Love In a Cold Climate" and "The Blessing" are the best, and actually they are performance pieces: fast-paced episodes of social comedy and self-display in book form.
Her letters, filled with gossip and teases, read that way, too.
Waugh had the coldest house in England, she wrote, and Anthony Powell the coldest heart.
The Duchess of Windsor had liver spots, "which confirms my idea that only wicked people get them." Randolph Churchill looked like a bombed-out building and exemplified "a sort of brutal island rudeness." After she left England in 1945 to settle in France, she wrote to her mother that it was "as if I had come out of a coal mine into daylight."
World War II had turned the Mitford family comedy into a melodrama with some very ugly climaxes.
Six sisters born and brought up to do nothing but sparkle were suddenly called on to think and show character.
The results were explosive: Unity Mitford became a Nazi, Diana became a Fascist, Jessica became a Communist and Nancy became what she called much later "an old-fashioned Liberal." She did her sparkling best to stay on good terms with the others, and her letters show that she managed it only by ventilating behind their backs:
Nancy's letters to her mother are marvels of psychological camouflage: a daughter's version of guerrilla warfare.
It isn't true.
She could appear brittle and sometimes defiantly shallow.
Sad, too: the emotional temperature of the men in her life shows she knew more than anyone should about the pursuit of love in a cold climate.
But she was smart, full of fun and honorable when it counted. (When she died in 1973, she left her money in trust to help needy friends and family members.) She was gallant, too.
While dying of cancer, she finished a biography of Frederick the Great.
She longed, she said, to be a "pretty young General" who could gallop over Europe with him "and never have another ache or pain." Frederick also allowed her to deliver a final, ruefully fair verdict on herself.
About teasing, she wrote a disapproving scholar: "I am a tease &amp; I know all about it. There's always surely an element of cruelty. . . . Frederick teased often unkindly &amp; sometimes cruelly but he didn't hang draw &amp; quarter, or rack, or break on the wheel like others of his day. I'd much rather be teased!"
Pretenses aside, she didn't have just charm. Under pressure, she had character.


Japan to Give More Thought To Software Copyright Law
Japan's Government will postpone the release of a report recommending possible changes in software copyright laws to give more consideration to United States objections, an American trade official said today.
During negotiations over the last two days, Tokyo told United States officials that the advisory committee report, originally scheduled to be finished in January, would not be released until March at the earliest so that "careful and cautious" consideration could be given to Washington's views, the American official said..


Microsemi Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Comeback City -- A special report.; Economic Focus in Shanghai: Catching Up
If there is a swaggerer in this part of the world, its name is Shanghai.
This Chinese city is racing to recapture the glory of capitalism that flourished here 60 years ago and crumbled under the scorn and persecution of Communism.


CHRONICLE
MOLLY IVINS, the syndicated columnist for The Fort Worth Star-Telegram and best-selling author of two books, has punctured the pretensions of many political figures over the years and poked fun at their behavior.
But would she dare become one of them, say a United States Senator?
The editors of The Nation think that's a mighty fine idea, and in an editorial in the January 3/10 issue, which will be on newsstands today, they suggest that she run for the Texas seat now held by Kay Bailey Hutchison, a Republican.
Ms.
Ivins is also a contributing editor at The Nation.


Indians-Mariners Trade Leaves Mets Still Looking
The Mets' Joe McIlvaine, frustrated in his attempts to solve his team's problems at shortstop, has lamented for some time that he could write a book about the would-be trades just out of arm's reach.
The book McIlvaine was attempting to write about the acquisition of a Gold Glove-caliber shortstop took a dramatic twist and has come to a sudden, unwelcome end.
The Seattle Mariners temporarily derailed McIlvaine's grand design Monday night by trading Omar Vizquel, their sharp-fielding shortstop, to the Cleveland Indians for shortstop Felix Fermin, infielder Reggie Jefferson and cash.


Viacom Is Said to Be Trying for a Higher Bid
At the end of a nearly six-hour meeting yesterday to weigh rival takeover bids, the board of Paramount Communications Inc. issued a terse statement saying that it had recessed until today.
"No action was taken by the board," the company said.
Viacom Inc., the favored bidder, appeared to be still trying to raise its offer to a level that would allow the Paramount board to accept it rather than a bid from QVC Network Inc.
The chairman of Viacom, Sumner M. Redstone, met at about 11 A.M. with representatives from Paramount's law firm, Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, to ask for more time to present Paramount with a revised offer, according to several executives with knowledge of the discussions.


Ross Roy Will Sell Public Relations Unit
Ross Roy Communications of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its public relations subsidiary, Anthony M. Franco Inc., to four of the agency's executives.
The terms were not disclosed.
The four executives, who become equal partners in Franco, are Stephen F. Friedman, president at Franco's Covideo Company; Daniel F. Ponder, chief financial officer; Charles C. Ragains, chief operating officer, and George N. Sepetys, president of Franco's Comark Group.


Thieves Steal 1,000 Gifts Intended for Needy Children
The theft over the weekend of about 1,000 gifts from a shelter in lower Manhattan that were to be given to homeless children throughout New York City this Christmas was an act that sickened even veteran social workers who thought they had seen it all.
The toys, collected by the United States Marine Reserve, businesses, individuals and employees of the city's Department of Homeless Services, were stored in a large room in a block-long, Depression-era building at 78 Catherine Street between Monroe and South Streets.
The building is the Catherine Street Family Respite Center.


Stocks Subdued on Interest Rate Concerns
Stocks traded lower yesterday as investors grew cautious awaiting a sign from the Federal Reserve on the direction of interest rates.
With concern rising that the recovering economy will force the Fed to raise short-term interest rates to counteract a possible upturn in inflation, the meeting yesterday of the Open Market Committee, which sets the central bank's monetary policy, was a focus of attention.


Accounts
*
St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, to Earle Palmer Brown, New York, to handle its account, previously at Friedman Benjamin Advertising, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


Exiled Haitian Rebuffs Diplomats
The Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide rebuffed a request by a delegation of diplomats today to agree to some kind of international conference that they hoped would reinvigorate attempts to return him to power as President of Haiti.
And in a threat to the Clinton Administration, Father Aristide and his advisers warned that they were reconsidering the exiled President's support for the Administration's policy of returning Haitian refugees picked up at sea.


Sports of The Times; Desert Duel: Meggett vs. Beuerlein
IN their 11-3 revival this season, the Giants have reflected Dan Reeves's controlled efficiency.
No finger pointing after losses.
No gloating after the victories.
No lingering squabbles among the players.
Above all, no quotes that opposing teams could post on a bulletin board for psychological stoking.
Until now.


Boston Globe Selects Ingalls, Quinn Shop
The Boston Globe said yesterday that it had selected Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson of Boston to handle its account, which had been at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos of Boston for the last 15 years.
Billings on the account, which includes broadcast, print and outdoor advertising and direct mail, were estimated at $4 million.
Ingalls, Quinn was awarded the account after a two-month review that began with 16 agencies, was narrowed to 6 and ended with 3 Boston-based finalists: Ingalls, Quinn; Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot, and Houston, Effler &amp; Partners.


Accord Elusive in South Africa
After 16 hours of talks aimed at averting an election boycott in South Africa by a bloc of pro-apartheid whites and conservative blacks, negotiators adjourned early this morning without a breakthrough.
But the officials said they had agreed to resume the talks later.
It was not immediately clear when the talks would reconvene.
Some reports said there would be a session later today, while others said there would be no resumption until January.


A Setback for Sur
The top United States ice dancers will apparently be ineligible for the Winter Olympics after the attempt by GORSHA SUR, a Russian, to gain accelerated citizenship met another roadblock yesterday.
Sur and RENEE ROCA, both of whom live in Colorado Springs, won the 1993 United States championship and are favored to repeat at the 1994 nationals next month in Detroit.
To be eligible for the Winter Olympics, though, Sur must be a United States citizen by the time of the national championships, which begin Jan. 4.


YELTSIN SHAKES UP SECURITY MINISTRY
President Boris N. Yeltsin declared today that the successor to the K.G.B., the Security Ministry, had proven "unreformable" and ordered it transformed into yet another new internal security service.
In a statement issued through the Itar-Tass news agency, Mr.
Yeltsin denounced the Security Ministry as "obsolete, ineffective, a burden on the state budget and a restraining factor for the implementation of political and economic reform."


INSIDE
No Cure-All for Argentina
A modest gesture of protest that overflowed into widespread violence in Argentina shows that all is not well, despite economic progress.
Page A4.


To Sip, Perchance to Steam
LIKE a fragrant gulf breeze, the steamy, seductive aroma of freshly ground coffee beans is caressing New York City.
With names like the Coffee Experience, French Roast Cafe, New World Coffee and Seattle Bean Company, these sleek caffeine canteens are introducing -- some might say addicting -- New Yorkers to potent espresso, ristretto (a short super-intense espresso), cappuccino (half coffee, half steamed milk with foam) latte (espresso with steamed milk and a touch of foam), caffe mocha (espresso with steamed chocolate milk), macchiato (espresso with a dollop of milk foam) and more.


A Holtz for UConn?
SKIP HOLTZ, offensive coordinator at Notre Dame, where his father is head coach, will be named head coach at the University of Connecticut at a news conference today in Storrs, Conn., according to reports.


Chinese Seek a Halt To 'Abnormal' Births
A Chinese official has proposed giving the Government the authority to use sterilization and abortion to prevent the birth of children who might be considered "abnormal." The official's report cited the existence of "more than 10 million disabled persons who could have been prevented through better controls."
The move is certain to outrage groups who have been watching China's human rights record.
Article, page A8.


MORE OF HOMELESS ARE NOW FAMILIES
A survey of 26 major cities has found that the proportion of the homeless population consisting of families with children increased by 30 percent this year.
While families made up 33 percent of those seeking food and shelter last year, they account for 43 percent now, according to a report on the status of Hunger and Homelessness in American Cities.
The report was released today by the United States Conference of Mayors.


I.M.F. May Loosen Conditions for Aid To Russia Economy
Officials of the International Monetary Fund said today that they were considering loosening their conditions for releasing aid to Russia, but they also called on President Boris N. Yeltsin to spend more on the poor and less on propping up inefficient state industries.
Responding to stinging criticisms that the fund has not been sensitive enough to Russia's hardships, officials held out the hope that easing conditions on aid would make economic reform more palatable to Russians.


France And Spain Impose Quotas
Europe's response to a perceived cultural threat from the United States intensified today as the French Senate approved a law obliging radio stations to play at least 40 percent French music and the Spanish Parliament imposed restrictions on the dubbing and projection of American movies.
The decisions underscored a growing sentiment in Europe, which came to light during world trade talks that concluded last week, that Hollywood and the American entertainment industry pose a threat to European culture that must be confronted if the Continent's identity is to be preserved.


Dinkins Encourages Council to Retain His Key Programs
Striving to define and protect his legacy, Mayor David N. Dinkins appealed to the City Council yesterday to preserve the liberal programs he initiated from what he called "the very different ideology and philosophy" of Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani.
In a speech before the Council -- his last formal address before he leaves office in nine days -- Mr.
Dinkins was by turns conciliatory and biting.
He appealed to New Yorkers to put aside the racial and political divisiveness of the mayoral campaign and to Mr.
Giuliani to bring the city together and "make us proud."


Don't Tell David Edwards He Can't
David Edwards has always had something to prove.
People said he was too small to make it in basketball.
As a 5-foot-9-inch senior, he averaged 41 points per game at Jackson High School in Queens.


C. Corey Mills Dies; Retired Architect, 84
C.
Corey Mills, an architect and former State Senator from Brooklyn, died on Monday at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 84 and lived in Bedford, N.Y.
He had had a long illness, his wife said.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Instant Replay
Instant replay is coming to college hockey to resolve the infrequent but bothersome problem of dubious goals.
Was it in, or wasn't it?


Uki Heineman; Importer, 73
Uki Heineman, a retired importer who was active in liberal causes, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 73.
The cause was scleroderma, her family said.


Thomas Gives Jets A Winning Attitude
The Jets might be clinging to their playoff hopes by their fingertips, but cornerback Eric Thomas can think of much worse situations to be in at this time of year.
Last year he played for Cincinnati, then signed as an unrestricted free agent with the Jets during the off season.
"I couldn't ask for much more of a chance to go to the playoffs," Thomas said.
"If I had stayed in Cincinnati that wouldn't have even been a possibility. From the time the season started, I knew that Cincinnati wasn't going to win many games. I think they knew that, too."


Raiford Trask Sr., 77, University Benefactor
Raiford Graham Trask Sr., a real estate developer who was a benefactor of the University of North Carolina at Wilmington, died on Sunday night at his home in Wilmington.
He was 77.
He had had cancer for two years, his family said.
Mr.
Trask built his career by turning his family's farm land into subdivisions.
He also helped develop resorts and shopping centers in Wilmington.


A Safety Net for Russian Reform
Russians voted their fears, pain and anger 10 days ago when they turned toward anti-reform demagogues in surprising numbers.
The West cannot cure Russia's distemper with the promise that better days are sure to follow if only Moscow will move quickly to a market economy.
It must provide aid, and soon, so that Boris Yeltsin's reformers can protect Russia's most vulnerable citizens from the wrenching dislocation of economic reform.
Economic recovery in Russia means shutting down mammoth military, steel and other factories that produce little of value.
In time, investment can be redirected into housing and consumer products that Russians crave.
But the unemployed, the displaced military and pensioners cannot wait.
Only when they are taken care of can President Yeltsin's reform Government survive.


In School
One of the great frustrations for anyone writing about education or social service reform is trying to determine whether the latest new thing delivers any better results than the same old thing.
Rarely do you find follow-up studies that quantify the success or failure rates of the dazzling new front-page trend that was about to save the world in 1992.
A refreshing exception is the new National Guard's Challenge program for high school dropouts.
The program takes tough teen-agers, houses them in a barracks for five months, then uses paramilitary discipline, marching drills and lots of classroom instruction to get them their high school equivalency diplomas.
Students who pass their G.E.D. plus successfully enroll in further education or training programs are entitled to a $2,200 stipend.


How Tenure Safeguards Academic Freedom
To the Editor:
What you neglect in "Amid Joblessness, the Joys of Tenure" (The Week in Review, Dec. 12) is that abolition of tenure would radically change the character and qualifications of college and university faculties.
Young people now typically spend five or six years earning a doctorate in the subject to be taught.
Why would they do so if their training could be rendered useless by some administrator who decided that they, having reached age 40, were "dead wood"?


2 Die as Storm Whips Western Europe


Agassi Has Surgery on His Aching Right Wrist
Andre Agassi, hampered for the last year by tendinitis in his right wrist, underwent surgery on Monday afternoon at the Santa Barbara, Calif., clinic of Dr.
Richard Scheinberg, the same orthopedist who three years ago rebuilt the wrist of another of tennis's unorthodox sluggers, Jimmy Connors.
Agassi's rehabilitation period is expected to force him to again miss the first Grand Slam event of 1994, the Australian Open.
Agassi, 23, has skipped or missed the Australian for the last seven years but had planned to make his Melbourne debut in 1994.
Instead, Agassi's latest comeback from what has turned out to be a career-threatening condition will probably have to wait until February.


Park Electrochemical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Estate Wins $100,000 Settlement From Health Insurer for AIDS Bias
Settling charges that it had discriminated against members with AIDS, a union welfare fund in Minnesota agreed yesterday to pay $100,000 to the estate of a construction worker who died last year.
The payment to the estate of Mark Kadinger, a 36-year-old construction worker who died in November 1992, was the first large award in a case involving an AIDS-related denial of health insurance under the Americans With Disabilities Act, which took effect last year.


D.M.B.&amp; B. Forms National Buying Unit
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles Worldwide of New York said yesterday that it had formed a independent national media placement agency, called Televest, by separating its national broadcast buying operations from its advertising agency operations.
Televest, with approximately 80 employees, will serve D.M.B.&amp; B. clients with billings estimated to exceed $1 billion like Procter &amp; Gamble and Kraft General Foods,.
It will also seek outside accounts.


Personal Health; Protecting your body during winter exercise.
"OH, the weather outside is frightful." But before you decide to venture out anyway for your daily constitutional, think about how to protect your body.
Or, if you decide to stay in, think about how to give it the workout it deserves.
Too many people use winter's inclement weather and short days as an excuse to follow the advice of the old pop tune and stay in front of the fire that's "so delightful" -- until spring.
And too many who pursue their regular outdoor activities despite freezing temperatures, biting winds and icy precipitation are careless about protecting themselves properly against winter's hazards.
But if you follow the sage advice of cold-weather experts, you need not turn to flab or risk weather-related discomfort or injury.
Dress Properly
This is the key to safe and comfortable winter exercise.
The trick is to protect your body, especially your extremities, against the cold, wind and precipitation and to avoid becoming overheated.
If the fabric next to your skin gets wet, you are likely to get chilled when you slow down.


Bank Robbers Get $1.4 Million (for a While)
Four men posed as bank customers.
Three others outside waited patiently yesterday while a Brink's armored truck completed what appeared to be an ordinary delivery of nearly $1.5 million to a busy midtown Manhattan bank.
After the cash was brought into the bank and the Brink's guards left, the police said, the men suddenly drew guns, donned ski masks and stole the entire delivery.
They left the bank without firing a shot.


Flagstar Picks Shop For Selling to Blacks
The Flagstar Companies of Spartanburg, S.C., which owns and operates restaurant chains including Denny's and is a major franchisee of Hardee's, said it had named the Glover Company in Chicago as the first agency to handle advertising and marketing programs aimed at black consumers.
Billings have not yet been determined.
Glover, which already handles the black consumer marketing for Flagstar's Hardee's outlets, will also handle black consumer advertising for Denny's, the Quincy's Family Steakhouse chain and El Pollo Loco.
The agency was awarded the account after a two-month review that was narrowed to Glover and an undisclosed second shop.


Interscience Computer Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Pennsylvania Governor Is Back After Transplant
Looking extremely thin, his bushy black eyebrows accentuating the paleness of his skin, Gov.
Robert P. Casey returned to work today for the first time since a heart and liver transplant brought him from the brink of death 190 days ago.
There had been widespread speculation that Mr.
Casey, a 61-year-old Democrat, would not come back to his office here.
Now questions linger as to how effective he can be in the final 12 months of his term.
Indeed, twice since the operation Mr.
Casey was hospitalized for infections.


Book Notes
Prizes and Performance
For the author who wins one, a National Book Award carries a $10,000 check and literary prestige.
But does it automatically translate into general fame, sudden fortune or substantially greater net sales?
A month after E. Annie Proulx won the 1993 fiction prize for "The Shipping News," a novel about a down-at-the-heels newspaper reporter in Newfoundland, her star has unquestionably risen.
But her publisher, Charles Scribner's Sons, says it is still too early to predict what the award means for final sales of her book.


California Amplifier Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Patchwork Team Leaves Daly Frayed
THE point guard vacuum was never more conspicuous for the Knicks than it was last night.
Their pound-it-to-the-post offense couldn't score when it had to against a team that has experienced few late fourth-quarter defensive stops.
They were beaten by a slippery kid who they couldn't keep out of the lane with the game on the line.
Kenny Anderson is not on the trading block, not for sale.
The Knicks had better go get someone else soon.
Because the way they played in losing to the Nets, of all people, Scottie Pippen could retire and the Bulls would still have a chance to win the East.


Bridge
A recent study of the bridge players of Eastern Long Island found a giant web of interconnecting partnerships at a group of duplicate clubs.
A player might have a regular date to play with A on the first Sunday of the month, B on the first Monday, and so on.
Many play five times a week, and therefore have 20 regular dates, although some dates may be weekly rather than monthly.
If asked for a date by a newcomer, a player is likely to offer the fifth Thursday, or another fifth, since those are not permanently reserved.
This web of connections provides a helpful network after events like retirement, relocation or the death of a spouse.
A survey found that the average age of the players in one game was over 65.
The youngest player was 47, and the oldest 93.
More than 75 percent were women.


Turning Back to an American Turning Point, 1968
It was the best of years.
It was the worst of years.
That's 1968, the subject of tonight's "CBS Reports." Abetted by punchy newsreel clips, Mike Wallace takes what in more tranquil times might be called a stroll down memory lane.
Since most of these memories are of war abroad and clashes at home, it's more like trying to stroll through Sarajevo on a busy day.
In Vietnam, there were the Tet offensive, a military defeat for North Vietnam but a propaganda victory, and the massacre at My Lai, a moral disaster for the United States.
In Biafra, there was man-made starvation, and in Czechoslovakia, Soviet tanks crushed the Prague Spring.


Greyhound Lines
Shares of Greyhound Lines Inc. declined more than 10 percent yesterday after the company said it expected 1993 earnings to fall short of 96 cents a share from a year earlier.
It did not provide a specific forecast.
On Monday, Greyhound said that heavy discounting in November had resulted in increased traffic but lower revenues.


Domino's Ends Fast-Pizza Pledge After Big Award to Crash Victim
For nearly a decade, Domino's Pizza has enticed customers with a sure-fire marketing gimmick, a promise to deliver pizza within 30 minutes.
But stung by a jury verdict in St.
Louis last week that awarded more than $78 million to a woman struck by a Domino's driver in 1989, the company said yesterday that it would no longer promise such speedy delivery.


A Stew in Which Vegetables Star
STEWS historically have been hearty dishes with lots of cheap meat that has to be cooked for a long time.
In this updated version, the cooking time is less and the price of the meat is more.
The emphasis in this stew of lamb, lima beans and potatoes is on the vegetables.
There is just enough lamb to add texture and flavor.
For the dish to cook quickly, the lamb must be ground.
To get lean ground lamb, you will have to choose the leanest cut you can find, then trim it well and grind it.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 17
Dec. 10
Dec. 18
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.6
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.5
3.1
Gasoline stocks
225.0
223.4
214.8
Distillate stocks
141.9
144.8
137.3
Crude imports, daily
6.8
7.1
6.2
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.9
1.8
Crude stocks
340.6
345.4
330.2
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
91.7
92.4
87.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


No Wonder New York City's Losing Bus Riders
To the Editor:
Further to your Dec. 6 news article on declining New York City bus ridership: Like many pedestrians and mass-transit supporters in this city, I have very definite opinions about our buses.
A recent subway advertisement for the Transit Museum depicts the trolley of yesteryear as a dinosaur.
But it is today's behemoth Grumman-manufactured bus that should be so labeled.
It is this giant leftover from the days of cheap, abundant fuel that more often than not disobeys traffic signals or "blocks the box," snarling traffic.


TALKS ON BOSNIA TACKLE LAND ISSUE
Negotiators at a new round of peace talks over Bosnia and Herzegovina grappled tonight with a proposal to give somewhat larger territorial concessions to the Muslims as part of an overall settlement.
President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia said after eight hours of talks that the Croats and Serbs had agreed to grant the Muslims a full one-third of the land, up slightly from the 30 percent offer of a previous package that collapsed.
But there was no confirmation by the Serbs, and no indication that the offer had been presented to the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government.


Rewarded by Annenberg in the Bronx
The principal of University Heights High School in the Bronx squirmed in her chair in front of the classroom.
"My topic is the same as Suzanne's," she said, popping her chewing gum.
"So she said everything I would have said already."
When she finished, the students in the advanced placement class in philosophy and human values snickered as they filled out their evaluations.
They had designed the criteria against which they themselves would be measured.
Accepting with mock consternation lower marks than her co-teacher, Suzanne Valenza, the principal, Nancy Mohr, said she was satisfied that her students had achieved an important goal: taking control of the standards they are asked to meet.


COMPANY NEWS: Changing Markets; Failure Group Seeks Fate Different From Its Name
The Failure Group Inc. appears to be worried about living up to its name.
Yesterday, Failure, a consulting company based in Menlo Park, Calif., that analyzes accidents and disasters, reported an $879,000 loss for its fiscal second quarter ended Nov. 26.


In America; Football's Fearful Reality
In an interview with ESPN, Randall Cunningham, the gifted quarterback of the Philadelphia Eagles, discussed an injury he suffered earlier this year that put him out of action for the rest of the season:
"I heard my ankle snap, so I said to myself, 'Wow, I broke my ankle.' So they put it back together and they clamped it. They put clamps on it. And they drilled a screw straight through, so it was locked. Then they put a plate on the outside with screws going all the way through -- normal screws, like you put in wood. And I can feel it. It's kind of crazy."


William H. Todd 2d; Investment Adviser, 70
William H. Todd 2d, an investment adviser who lived in Rye, N.Y., died yesterday at Greenwich Hospital in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 70.
The cause was cancer, said Martha Todd, a daughter-in-law.


No Felony Charge Expected For Driver in Hurley Crash
A toxicology report has apparently exonerated the driver who injured Sacramento Kings guard Bobby Hurley in a car accident 10 days ago.
According to a police spokesman yesterday, Daniel Wieland, the driver, was found to have only traces of methamphetamine, which is commonly known as speed, in his urine but not in his blood on the night of the accident.
As a result, he was not expected to be charged with a felony count of driving under the influence of drugs.


New Plan For Phone And Cable
Vice President Al Gore outlined a broad plan today to overhaul the nation's telecommunications laws, but provided few details on how the Administration planned to tackle the devilishly divisive details.
As expected, Mr.
Gore called for eliminating the legal barriers that now prevent cable television, local telephone and long-distance services from competing with one another.


Wanted: A Cabinet of Taxpayers
Of course, the White House knew it was asking the public and Congress to accept a double standard in nominating Bobby Ray Inman as Secretary of Defense.
That's why the public was kept in the dark for four days about what President Clinton has known for weeks.
For seven years Mr.
Inman has failed to pay Social Security taxes on his housekeeper's wages.
His failure continued throughout a year in which thousands of Americans, alerted by Zoe Baird's experience, voluntarily began payments.


Compaq Woos Consumers, and Wins
The Compaq Computer Corporation, which made its name selling personal computers to corporate accounts, is getting a big test this holiday shopping season in a new market -- consumers.
This is the first Christmas that Compaq is offering a personal computer designed especially for and aimed directly at consumers and home office users -- the Presario.
In a big departure from its traditional corporate sales channels, Compaq is even selling the Presario and the company's highly successful Prolinea desktop line through warehouse clubs.
So after years of depending on traditional computer dealers, Compaq is now getting acquainted with shoppers at Wal-Mart's Sam's Warehouse Clubs, Best Buy, Service Merchandise and Montgomery Ward.


I.B.F. Wants Holyfield to Obey Rules
Bob Lee, the head of the International Boxing Federation, took an outrageous position this week: he attempted to infuse morality into the sport.
"I've been trying for a long time," he said, "but it's not easy."
It is the reason, he explained, that he denied Evander Holyfield's petition to fight a heavyweight title unification bout against Lennox Lewis.


Pizza Hut Awards Account on Children
Pizza Hut said yesterday that it had selected Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein of San Francisco to handle campaigns aimed at children as well as selected projects.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade publications estimated them at $10 million to $20 million.
Goodby, Berlin, which like BBDO New York, Pizza Hut's main agency, is owned by the Omnicom Group, was awarded the account after a two-month review that was narrowed to three agencies: Goodby, Berlin; Ayer Inc. of New York, and Foote, Cone &amp; Belding of San Francisco.


60-Minute Gourmet
OVER the years, I have probably offered more than two dozen recipes for seafood soups in this column.
One reason is that I love them.
Another is that they are well suited to quick home cooking.
Some of the soups have a common base -- a fish or shellfish stock or scallops -- but each is distinctive because of the endless variety of seasonings that can be added.
Monkfish is one of the best species for soup because its firm flesh holds up so well.
Blackfish, which in the East is sometimes called tautog, is a moderately firm, white-fleshed fish that also works well in chowders and soups.
Sometimes, I use tilefish, which has similar qualities and is relatively inexpensive.
The only species that do not belong in soups are those with rich or oily flesh, like mackerel and salmon.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  TAX BREAKS APPROVED FOR HUGE TOWERS
The City Council voted overwhelmingly to extend tax breaks to developers who build large apartment towers in Manhattan.
The bill extends to midtown and lower Manhattan a property-tax abatement that has been available to developers since 1975 in most of the city.
A1.


2 Bronx School Chiefs Ousted After Trying to Combat Graft
Two Bronx school superintendents hired to help improve schools and fight graft are being ousted by their local school boards, which have long histories of corruption.
The two superintendents, Felton Johnson in District 9 and Robert Henry in District 12, have been notified in recent days that their contracts will not be renewed.
The two districts were singled out again last week for censure by the New York City school system's top investigator in a report on voter fraud in the spring school board elections.


Knicks Give Themselves a Big 'L' for Their Effort
For the Nets, it was a much-needed victory.
For the Knicks, it was more reason to worry about the state of their offense.
With Kenny Anderson (14 points, 7 assists) and Derrick Coleman (29 points, 16 rebounds) making key plays, the Nets pulled out an 85-81 victory over the Knicks tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Nets (9-14) have had trouble in close games this season, but they did not let this one get away.


Orioles' Olson Is Atop New Free-Agent List
A group of 35 new free agents burst onto the winter market yesterday, led by Gregg Olson, the Baltimore Orioles' closing relief pitcher.
Olson's sudden, surprising availability aroused widespread but cautious interest among other clubs.
The players became free agents because their clubs did not tender them 1994 contracts by the Monday midnight deadline.
Contrary to earlier expectations of general managers that the number of nontendered players would rise significantly from last year's 39, this marked the first year since 1989 that the number dropped.


An Award for Norman
GREG NORMAN was voted World Player of the Year by the editors of Golf Digest magazine for the second time, the magazine announced yesterday.
Norman, winner of his second British Open title this year, also won the Doral Open and the Taiheiyo Masters in Japan.
He finished third on the PGA money-winning list with $1.3 million.


Horizon Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Not as Easy as A.B.C.
TROY OCKERMAN and his pals knew they were part of something special at Riverbend Bowl in Corunna, Mich.
It may have been bowling history, but that remains to be seen.
The 24-year-old Ockerman rolled three straight 300 games -- 36 consecutive strikes -- last Saturday in the final three matches of a monthly king-of-the-hill tournament.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Domino's Pizza ended its marketing promise to deliver pizza within 30 minutes, after a jury awarded $78 million to a woman struck by a Domino's driver in 1989.
The change could have a profound impact Domino's business, which depends largely on delivery services by 5,300 stores in the U.S. and abroad.  [ Page A1. ]


Giuliani's Choice for Hospitals
Promising a new direction in health care, Mayor-elect Giuliani nominated New Jersey's Health Commissioner to head New York City's hospitals and clinics.
Page B3.


CHRONICLE
Now, it's Prince EDWARD who wants to shoo those nasty reporters away.
Journalists have been hot on the trail of the Prince, Queen Elizabeth's youngest child, since the news began spreading that he is romantically involved with SOPHIE RHYS-JONES, 28, a public relations executive.


Clinton Vows U.S. Will Pursue Justice In Pan Am Bombing
Up the hill from the graves of John F. and Robert F. Kennedy, past the old amphitheater of Arlington National Cemetery, a 5-year-old boy who never knew his father stood in the raw morning cold today next to President Clinton.
The boy, Nicholas Bright, was six months old when his father, Nicholas, 32, of Brookline, Mass., died along with 269 other people in the bombing of Pan American World Airways' Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland on Dec. 21, 1988.
Today, Nicholas attended the ground-breaking ceremony for a memorial to the victims that Congress has approved for the national cemetery.


Trenton Official Picked To Head Hospital System
Promising to steer health care in New York City in a new direction, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani nominated the Health Commissioner of New Jersey yesterday to head the city's $3.2 billion system of hospitals and clinics, moving to force out the current director before his term expires in May.
Aides to Mr.
Giuliani said that he hoped to have his nominee, Dr.
Bruce Siegel, take over the Health and Hospitals Corporation as soon as possible after Jan. 1, replacing Dr.
Billy E. Jones, who has served as the corporation's director since Mayor David N. Dinkins appointed him in 1992.


Thank You, Mr. Dinkins
Mayor David Dinkins did honor to his own reputation by standing on principle this week and saying no to the New York City unions that helped elect him four years ago.
It could not have been easy for him, especially in the waning days of his tenure, as friends and foes alike so closely scrutinize his every lame-duck move.
Nonetheless Mr.
Dinkins put his city's interests first and refused to let the unions dictate a destructive policy.
Municipal labor leaders wanted the City Council to push through a measure that would have hampered the ability of his successor, Rudolph Giuliani, to let private companies deliver city services.
Privatization is no panacea.
But Mr.
Giuliani campaigned on the issue and has every right to pursue the policies he favors -- as do the New Yorkers who elected him.


Led by a Tiny Hand, Man Leaves Street Life
FOR Thomas Vance and his daughter, who was conceived when he and her mother were homeless crack addicts, 1993 has been a pretty good year.
"Kendra turned 3 in March," said Mr.
Vance, who was able to kick a five-year crack habit after the partner with whom he had lived in subway stations became pregnant.
She is still living somewhere on the streets, while he gave up drugs to claim and raise Kendra.


Credit Card Holders Need Tighter Security
To the Editor:
Further on your Dec. 9 news article about a Secret Service investigation of a New Jersey auto dealership where certain salespeople had used the TRW credit reporting system to obtain credit card numbers of people who were not even customers and then used those numbers to make unauthorized purchases:
That a system containing detailed personal information could be made available without an individual's consent is disturbing enough.
But why haven't credit card companies instituted better security measures?
Why can't a system be developed where phone order purchases require proof the caller is the authorized cardholder?
Such a system exists for bank debit cards, where a personal identification number is required to gain access to one's account.
Credit card issuers should require that when you call a company to make a purchase, you must key in the account number and PIN on your phone.
This would insure that the purchase could only be made by the cardholder and also keep account information out of the order taker's hands.
The technologies that make such systems possible should be used to protect people.
ELLIS BAUMEL  Bayside, Queens, Dec. 13, 1993


Italian Fascism Didn't Practice Anti-Semitism
To the Editor:
You report that the electoral resurgence of neo-Fascism in Italy has alarmed Italian Jews, "many of whom have painful memories of the 1938 Italian racial laws that made Jews second-class citizens and paved the way for the deportation of the 7,000 who died in Nazi camps" (news article, Dec. 5).
Italian Fascism's position on the Jews was much more complicated than this would suggest.
Until 1938, when Mussolini bowed to German pressure and enacted an Italian version of the infamous Nuremberg laws, Fascist ideology was free of any elements of anti-Semitism, and the party's membership rolls were open to Jews, who joined in roughly the same proportion to their numbers as non-Jews.


Teachers Continue to Strike at Catholic High Schools


AT WORK WITH: Eli Zabar; A New Hero for 'Waste Not, Want Not'
NEW YORKERS love a love-hate relationship, and with Eli Zabar, they have their man.
At his E.A.T. on Madison Avenue, shoppers are cordially invited to spend $3 on one brownie, $7 on one hallah, $12 on one chicken salad sandwich.
But if they stop complaining long enough to get the object of their disaffection into their mouths -- especially the bread, Eli's bread, which in the last few years has transformed the staff of life in this town -- the outrage inevitably gives way to a rush of warm, mushy adjectives.
They'll hate him in the morning.
At 50, Mr.
Zabar's bad-boy image persists, only now, everyone else wants lessons.
The baby brother of Stanley and Saul Zabar, (61 and 66 respectively) the owners with Murray Klein of Zabar's on Broadway, Eli was always the renegade.
Manners?
Nah.
He repeatedly told the press how rotten his competitors were, threw Giorgio DeLuca of Dean &amp; DeLuca out of E.A.T., accusing him of spying for information on importers.
And when his brothers offered him a job on the night shift at Zabar's after he asked to be a partner, he flat out quit and never looked back.
Saul Zabar says: "I think he made the right choice. Both sides of the family have been successful, West Side and East Side. There's no jealousy. I think he's more up-front than the rest of us. That's his nature."


Now Drug-Free, Couple Still Faces a Long Battle
On opposite walls in the sunny apartment that Tonia Garcia shares with her fiance in East New York hang two key rings.
One is Ms.
Garcia's.
The other belongs to her fiance, Eddie Blue.
Both have a string of colored tabs spilling down like streamers against the white walls.
And on each tab are words in gold lettering that represent landmarks in the lives of Ms.
Garcia and Mr.
Blue: 1 week drug free, 6 weeks drug free, 6 months drug free, 1 year drug free.


Chaney of Temple Fumes on the Phone
Coach JOHN CHANEY of unbeaten Temple (4-0) upbraided the N.C.A.A. and the news media yesterday during a conference call to the Metropolitan Basketball Writers Association's weekly luncheon.
Chaney said he met on Monday in Washington with Representative CARDISS COLLINS, Democrat of Illinois, regarding the issue of some key people in a research group responsible for advising National Collegiate Athletic Association committees on eligibility standards having ties to RAY CATTELL, a psychiatrist whose views on social engineering have provoked charges of racism and elitism.


On Comet, on Cupid, on the Henry Hudson Parkway . . .


C.I.A. Doubtful on Serbian Sanctions
In a new assessment, the Central Intelligence Agency has concluded that the economic embargo imposed on Serbia 18 months ago is likely to deteriorate and that the West will probably have to accept the ethnic partitioning of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In the analysis, the C.I.A. also says that there appears to be "no good and politically viable alternative" to the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, who has been accused in the West of starting the ethnic violence that followed the breakup of the old Yugoslav federation.


No Headline
"The lawsuits touch all of us, not just the guilty priests or the Archbishop or the pastors of the parishes where the abuse may have happened. Never did I think when I was ordained a priest and a bishop that I would have to deal with such a painful problem personally." MICHAEL J. SHEEHAN, Roman Catholic Archbishop of Santa Fe, N.M.  [ A1:2. ]


Goodmark Foods (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Washington Wines Get to the Big City
WHEN Christopher Camarda is not waiting on tables five nights a week at Il Bistro, a restaurant in the Pike Place Market in Seattle, he makes wine, mostly red.
If things continue to go right, within a year he'll just do wine.
Mr.
Camarda's boutique winery in Seattle is named Andrew Will, after his nephew and his son.
His production is tiny -- 1,800 cases a year -- and the word has got around Seattle that his Bordeaux-like cabernet sauvignon and his merlot are fine.
"The '90 cabernet and '91 merlot sold out within a few months," he said on Monday.


Corrections
A picture caption on Sunday about the re-emergence of the Muslim militant group Al Jihad in Egypt incorrectly described an attack that killed seven people last August.
It occurred near, but not at, the American University.


Investigator to Seek Ex-White House Aide's Files on Clinton Land Dealings
Federal law-enforcement officials said today that they would seek to examine files, removed from the office of the deputy White House counsel shortly after he killed himself last summer, concerning Arkansas land dealings of President Clinton and his wife, Hillary.
These officials, speaking on condition that they not be identified, said they were studying how best to proceed in a highly charged political atmosphere in which the White House, citing lawyer-client privilege, has suggested that the Clintons will try to keep the documents to themselves.


Review/Theater: Anarchia; Wistful Contemplation Of a Life of Engagement
The legendary Living Theater is 46 years old this year, and its latest production, "Anarchia," emanates a reflective, self-searching quality common to the identity crises of middle age.
The play, written and directed by Hanon Reznikov, is a wistful, willfully self-conscious defense of the philosophies and techniques that have shaped the company since its inception.
And there is both a sense of battle weariness and an enduring, quixotic valor to the performance that infuse it with unexpected poignancy.
Led by the ragged-voiced but eternally game Judith Malina, who was the co-founder of the troupe with her husband, the late Julian Beck, six actors shift between fictive and real-life personae to explain their belief in anarchism -- a gentle, defanged version that stresses passive resistance and individual self-expression -- as both a political and esthetic creed.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day on Saturday about investment companies that try to deal only in companies with records of social and ethical concern reversed the identities of two executives of the Calvert Group.
Clifton S. Sorrell was at the left and Wayne Silby at the right.


F.B.I. Chief Suspended for Interview on Bombing Case
The New York F.B.I. chief, who supervised the World Trade Center bombing investigation, has been suspended from his duties after Government lawyers complained that he had talked about the bombing case during a television interview.
James M. Fox, the assistant director in charge of the New York office, was suspended on Dec. 10, less than a month before his retirement, by F.B.I. director Louis J. Freeh.
The disciplinary action was for comments on the Dec. 4 broadcast of "11 News Close-Up" on New York television station WPIX, F.B.I. officials said.


Study Links Miscarriages to Caffeine Consumption
A new study suggests that pregnant women who consume the amount of caffeine in one and a half to three cups of coffee a day may nearly double their risk of miscarriage.
The researchers also linked high caffeine consumption -- the equivalent of more than three cups of coffee a day -- in the month before pregnancy with a similar risk of miscarriage, said Dr.
Claire Infante-Rivard of McGill University in Montreal, the main author of the report.
It is being published today in The Journal of the American Medical Association.


CARTER HAWLEY COMPLETES PLACEMENT OF NOTES
Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., which operates the Broadway, Emporium and Weinstocks department stores, said yesterday that it had completed a private placement of $143.5 million of convertible notes.
The company originally intended to raise $125 million to finance the remodeling of its stores and other business strategies, but demand for the notes enabled it to raise more, a company spokesman said.
Carter Hawley has been under scrutiny by some suppliers and creditors who have worried that the company would be unable to pay its bills.


As Free Trade Draws Nations Together, Campus Becomes 'Mexico Think Tank'
When President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico needed to better understand the emotional tugs and pulls of United States opinion on illegal immigration, he turned to the Center for U.S.-Mexican Studies at the University of California at San Diego.
When Pedro Aspe, the Mexican Secretary of Finance, wanted perspectives on economic development in the United States, he turned up at the center.


Ailing Islanders Are Looking Once More to the Kid Line
With three defensemen out with injuries, the Islanders are depending more on their forward lines.
The best one has been the Kid Line of Travis Green, Marty McInnis and Brad Dalgarno.
They have accounted for nine goals and nine assists in the Islanders' five-game unbeaten streak.
Tonight, they will try to extend the streak in Montreal against the Canadiens.


Critic's Notebook; Marked Diminuendo In Classical Radio
Tomorrow evening at Merkin Concert Hall, Isaac Stern will play the violin, Marilyn Horne will sing, Victor Borge will clown and Giora Feidman will play klezmer music.
Thomas Hampson plans to walk over from the Metropolitan Opera House after singing Part 1 of "Les Troyens," and Claude Frank and Lillian Kallir will play piano duets.
It sounds like a party and it is, but there is also a sad undercurrent.
The invitation-only event is to be recorded for broadcast as the final edition of "The Listening Room," the interview-and-performance program that Robert Sherman has presented on WQXR-FM (96.3), the radio station owned by The New York Times, since 1970.
It is to be broadcast on New Year's Day at 10 P.M.


Bomb Jury Hears Accounts Of Phone Calls From Prison
Prosecutors in the World Trade Center case yesterday began what promises to be a very long reading of transcripts of conversations, translated from Arabic, held between a man in prison with somebody outside prison.
The prosecution maintains that the man in prison is Ahmad M. Ajaj, one of the defendants in the World Trade Center bombing case, and, indeed, while the defense does not concede that it is Mr.
Ajaj, the man speaking identifies himself as Ahmed and he seems to describe a situation identical to that of Mr.
Ajaj.


Pitino Happy as Kentucky Coasts
Kentucky 86; Texas 61
Six games into the season, Rick Pitino is finally happy with his fifth-ranked Kentucky Wildcats.


Study Suggests High Rate of Impotence
THE largest study of impotence since the Kinsey report has found that about half of American men over 40 have experienced the problem to varying degrees.
The federally financed study, carried out among 1,709 men in 11 areas in Massachusetts, asked them a variety of questions about their sexual potency during the previous six months.


Gephardt Backs GATT Pact
The House majority leader, Representative Richard A. Gephardt, who was a leading opponent of the North American Free Trade Agreement, said today that he would support approval of the global trade pact just negotiated under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Mr.
Gephardt, a Missouri Democrat who is influential in the House on trade issues, said he would back the legislation necessary to put the GATT agreement's thousands of provisions into American law.
The accord reduces tariffs and extends international free-trade rules to agriculture and some service industries.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Wings' Streak at 8  Sergei Fedorov had two goals and an assist last night as Detroit scored its eighth straight home victory.
The 3-point night gave Fedorov 58 points for for the season, one less than the league leader, Wayne Gretzky.
Chicago's unbeaten streak ended at five games.
All the scoring came in the first period. (AP) Penguins 8, Lightning 3: Mike Ramsey and Rick Tocchet scored 35 seconds apart to start a five-goal second period that carried Pittsburgh to the home-ice victory over Tampa Bay.
The Penguins ended Tampa Bay's 3-0-1 road streak.
Bryan Trottier had three assists for the Penguins, leaving him two short of 900 career assists. (AP) Capitals 4, Flyers 1: Dmitri Khristich had a goal and an assist in visiting Washington's victory.
Philadelphia, which entered the game tied for second in the league in goals, has managed just 13 goals in its last 8 games. (AP) Senators 2, Nordiques 1: Ottawa scored in the opening 10 minutes on goals by Brad Shaw and Aleksei Yashin and went on to beat visiting Quebec. (AP) HOCKEY All-Russian Final  With President Boris Yeltsin among those watching from the stands, the Russian Olympic hockey team defeated the Russian national team, 8-1, yesterday and won the title in the Izvestia Cup tournament in Moscow.
In the game for third place, Sweden whipped Team USA, 8-3.
Todd Marchant scored two goals for the United States and was the tournament's top scorer with 9 points on 3 goals and 6 assists. (AP) SKIING  Smirnov Wins Again  Vladimir Smirnov of Kazakhstan won his second World Cup cross-country ski race yesterday, strengthening his lead in the overall standings.
Smirnov won the men's 10-kilometer classical style event in Toblach, Italy, beating Jari Isometsa of Finland by 18 seconds and the world champion, Sture Siversten of Norway, by 18.3 seconds. (AP)


United's Unions Try to Ease Investors' Fears
Leaders of the pilots' and machinists' unions at United Airlines tried to head off investors' concerns today about their offer to gain majority control of the company and their role in managing it should they succeed.
In a news conference held after they met with Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich and Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena, the union officials stressed that employee representatives would hold three seats on a 12-member board and that management of the UAL Corporation, United's parent, would be turned over to Gerald Greenwald, a former vice chairman of the Chrysler Corporation.


Many Companies in Area Disillusioned by Accord
Though the New York metropolitan region has the largest concentration of international companies in the United States, it was left relatively untouched by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade signed in Geneva last week.
And that's not necessarily good.
Provisions that would have helped industries vital to the region, particularly financial services and entertainment, were left out of the treaty that established new rules for international trade.
Executives in those fields said that those omissions mean that the United States missed a rare opportunity to help the lagging economies of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.


Sex Abuse Cases Threaten To Bankrupt an Archdiocese
Faced with dozens of sexual molestation accusations against priests in New Mexico, the Catholic Archdiocese of Santa Fe has told parishioners that it might have to file for bankruptcy.
It has also asked parishioners to help defray millions of dollars in settlement costs and legal expenses to spare it from becoming the first American archdiocese ever to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
In a letter read from pulpits or posted on bulletin boards in 91 parishes and missions throughout New Mexico on Sunday, Archbishop Michael J. Sheehan noted that with victims of sexual misconduct demanding up to $50 million in damages and the church's insurers balking, bankruptcy loomed.
Acknowledging that he was taking a "drastic" step, he asked each parish to contribute whatever cash and property it could rather than have them seized by the courts.


Taylor Has Appointment With Yanks' Doctor
Brien Taylor, the blue-chip left-hander in the Yankees' farm system, is scheduled to be flown to New York today to have his pitching shoulder examined by the Yankees' team physician.
Taylor, baseball's No. 1 draft choice in 1991, was involved in a fight near his home in Beaufort, N.C., last Saturday night and injured the shoulder.
After his older brother, Brendon, was hit in the head with a rock thrown by Ron Wilson in an apparent business dispute at Wilson's home in Harlowe, N.C., family friends of Taylor said last night, Taylor and his cousin, Charles Donnell Johnson, traveled to Harlowe to question Wilson about the incident.


Home Shopping in a Venture to Go Global
The Home Shopping Network, the television retailer, has formed a joint venture with Tele-Communications Inc., the country's largest cable systems operator, to form a television shopping service to plumb international markets, the two companies said yesterday.
They provided few details of the venture, to be called Home Shopping International, declining to say where and when they planned to start it.
They also refused to disclose the terms of the deal and said it was subject to regulatory approval.


Falcon Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Carriage Rules Are Relaxed, But Dinkins Promises a Veto
The New York City Council passed a bill yesterday to expand when and where horse-drawn carriages can operate, but Mayor David N. Dinkins said he would veto the measure.
Because the existing regulations for the trade are to expire on Dec. 31, the promised veto could mean that the city's 200 drivers -- there are about 140 horses -- may cruise the city's streets unencumbered by rules, at least for awhile.


Cities Must Generate Support for Recycling
To the Editor:
Michael D. Diederich Jr., Assistant County Attorney in Rockland County, New York, performs a service in commenting on the garbage "flow control" case before the United States Supreme Court in "Should Municipalities or Businesses Control Trash Handling?" (letter, Dec. 7).
Mr.
Diederich, however, misses an important fact: the "flow control" case is about protecting costly incinerators, not about improving recycling.
Rather than encouraging incineration, city and state governments should be assisting recycling by improving the marketplace for discarded materials that can be reprocessed.


Santiago del Estero Journal; With Fire and Fury, Argentine Poor Make a Point
The plan by provincial government workers, who had not been paid in more than three months, was apparently to make a modest protest by overturning one official car next to the Governor's mansion here and then going home.
Quickly, however, their pent-up frustrations erupted on Thursday, federal officials say, as 4,000 demonstrators burned cars, sacked and burned government buildings and even invaded the homes of prominent politicians.


Corrections
An obituary by The Associated Press on Dec. 2 about Francis L. Dale, a former United States representative at the United Nations, professional sports executive and publisher of newspapers in Cincinnati and Los Angeles, referred incorrectly to his Navy service in World War II.
He was a gunnery officer aboard the destroyer escort Pillsbury when it captured a German submarine.
He was not yet the ship's commander.
The officer in charge was Lieut.
Comdr.
George W. Caselman.


China Weighs Using Sterilization and Abortions to Stop 'Abnormal' Births
China's Minister of Public Health has proposed national legislation to halt the birth of "abnormal" children, using Government-ordered sterilizations and abortions if necessary.
The Minister, Chen Minzhang, has presented draft legislation on "eugenics and health protection" to the National People's Congress and said China is in "urgent need of adopting such a law to put a stop to the prevalence of abnormal births," the official New China News Agency reported.


Corrections
A table on Friday with an article about Government-supported research on the effects of radiation on humans misstated the purpose of one experiment at Vanderbilt University in Nashville.
The study in which radioactive iron was given to pregnant women was intended to determine the extent of iron deficiency among the women.


Michael Jackson's Lawyer And Investigator Quit Jobs
With most of Michael Jackson's friends silent and his career at a standstill, the crisis surrounding the pop superstar took an unexpected turn today with the disclosure that his longtime lawyer and private investigator had quit.
Jackson aides confirmed the resignation of Bertram Fields, one of Hollywood's top lawyers, and Anthony Pellicano, Mr.
Jackson's private investigator, after Daily Variety reported the departures.
The Jackson camp, including the star's mother, Katherine, had recently criticized Mr.
Jackson's advisers for their handling of the child molestation accusations against the entertainer.
Mr.
Fields, through an aide, denied that he and Mr.
Pellicano had been dismissed.


The Pop Life
The Country Speaks
"Break the silence." Garth Brooks, Billy Ray Cyrus, Dolly Parton, Willie Nelson, Mark Chesnutt, Mary Chapin Carpenter and 40 other country music stars will echo that theme in their industry's national campaign to prevent the spread of AIDS, especially in rural America.
The campaign, to be kicked off in Washington on Jan. 13 by Kristine Gebbie, the Federal AIDS policy coordinator, is to feature the country stars in public service announcements on radio and television.
Fans will hear George Jones say: "Don't play possum with AIDS. Educate your children." And Clint Black: "You know AIDS isn't just some big city problem. An estimated 1 out of every 250 Americans is infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS. And that includes small towns and rural communities and counties all across the country. Break the silence."


Gesco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Times Names Culture Editor
The appointment of Daniel Lewis as the cultural news editor of The New York Times was announced yesterday by Max Frankel, the newspaper's executive editor.
Mr.
Lewis, now the editor of the Week in Review section, will start his new job in late January, heading a department of more than 50 critics, reporters and editors and overseeing the Arts and Leisure and Weekend sections as well as the daily arts coverage.
He succeeds Paul Goldberger, who has been named the chief cultural correspondent and plans to report on arts institutions and on urban planning.


C.I.A. Doubtful on Serbian Sanctions
In a new assessment, the Central Intelligence Agency has concluded that the economic embargo imposed on Serbia 18 months ago is likely to deteriorate and that the West will probably have to accept the ethnic partitioning of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In the analysis, the C.I.A. also says that there appears to be "no good and politically viable alternative" to the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, who has been accused in the West of starting the ethnic violence that followed the breakup of the old Yugoslav federation.


HEI Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Japan's Loan Sharks Make Good Money in Bad Times
Of all the battered sectors of the currently depressed Japanese economy, the business of lending money may be in the worst shape.
Banks are awash in bad debts.
The stock market during the last four years has lost more than $3 trillion, equal in value to nearly half the gross national product of the United States.
And nonbank finance companies have taken a shellacking on real estate lending.


Metropolitan Diary
A FRIEND writes:
They didn't show up until the first of December, but Travis, a neighborhood holiday-loving dog, seemed to sense the coming of the Christmas tree men days earlier.
By the afternoon of their arrival, the men had built what was to be their living quarters through Christmas Eve and had constructed the wooden framework that would support the Fraser firs, Douglas firs and -- most fragrant and popular of all -- the balsam firs they had come to sell.


Waste Found In a Program For Children
A state-mandated program to help handicapped children in Suffolk County is rife with abuse, a grand jury has found, and aggressive recruiting by poorly regulated treatment centers and therapists has made the $126 million program the most expensive one in the state.
In a report released today, the Suffolk County grand jury said that state law gives too much power to therapists and treatment centers to decide which children should receive services and how much to charge, opening the program to abuse and making it difficult to control costs.


Hospital Overstepped in Caesarean Case
To the Editor:
Although the United States Supreme Court has decided not to hear the case involving an Illinois woman who refused to undergo a Caesarean section (news article, Dec. 19), one claim in your Dec. 15 news article on the case was particularly disturbing.
In discussing the case's history, you assert that the hospital "remained neutral." This is clearly not true.


Four Killed in House Fire in Rochester; Infant Is Found Alive Hours Later


Wine Talk
WHEN is a bottle of wine worth $1,200?
The minute someone shells out $1,200 to acquire it.
Actually, $1,200 is not that much to a big-time wine collector.
When a very rare bottle comes on the market, usually at an auction in London, bids of $5,000 or even $10,000 may prompt some television coverage but will not raise too many eyebrows among wine professionals.


Washington Is Back
George Washington has returned to the Vermont House chamber.
In 1837, his portrait was displayed behind the speaker's podium.
When the Statehouse burned in 1857, the portrait was rescued and later returned to the House chamber in the new Statehouse.
But when an addition was built on the back of the building at the turn of the century, the portrait was moved to another room.
As part of the complete restoration of the chamber now in progress, the portrait was returned this week to the House chamber, again behind the speaker's podium. (Associated Press)


How Tenure Safeguards Academic Freedom; Not Like Protectionism
To the Editor:
Re "Amid Joblessness, the Joys of Tenure" (The Week in Review, Dec. 12): Comparing tenure with protectionism in international trade is not valid.
Professors deal with ideas, not products.
Those with ideas not generally accepted (many of which may become "accepted wisdom") are likely to be eliminated from university faculties, other things being equal.
Tenure gives some protection.


Marie Briehl Dies; Pioneer in Analysis Of Children Was 96
Dr.
Marie H. Briehl, one of the country's earliest child psychoanalysts, died on Saturday at her home in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
She was 96.
The cause was heart failure, her family said.


The Longest Night
Some nights -- the nights before a wedding, say, or a journey, or a birth -- seem eternal.
Those are the nights one measures not in minutes but in heartbeats.
But the longest night can be clocked.
This year it began at 4:31 yesterday afternoon -- precisely one hour and five minutes after winter's official arrival -- and didn't end until 7:17 this morning.
Fourteen hours and 46 minutes without a sun, and with a moon in half-mourning, may impel some people to curse the darkness.
Resist the urge.
The winter solstice is the tie that binds, the one all-purpose night in a complex 31 days, the sole observance in which all of us can share -- believers and non-believers, rich and poor.


Priceless Gifts
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 15 news article on the $4 billion loss in value of gifts that recipients don't like, as calculated by Prof.
Joel Waldfogel of Yale University: While I have not read his American Economic Review article, Professor Waldfogel omits an important variable.
That is the deadweight gain earned on gifts that are valued more highly than what the gift giver spent.


Low-Income Housing Project Is Dedicated in Newark


NEW YORK COUNCIL VOTES TAX BREAKS FOR HUGE TOWERS
The New York City Council, in a tumultuous meeting that ended its legislative session, voted overwhelmingly yesterday to extend tax breaks to developers who build large apartment towers in Manhattan.
The bill, which is intended to give a stimulus to the city's anemic construction industry, extends to midtown and lower Manhattan a property-tax abatement that has been available to developers since 1975 in most of the city.
For developers who qualify for the break, taxes are frozen for 10 years at the amount the owner of the site paid before the new construction.


No Holiday Trials (Juries Might Catch the Spirit)
The sound of high school carolers and the sight of Christmas trimming have led the county court in this small western Pennsylvania town to postpone all jury trials until after the holidays.
The Christmas spirit simply made it too likely that jurors would be inclined to be lenient toward defendants, the three judges of the Mercer County Court of Common Pleas decreed.
Legal experts say that calling off jury trials for this reason during the holidays may be unprecedented in American courts.
But one expert adds that she does not think it will make much difference: there is no evidence that the holidays affect the outcomes of trials.


Remembering a Father He Never Knew


Reviews/ Television; Still Happily Footloose In the New York of 1944
Broadway musicals done for television come in two basic packages.
There are the full-fledged productions, like last week's extraordinarily successful CBS production of "Gypsy," starring Bette Midler.
And there are the concert versions with full orchestra, several performers and a few props.
They, too, can be exceptionally rewarding.
A few years ago, public television offered Stephen Sondheim's "Follies," taped at Lincoln Center.
Tonight on "Great Performances," on PBS at 9:30, there's "On the Town," taped last year at the Barbican Center in London.
Based on an idea by Jerome Robbins, "On the Town" opened in 1944.
The music is by Leonard Bernstein; the book and lyrics are by Betty Comden and Adolph Green.
World War II is entering its final phase, and the streets of New York are still crowded with servicemen.
Three sailors are on a 24-hour leave, determined to find some "girls" and prove that New York, New York really is a helluva town.
For this performance, directed for the stage by Patricia Birch, the London Symphony Orchestra is conducted by Michael Tilson Thomas.
As it happens, he was born in 1944.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Proving that the paper towel business is not quite cut and dried, Brawny rediscovers its strengths.
IRVING BERLIN once penned a paean to "The Girl on the Magazine Cover." No one has ever sung the praises of the man on the paper towel wrapper.
No surprise there, since paper towels are among the most mundane of consumer products.
Still, Americans bought an estimated 2.3 billion rolls last year, spending about $2.2 billion, according to MRCA Information Services.
While the Bounty brand, marketed by Procter &amp; Gamble, tops the field, with 22 percent of the market, there is a spirited battle for second place -- at around 12 percent each -- between Brawny, made by the James River Corporation, and Scottowels, made by the Scott Paper Company.


Caramel: Sugar Turned to a Mellow Gold, and Just as Rich
CARAMEL is sugar with a Midas touch.
Pristine white crystals are transformed by heat into a molten glaze.
Everything from tarte Tatin and creme brulee to peanut brittle and Cracker Jack owe their inviting toasty burnish to caramel.
The flavor is becoming increasingly popular on dessert menus, giving chocolate, the perennial favorite, some stiff competition.


I.B.M. Adds Marketer From RJR to a Top Job
I.B.M.'s chairman and chief executive, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., added another outsider to his inner circle of top managers yesterday by naming G. Richard Thoman, a longtime colleague and former marketing executive at RJR Nabisco Holdings, as a senior vice president and a member of the computer company's 11-member executive committee.
The 49-year-old Mr.
Thoman will be the group executive with responsibility for businesses including the IBM Personal Computer Company, the Power PC chip unit and the Prodigy Services Company, an on-line information service partnership with Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.


First Lady, Defending President, Denounces 'Outrageous Attack'
The White House rolled out its second biggest gun today as Hillary Rodham Clinton rose to defend her husband against new accusations about the state of their marriage and new scrutiny of the suicide of Vincent W. Foster Jr., a senior aide and longtime friend.
Mrs.
Clinton, in interviews with news agency reporters, suggested that a connection existed between the rise of rumors about her husband and his newfound popularity in public opinion polls.
And she asserted that the White House was being subjected to "outrageous attack" fueled by payoffs made to the people making the accusations.
Two Troublesome Issues
Mrs.
Clinton's remarks were prompted by a series of reports on two matters.
First were accusations, published and broadcast widely this week, that her husband had used the state troopers who guarded him while he was Governor of Arkansas to arrange meetings with other women and to hide those meetings from her.
In addition there was the renewed interest in files that the White House removed from Mr.
Foster's West Wing office shortly after he killed himself in a Virginia park last summer.


ISRAEL AND P.L.O. BEGIN NEW TALKS
Israeli and Palestinian officials began talks here today aimed at resolving disputes that have delayed carrying out September's Middle East peace agreement.
A French Government official said that the two delegations had opened discussions at the Hotel Inter-Continental in central Paris, but that negotiations would not begin in earnest until Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel meets with a Palestine Liberation Organization executive committee member, Yasir Abed Rabbo.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.03
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.04
3.19
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.21
3.29
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.34
5.33
6.31
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.31
6.30
7.34
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.31
7.31
8.39
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.55
5.56
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Oxford Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Japan Somewhat Eases New Security Issuance
Nearly three years after decreeing that Government bureaucrats rather than the market would determine when companies could issue new shares, the Japanese Finance Ministry said today that it would slightly ease its grip on companies' ability to raise capital.
The announcement was part of a long-awaited package of 70 measures that will loosen a number of regulations over the stock and bond markets.
In addition to making it easier for companies to sell new shares, the steps increase the investment tools available to mutual fund companies and permit corporations to raise capital by selling several types of bonds that are new to Japan.


The Presents Food Experts Cook Up
Gifts of food used to be the easy, last-minute way to give something that couldn't possibly be objectionable.
But those days are definitely gone.
Now, nearly everyone has some kind of peculiar relationship with some kind of food.
Maybe chocolate is their greatest passion, but its fat content has led them to view a box of candy as potentially lethal.
Or maybe fruit seems too virtuous.
What is a gift, if not a fulfillment of an inarticulated fantasy?


New Data Sought on Municipals
A broad group of municipal bond issuers, dealers, lawyers and analysts has endorsed a proposal that would for the first time require continuing financial disclosure in the $1.2 trillion municipal bond market.
The proposal, which was announced yesterday, comes at a time when the issuance of new municipal bonds has risen to record levels.
Moreover, it comes as the recent recession continues to put financial pressure on state and local government issuers, a fact that is not disclosed unless a new bond is being issued.


A New Casting Call on the Fox Lot
The talent hunt has begun.
When Rupert Murdoch's Fox Network starts assembling a team to broadcast National Football Conference games next season its first target is CBS's John Madden.
"We've had an expression of interest," said Barry Frank, Madden's agent, who also represents CBS's football studio co-host, Greg Gumbel.
Madden's football-only deal makes him a free agent with no other commitments to CBS.


Review/Film: Philadelphia; Tom Hanks as an AIDS Victim Who Fights the Establishment
For a film maker who thrives on taking chances, "Philadelphia" sounds like the biggest gamble of all.
As the first high-profile Hollywood film to take the AIDS plague seriously, Jonathan Demme's latest work has stubborn preconceptions to overcome as well as enormous potential to make waves.
What it does not have, despite the fine acting and immense decency that give it substance, is much evidence of Mr.
Demme's usual daring.
Maybe that's not surprising: it isn't easy to leave fingerprints when you're wearing kid gloves.
Hollywood's past reluctance to take on AIDS isn't strictly a matter of cowardice.
This subject, with all its anguished inevitability, does not easily lend itself to run-of-the-mill movie methods.
If the theater has led the way, with works as different as "Jeffrey" and "Angels in America," it also has more freedom to experiment with format.
Conventional wisdom has it that a big-budget film needs reassuring familiarity if it means to play at the multiplex, even if Mr.
Demme proved otherwise with his bracingly tough "Silence of the Lambs."


The Pain of Layoffs for Ex-Senior I.B.M. Workers; In Dutchess County, a Disorienting Time for Employees Less Hardened to Job Loss
Every two weeks, three men and three women who put their faith in the eternal prosperity and benevolence of I.B.M. gather in one another's living rooms to talk and, at times, to shut their eyes and clasp their hands in prayer.
Last April, the three men, each a high-level professional in his 50's, were among the 7,700 workers in the mid-Hudson Valley who through layoffs and buyouts lost what they had come to believe were lifelong I.B.M. jobs, and their wives were among thousands of spouses who lost a robust sense of the future.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICAN CYANAMID CO., Wayne, N.J., has acquired most of the crop protection operations of Shell Petroleum Co.
Terms were not disclosed.
OTIS ELEVATOR CO., Farmingham, Conn., has opened its first major manufacturing plant in Southeast Asia.
Within two years, the plant in Penang, Malaysia, will employ about 450 people.


New Risk Factors Seen on Hypertension
People with slightly elevated systolic blood pressure, the higher of the two blood pressure readings, are at increased risk of developing full-fledged hypertension and heart disease compared with those with normal blood pressure, a new study has found.
People with the condition, borderline systolic hypertension, have generally not been classified as having high blood pressure because the slight elevations were not known to be potentially harmful.


St. John Knits reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
An article on Dec. 8 about an assertion that the Croatian Government had expelled thousands of its political foes misidentified Zvonimir Cicak, the human rights campaigner who made it.
He is head of the Zagreb-based Croatian Helsinki Committee for Human Rights; he does not represent Helsinki Watch, a New York-based group.


People
*
Rein Luik was named to the new position of director of consumer operations at Cline, Davis &amp; Mann, New York.
He most recently was executive vice president and director of client services at DDB Needham New York. *
Susan M. Allyn was named to the new position of director of consumer marketing at Wenner Media Inc., New York.
She was previously director of marketing information and finance for the consumer marketing department at Time Inc., New York.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  The Clinton Administration will propose a Federal budget for the next fiscal year that has a deficit "in the vicinity of $190 billion," the White House budget director said.
Members of the House from the New York metropolitan area were already attacking the Administration's plan to phase out $800 million in annual mass transit operating subsidies, of which the New York area now receives about $100 million.
A13.
NEW YORKER TAKES HEALTH CARE POST President Clinton named Harold M. Ickes, a New York lawyer and Democratic Party stalwart, to be his deputy chief of staff with primary responsibility for orchestrating the health care campaign for the White House.
A15.
NEW YORK CITY


COMPANY BRIEFS
HEINEKEN N.V., Amsterdam, agreed to acquire a majority stake in Brauerei Haldengut of Switzerland.
Terms were not disclosed.
LOCKHEED CORP., Calabasas, Calif., said it had received a $94.6 million Air Force contract related to the F-16 jet fighter.


Dean Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


His Good Will Extends to Nassau Inmates; L.I. Real-Estate Developer Pays the Bail and Sends 5 Prisoners Home for Christmas
The 20-year-old inmate at the Nassau County jail was fidgeting in his chair, trying to figure out what to say to get himself home to his mother, his girlfriend and his 5-month-old son in Brooklyn in time for Christmas.
A first-time offender, Eric Nieves, had been arrested 19 days earlier on charges of driving a stolen car and did not have the $1,000 he needed to post bail.
On Tuesday, he sat in a small office in the jail, having made it to the final round of the county's annual Christmas bail program.


Economic Scene; If scalpers can get so much, why aren't tickets costlier?
BARNEY, idol of the Oshkosh B'Gosh set, is coming to Radio City Music Hall in March.
But unless you are prescient -- or very rich or very indulgent -- the tike in your life is going to miss the chance to see the purple dinosaur in the polyester.
Tickets for all 11 shows sold out in two hours.
The only way to get them now is through brokers who are selling $30-list seats for as much as $200 -- a fact that has raised the dander of New York City's Department of Consumer Affairs, which will be trying to collect fines under New York State's anti-scalping law.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.19
2.97
3.38
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.06
3.15
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.23
3.28
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.24
5.34
6.37
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.21
6.31
7.35
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.24
7.31
8.39
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.54
5.55
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


How to Help Cambodia
Thanks to the United Nations, Cambodia now has a democratically elected Government.
But it faces a military threat straight out of its nightmarish past.
The Khmer Rouge, which killed more than a million Cambodians in the 1970's, persists in waging armed struggle against the new Government.
The guerrillas say they are willing to make peace in exchange for a role in the new administration.
But meanwhile they are fortifying themselves with new arms shipped across the porous Thai border.


Resorts Urge Changes in Federal Rent Rules
A user-fee policy for collecting rent from ski areas on United States Forest Service land has created a sizable controversy within the ski industry.
But there's one point on which most agree: something needs to be done soon to overhaul the system.
"Everybody is really fed up with it," said Tom Corcoran, president of Waterville Valley Resort, a 255-acre ski area in Waterville Valley, N.H.
"It was designed more than 20 years ago to be equitable, but it has brought up inequities."


Roll Over, Beethoven, Profits Are Slim for Radio
Radio listeners in the New York City area find themselves in an increasingly common situation around the country: just one commercial radio station in their area playing classical music full time.
The announcement last week that WNCN-FM was dropping classical music for rock-and-roll leaves no more than 40 commercial stations nationally that specialize in classical music.
Only Chicago and San Francisco have two such stations, though in many parts of the country, noncommercial stations devote many hours to classical music; in New York City, WNYC-FM provides 12 to 14 hours of classical music a day.


On Surprise Visit to Ulster, Major Calls for Peace
On a surprise visit to Northern Ireland, Prime Minister John Major walked both the Catholic and Protestant streets of Belfast today to proselytize for the peace initiative that he started with the Irish Prime Minister a week ago.
In an unusual foray for a British leader into the heart of the republican area of West Belfast, where murals and graffiti proclaim support for the Irish Republican Army's campaign to drive the British out, the Prime Minister challenged the political arm of the I.R.A. to take up the initiative.


The Smells, Sounds and Touch of Christmas


Review/Theater: Henry IV Parts 1 and 2; A Civil War Henry IV With a Punk for a Prince
Talk about generation gaps.
In Ron Daniels's lively but erratic staging of both parts of Shakespeare's "Henry IV" at the American Repertory Theater, the King and his wayward heir, Hal, appear to be separated by about 130 years.
The rebellious Prince is here portrayed as a platinum-haired punk who resembles the English rock star Billy Idol; his father, looking like a mustachioed general from a Matthew Brady daguerreotype, clearly belongs to the era of America's Civil War.
Arduously stretching the liberties afforded by post-modernist theories of production, Mr.
Daniels has created a wildly anachronistic, culturally mixed salad in which different elements of Shakespeare's epic political portrait are accorded theatrical analogues from wholly disparate historical moments.


Daughter of Castro Leaves Cuba And Is Given Asylum in the U.S.
Fidel Castro's daughter has fled Cuba and has been granted political asylum in the United States, State Department officials said today.
The woman, Alina Fernandez Revuelta, arrived in Atlanta on Tuesday on a flight from Spain after her asylum request was granted by the United States Embassy in Madrid, said David Johnson, a State Department spokesman.


Holocaust Deniers Got More Than Visibility; Not an Isolated Crank
To the Editor:
The Holocaust denier Bradley R. Smith is intensifying his efforts to convince American youth that the Holocaust did not happen (news article, Dec. 12).


Critic's Notebook; Crime and Black Images in TV News
"Viewpoint," the useful ABC program that gives critics of television news a chance to confront its perpetrators, recently devoted 90 minutes to "Crime, Violence and TV News." Although more was bitten off than could be chewed, troubling questions were raised about the evening's hottest issue, the coverage of crimes committed by young black men.
Jeff Greenfield's scene-setting and Ted Koppel's questions were well aimed, and the criticism by the black panelists -- among them the writer Ishmael Reed; the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d, a prominent New York City minister; Fred Thomas, the Washington chief of police; Representative Walter R. Tucker 3d, a Democrat from Los Angeles, and several journalists -- was unsparing.


Franklin Supply Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Intermetrics Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Review/Film; A Deconstructed Bovary
"Valley of Abraham" was shown as part of this year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 5.
The film opened yesterday at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
At the age of 85, the Portuguese director Manoel de Oliveira, who has been making movies since 1931 and is still little known in this country, has brought forth what some European critics describe as his chef-d'oeuvre: "Valley of Abraham," a variation on Gustave Flaubert's "Madame Bovary," inspired by Agustina Bessa-Luis's Portuguese novel also titled "Valley of Abraham."


Clinton Denies Trying to Stifle Charges
President Clinton said today that he had never tried to use the weight of his office to suppress accusations by state troopers that he had conducted sexual liaisons while Governor of Arkansas.
Asked if he had offered jobs to the two Arkansas state troopers who have said in several recent interviews that they helped arrange meetings with several women for Mr.
Clinton and hide those meetings from his wife, Mr.
Clinton responded, "That absolutely did not happen."


Classical Music in Review
Canticum Novum Singers  St. Ignatius of Antioch Church
Harold Rosenbaum led his Canticum Novum Singers in an unusually varied collection of Christmas works on Saturday evening, with offerings ranging from Renaissance and Baroque choral settings and organ works to Rachmaninoff and Honegger rarities and a touch of levity from Peter Schickele.


Miller (Herman) Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Essay; Cold Comfort Level
My first run-in with Adm.
Bobby Ray Inman came after I praised him in a 1980 column.
As America's chief eavesdropper, he had overheard a suspicious call by President Carter's brother, Billy, to the Libyan Embassy, and properly brought the wiretap to the Attorney General for criminal investigation.
But praise from me brought him glares from the White House, and Admiral Inman -- recorders whirring -- called me to denounce "irreparable harm you have done by revealing our sources and methods." It was hard to believe that the Libyans did not know that all embassy phone lines were routinely tapped, but I respectfully asked if he would entertain one question.


An Exhibition of Festivals
HANUKKAH is past, and Christmas and the African-American harvest festival of Kwanzaa are rapidly approaching.
But 15 holidays and festivals, some not as well known as others, are being celebrated in "Holidays and Festivals in America," which will be on display at the Balch Institute for Ethnic Studies in Philadelphia through July 30.
With objects and photographs, the exhibition shows the traditions surrounding the celebrations and how cultural identity and diversity have been made known to a wider public.
Among the celebrations highlighted are two harvest festivals: the Jewish celebration of Succoth and the Korean festival of Chusok.


Commanders Get Pins From Kelly
New York City's Police Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, who steps down in January after 15 months as leader of the 30,000-member department, yesterday gave each of the 75 precinct commanders a pin that he conceived to recognize the "special status and responsibilities" of precinct commanders.


Holocaust Deniers Got More Than Visibility
To the Editor:
Bradley R. Smith offered his Holocaust-denying advertisement to The Justice, the Brandeis University student newspaper, for a political purpose, and the explanation by the student editors for accepting the advertisement -- to educate people about Bradley Smith -- indicates their ignorance of Bradley Smith's motives (news article, Dec. 12).


House Proud
WITH luck in New York City, windows provide views: the green swards of Central Park, the glittering spires of midtown's great monuments or, more often, a neighbor feeding a baby.
The big-city, great-view game is like trying to buy horizontal air space -- and on a clear day, you can pay forever.
More than a few New Yorkers have learned to love the air shaft.
But no matter where one happens to live, interior windows, used between rooms or hallways, as transoms, French doors or clerestories, provide fresh outlooks on life, as well as warm, intimate views.
Interior windows -- an architectural feature typical of older houses and apartments -- can be powerful, relatively easy pieces of renovation.


Jabil Circuit Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Coslet Is No Grammarian
Jets Coach Bruce Coslet wouldn't comment on how much confidence he has in his team heading into the final two games of the season with the playoffs on the line.
He thought it was a loaded question.
But he did comment on whether the team was about where he thought it would be at this point in the season.
"I won't say that," he said.


Meggett Intensifies Beuerlein Feud
It is safe to say that Giants running back David Meggett and Phoenix quarterback Steve Beuerlein won't be kissing under the mistletoe anytime soon.
Meggett ripped Beuerlein at the Superdome after the Giants beat the New Orleans Saints Monday night.
It could have ended there.
But Meggett escalated the feud today, accusing the Cardinals of making racial comments to quarterback Phil Simms during the Giants-Cardinals game three weeks ago.


Harlem Shots Kill a Cabby; Rider Is Hurt
In what the police say was probably a random shooting, two rounds were fired early yesterday morning in East Harlem, smashing through the windshield of a yellow cab, killing its driver and wounding a female passenger as the cab circled a crime-ravaged neighborhood waiting to pick up the woman's co-worker.
Unlike the shootings that have claimed the lives of 41 other taxi drivers in New York City this year -- 35 of them livery drivers -- the killing of Tarek Abdel Hamid does not appear to have had robbery as a motive, the police said.


Aqueduct to Simulcast 5 Races
As a result of legislation passed last week in Albany, the New York Racing Association has devised a format for a daily program of seven live races and five simulcast races from Gulfstream Park in Florida beginning Jan. 4 at Aqueduct.
During the week, the program will begin with three live races from Aqueduct and then alternate five Gulfstream simulcast races with four live Aqueduct races.
The final race will be a simulcast of the feature race from Gulfstream.
Although minor details need to be worked out, it is expected that the weekend program will open with four live races and conclude with two consecutive simulcasts from Gulfstream.


Terreri's Start Is Not Inspiring
Jacques Lemaire gave Chris Terreri his second consecutive start for the first time this season, but the experiment was unsuccessful.
Terreri had an uninspired outing on a night all the Devils would rather forget.
He allowed three goals on the first eight shots he faced and the Devils never recovered, losing to the Hartford Whalers by 6-3 at the Civic Center.


Treasuries Rise Sharply In Late Rally
The Treasury market rallied sharply yesterday as strong demand at the auction for five-year notes and sudden buying interest from investors gave prices a lift on the last full day of trading before Christmas.
The price of the 30-year bond jumped more than a point as the yield dropped to 6.21 percent.
"I think there was some pent-up demand waiting to get past the auctions," said John Costas, head of government trading and sales at CS First Boston.


Santa Claus Canceled at Malls in Colorado


Redmen Provide Lessons For Young Niagara Team
It didn't take much.
A few steals here, a couple of slams there and St.
John's rolled to a convincing 89-66 victory over Niagara last night at Alumni Hall.
Niagara (1-6) got off to a horrible start and spent the entire evening trying to recover.
The Purple Eagles' first two shots were off target and their next three possessions resulted in turnovers and led to three Redmen baskets.
Less than five minutes into the game, St.
John's had a 12-1 lead.
Niagara had 14 turnovers in the first half and St.
John's had 9 steals.


A 'New' Russia: Yeltsin Needs Consensus and Cash
After the strong vote for the far right and far left, President Boris N. Yeltsin had a serious choice to make about the pace and kind of economic reform.
But today, in his first post-election news conference, there was no indication he has made that choice.
His decision to keep Yegor T. Gaidar, a current First Deputy Prime Minister and leader of the reformers, means the probable continuation of a Government so divided that it has been unable to pursue a consistent economic strategy.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Tim Jones, infielder, on a minor-league contract.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Keith Miller, infielder, and Chris Gwynn, outfielder, on one-year contracts.


Bethlehem Journal; All Around Manger Square, Peace Is Walking on Tiptoes
Norway, front-runner in the Middle East for 1993 Country of the Year if they were to invent such an award, had a 50-foot fir that it wanted to give to Bethlehem as a Christmas tree.
The symbolism was pretty obvious.


Tab Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


It's Show Business
With his $10 billion bid for Paramount, Barry Diller of QVC Network Inc. is betting that the big money in television's 500-channel future will be made the old-fashioned way -- by creating the stories, movies and programs that people want to watch.
Without the entertainment and information offerings, all the flashy technology that experts say will soon be heading into homes -- from interactive television to the information highway -- amounts to little more than high-tech plumbing.
And that, analysts say, is what Mr.
Diller, a former movie studio and television network executive, understands so well.
And it explains why he is willing to spend so lavishly for Paramount Communications Inc.


Synercom Technology Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Bridgford Foods (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Dec. 16, with articles about the conclusion of talks on a General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, misstated an estimate made by Myron E. Ullman 3d, chairman and chief executive of R. H. Macy &amp; Company, of the amount that American consumers pay extra for clothing because of tariffs and quotas on imported apparel and fabrics.
He estimated the amount at $46 billion a year, not $46 million.


Giuliani Weighs Return of Control Over Some Services to 5 Boroughs
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani suggested yesterday that he was willing to return to the five boroughs some of City Hall's control over service delivery, and said he had asked the borough presidents to draft plans for an experiment in such decentralization.
Mr.
Giuliani said he would consider decentralization in areas like sanitation, road maintenance and repair, parks and environmental protection, and he pointed out that the Parks Department already has borough-level commanders.


The Sky Is the Limit to the Moves He Can Make


Making Art, Making a Living
More than 100 white pine rings on the surface of the turned wood bowl (right) by PHILIP C. MOULTHROP glow in the White House Library's dim light like golden planets spinning in an inky sky.
Mr.
Moulthrop (above) achieved this innovative effect by gluing on the wooden disks.
Then he filled in the background with darkened wood dust.
"It goes through a lot of sanding and finishing," said Mr.
Moulthrop, 46, a wood-turner and lawyer in Marietta, Ga.
"And it takes four or five times longer to make a bowl like this one than to turn a bowl from scratch."


Some Progress Seen In Talks on Ending Fighting in Bosnia
Talks on ending the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina showed tentative progress on several points today, but European diplomats said the opposing sides remained far apart on other issues and there were few indications that their differences can be bridged anytime soon.
"We have the beginnings of consensus on some points," Willy Claes, Belgium's Foreign Minister, said after a day of meetings here among delegations representing Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia and the Foreign Ministers of the 12 European Community nations.


Topics of The Times; The Pear Tree Index
By the time your true love has assembled all the gifts in "The Twelve Days of Christmas," it will cost him or her quite a bundle.
By one calculation, the bill would come to $72,300 -- up a little from last year.
By another, it would be close to $300,000 -- down a little this year because cows are down.
Cows?
Yes, eight of them, for the eight maids a-milking.
The Wall Street Journal, which has a thing about price indexes, reported both estimates the other day.
The lower one emanates from PNC Bank Corporation, of Philadelphia, which has been tracking these prices for 10 years.
The much higher one belongs to Hugh Gee &amp; Company, a San Francisco brokerage, which has been at it longer and takes a broader approach.
The difference between them is instructive.


Filling a Store With Her Finds
LIKE many imaginative retailers, Mary Vinson (at left) began as an inveterate traveler.
Friends always liked what she brought back from trips to the Caribbean, Africa and Australia, she said, and they didn't have to do the trekking.
Ms.
Vinson recently opened a 3,400-square-foot space in the South Beach section of Miami Beach to house her Island Trading Company Store.
She sells items that she's found on her trips -- jewelry, ceramics and small pieces of art -- as well as clothing that she designs herself, using traditional fabrics and textiles, when possible.


M.I.T. Wins Right to Share Financial Aid Data in Antitrust Accord
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology will be permitted to share financial-aid information with other universities and establish guidelines on interpreting the data under an antitrust settlement announced yesterday by the institute and the Justice Department.
The settlement ended more than two years of legal battles in Federal courts in which the Government contended that M.I.T. and the eight Ivy League colleges had violated price-fixing laws.


Holocaust Deniers Got More Than Visibility; Brandeis Statement
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 12 news article on a Holocaust revisionist ad published in the Brandeis University student-run newspaper distorted my statement by excerpting it.
The reader was left to believe I was primarily concerned with the theft of the newspapers that carried the ad, and that I was minimally attentive to the feelings of students angered by the ad and not at all concerned about the ad's substance and the Holocaust denial movement.


Classical Music in Review
Mendelssohn String Quartet and St. Lawrence String Quartet  Merkin Concert Hall
Eager to attract new audiences, and to appeal to listeners who do not necessarily want to devote a full evening to music, institutions are experimenting with alternative concert formats.
The New York Philharmonic's Casual Saturdays and Rush Hour Concerts are examples.
Another is Merkin Concert Hall's Cocktail Concerts series, four concerts that begin at 7 P.M. and last an hour, with free wine and cheese served before the performance.


Suffolk Executive Seeks to Acquire Robins Island
The Suffolk County Executive, Robert J. Gaffney, said today that he would accept Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's offer to pay half the $9.2 million purchase price for Robins Island and now expected that the uninhabited 445-acre island would be jointly acquired as parkland by the state and county.
Mr.
Gaffney said the county will seek to act on its three-year-old contract to buy the island in a Federal bankruptcy court hearing in Westbury on Tuesday.


The Search, Even by Air, For a '94 Tree
ALREADY?
With people still out shopping?
Who maybe haven't even seen the tree at Rockefeller Center?
What's this helicopter doing buzzing over western New Jersey, with three men scouting out New York's most prestigious tree -- for next year.


Coslet Is No Grammarian
Jets Coach Bruce Coslet wouldn't comment on how much confidence he has in his team heading into the final two games of the season with the playoffs on the line.
He thought it was a loaded question.
But he did comment on whether the team was about where he thought it would be at this point in the season.
"I won't say that," he said.


David Gillespie, 53; Studied Relationship Of Genes and Illness
Dr.
David H. Gillespie, a genetic researcher who advanced the understanding of cancers, AIDS and other diseases, died Sunday in an auto accident near his home in Glenmore, Pa.
He was 53.
At his death, he was the Barry Ashbee Professor of Basic Research at Hahnemann University in Philadelphia.
His work involved searching for viral "footprints" in human and animal cancer tumors.


Advocates for Homeless Meet With Clinton
President Clinton invited about a dozen advocates for the homeless to the White House today to describe what he called a new approach to "one of our most embarrassing social problems."
But the President avoided extravagant promises, choosing his words carefully to acknowledge the difficulty of the problem.


Kansas Trims Indiana In Overtime
Kansas 86, Indiana 83
Freshman Jacque Vaughn hit a 3-pointer with 0.2 seconds left in overtime to give No. 6 Kansas an 86-83 victory over No. 12 Indiana last night in Lawrence, Kan.
It was the fifth straight time the Jayhawks have beaten the Hoosiers.
Damon Bailey had pulled Indiana into an 83-83 tie with 18.3 seconds to go with a jumper that gave him a career-high 36 points, all but 6 after halftime.


Topics of The Times; Where Is Mansour Kikhiya?
Mansour Kikhiya, a former Libyan diplomat who became a dissident and human rights activist, vanished from a Cairo hotel Dec. 10 and is now feared to be in the hands of Libya's secret police.
The Clinton Administration is rightly pressing Egypt to do all it can to assure the safety and freedom of Mr.
Kikhiya, a U.S. national.
Though the main suspicion points to Libya's leader, Col.
Muammar Qaddafi, Egypt's own reputation is on the line.
President Hosni Mubarak maintains an ambiguous relationship with his Libyan neighbor, often working to deflect international punishment of Libyan terror.
More to the point, the police agencies of these two repressive regimes have an unsavory history of cooperation.
Egypt's police have handed over Libyan dissidents to Colonel Qaddafi's agents in the past.


Oracle Shares Tumble 12% On Downgrading of Ratings
Shares of the Oracle Corporation fell more than 12 percent today as analysts downgraded their ratings for the stock.
Oracle, the leading producer of software that manages large computer data bases, has outperformed analysts' expectations in each of the previous six quarters, but has always been a volatile stock.


What Surprise? Friends Say Diller Always Defies Odds
Barry Diller's Hollywood buddies were mostly on their way today to those trendy holiday vacation spots of the movie crowd: Aspen, Maui, the Caribbean.
But as they packed up, the producers and executives who have been awed, intimidated, dazzled and just plain scared of Mr.
Diller are expressing little surprise that the 51-year-old millionaire and former head of Fox Inc. has staged an extraordinary comeback and seems on the edge of taking control of Paramount Communications.


INTERNATIONAL PAPER ACQUIRES A MONSANTO LINE
The International Paper Company said it had acquired the Fome-Cor board business of the Monsanto Company for an undisclosed amount.
The line will become part of the Uniwood business unit in International Paper's Masonite division.
Fome-Cor produces extruded polystyrene foam bonded between various liners.
The products are used in graphic arts, manufactured home construction and the home-improvement and automotive industries.
Shares of Monsanto were up 87.5 cents yesterday, to $73.375, while shares of International Paper were down 87.5 cents, to $66.875.(Bloomberg Business News)


Texaco and Exxon Upheld In $2.8 Billion Tax Claims
The United States Tax Court ruled yesterday that the Texaco and Exxon Corporations would not have to pay close to $2.8 billion in taxes claimed by the Internal Revenue Service on oil that the companies bought from Saudi Arabia between 1979 and 1981.
Texaco was liable for $863 million in taxes and faced additional payments of $2.46 billion in interest.
The claims against Exxon totaled $2 billion in taxes alone.
The company said its interest costs would have been much greater but it had never tabulated the potential interest claim.


Close Adviser to Whitman Is to Be Secretary of State
Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman reached into her inner circle of friends and advisers today for her Secretary of State, choosing Lonna R. Hooks, a pharmaceutical company lawyer and senior aide during Mrs.
Whitman's days in the Kean administration.
The office, one of the smallest and least burdensome in state government, has traditionally been awarded to a governor's political operative, and Ms.
Hooks, who is 35, has already shown herself to be someone Mrs.
Whitman relies upon when the subject is politics.
She was the Governor-elect's chief of staff when Mrs.
Whitman headed the Board of Public Utilities, she was co-chairwoman of the Whitman campaign along with Hazel F. Gluck, and she is a major adviser during the transition period.


Weicker Gets A Subpoena On a Test Deal
Attorney General Richard Blumenthal issued subpoenas today to Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., his top aides, and dozens of other people in and out of state government to turn over all notes, written records and documents in connection with a disputed $150 million state contract to conduct auto emissions tests.
Mr.
Weicker's office indicated that it would comply with the request.
"It is entirely appropriate that, if subpoenas are issued, they should be issued to this office," Mr.
Weicker said in a statement.


Company Reimbursing Excess Fees For Water
A private water company on Long Island that has been the target of consumer protests and government lawsuits agreed yesterday to make $11.7 million in payments to settle pending litigation and state penalties.
Of that amount, $7.1 million will go to customers in Nassau County in the form of credits averaging $260 per household over three years.
The other $4.6 million will go to the City of New York, partly to pay back sewer taxes.


Editors' Note
An article yesterday about intelligence assessments of the military and political situation in Bosnia reported that the C.I.A. had concluded that the economic embargo imposed on Serbia 18 months ago was likely to deteriorate, and that the West would probably have to accept the ethnic partition of Bosnia.
It cited several passages from what it described as a formal C.I.A.
National Intelligence Estimate to support those generalizations.
After the article appeared, a C.I.A. spokesman said the excerpts obtained by The Times were not from a National Intelligence Estimate, but from a C.I.A. memorandum about a symposium at which divergent views on Bosnia's future were expressed.
The Times should have tried to verify that the document represented a C.I.A. conclusion.


Honors
*
Philip G. Ryan, president at Philip G. Ryan Inc., New York, was elected president of the New York chapter of the Public Relations Society of America, succeeding William A. Blodgett. *
Bert C. Roberts Jr., chairman and chief executive at MCI Communications Corp., was named Adman of the Year for 1993 by Advertising Age.


Paramount Bid's Tax Picture
Paramount shareholders have watched the bidding for their company climb, but they may not be aware of the changing tax consequences of the deal.
They are reaping a windfall, but as the bidding has gone up, so have the tax consequences.
Since the initial offer by Viacom Inc. on Sept. 12 of $69.14 a share, stock in Paramount Communications Inc. has soared, closing yesterday at $79.625.
QVC Network Inc.'s revised bid, submitted on Monday and accepted by Paramount yesterday, was for $86.70 a share.


Bed Bath &amp; Beyond Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about the ouster of two Bronx school superintendents misidentified the man shown in some copies.
He is Felton Johnson, one of the superintendents being dismissed, not Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines.


QVC'S HOSTILE BID FOR PARAMOUNT WINS BOARD VOTE
In what could be the final chapter in a long-running and nasty corporate takeover fight, the board of Paramount Communications Inc. agreed yesterday to merge with the partner it had resisted for months: QVC Network Inc.
The endorsement of the $10 billion takeover offer was particularly bitter medicine for Paramount's 64-year-old chairman, Martin S. Davis, who since September had led his board in vigorously rejecting QVC in favor of a friendly and lower bid from Viacom Inc.


Apogee Enterprises (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Sports of The Times; The Gritty Anthony Isn't The Answer
GREG ANTHONY says he wasn't serious, that recently when he expressed a desire to possibly leave the cruel world of professional basketball and buy a farm in Rhode Island or teach at a university, he was only joking.
He said that he started receiving phone calls from his family.
"They were worried when they read that," he said.
"They thought I was really depressed."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  YELTSIN SPEAKS OUT FOR REFORM  Ending a long silence on his setback in parliamentary elections, President Boris N. Yeltsin said he viewed the results as a reprimand to his Government.
But he vowed to stick with his economic reform team.
A1


Pentagon Weighs Aetna Bid
The Defense Department said yesterday that it expected to decide by early next year whether to reconsider a $3.5 billion medical contract it had awarded to the Aetna Life and Casualty Company in July.
The General Accounting Office had criticized the award process for the five-year contract, which covers 840,000 military dependents and retirees in California and Hawaii.
It recommended reopening the bidding under improved rules.


Cintas Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Palace of Toys Finds Profits Elusive
Neither rain, nor sleet, nor snow nor the depths of recession seems to shorten the queue of people shivering outside the F.A.O.
Schwarz flagship store in Manhattan during the holiday season, awaiting a chance to wander through the closest thing to Santa's workshop south of the North Pole.
The "toy" soldier standing at the main entrance salutes to more than 50,000 people each day at this time of year.
Many are tourists who include the Schwarz store at Fifth Avenue and 58th Street on their itinerary in the same way they do the Empire State Building or the World Trade Center.


Isles, Up 4-0, Hang On For Victory at Forum
These things happen when a team is playing well, getting all the bounces, making the most of all the breaks.
How else can one explain tonight's 5-3 victory over the Canadiens, a result that gave the Islanders a five-game winning streak and a six-game unbeaten streak?
After one period, the Islanders were being outplayed and yet they held a 4-0 lead.
Patrick Roy, considered the best goalie in hockey, had left the game with a stiff neck.
After two periods, the Islanders were still being outplayed and they still led, at that point by 4-2.


Isles, Up 4-0, Hang On For Victory at Forum
These things happen when a team is playing well, getting all the bounces, making the most of all the breaks.
How else can one explain tonight's 5-3 victory over the Canadiens, a result that gave the Islanders a five-game winning streak and a six-game unbeaten streak?
After one period, the Islanders were being outplayed and yet they held a 4-0 lead.
Patrick Roy, considered the best goalie in hockey, had left the game with a stiff neck.
After two periods, the Islanders were still being outplayed and they still led, at that point by 4-2.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article in some copies of Business Day yesterday about stock market trading appeared in error.
The article was about Monday's trading, in which the Dow Jones industrial average gained 3.64, not about Tuesday's trading, in which the Dow fell 10.06 points.


Premier Industrial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Aqueduct to Simulcast 5 Races
As a result of legislation passed last week in Albany, the New York Racing Association has devised a format for a daily program of seven live races and five simulcast races from Gulfstream Park in Florida beginning Jan. 4 at Aqueduct.
During the week, the program will begin with three live races from Aqueduct and then alternate five Gulfstream simulcast races with four live Aqueduct races.
The final race will be a simulcast of the feature race from Gulfstream.
Although minor details need to be worked out, it is expected that the weekend program will open with four live races and conclude with two consecutive simulcasts from Gulfstream.


Review/Music; Dissonance? Sounds Like New York
True to their hometown, New York rockers reach for extremes: of speed or sloth, of noise or concord, of complexity or simplicity, of compression or sweep.
Two disparate but extremist local groups, Band of Susans and Barkmarket, headlined the quadruple bill at CBGB on Tuesday night.
Band of Susans practices one of the purest strains of guitar-powered minimalism, a New York tradition that stretches back through Glenn Branca's guitar orchestras of the early 1980's and the Velvet Underground in the 1960's.
The songs use only two or three chords, repeated like mantras, and the band's three guitarists, including the group's leader and main songwriter, Robert Poss, strum power chords and tremolos that resonate until they fill a room with overtones, octave upon octave, chiming and buzzing and shimmering with forceful grandeur.
Mr.
Poss, Mark Lonergan and Ann Husic use their guitars with analytical precision, strumming down by the bridge or up on the neck for just the right mellow or piercing tone.


Wal-Mart to End Sales of Handguns in Stores
Wal-Mart, the nation's largest retailer, said yesterday that it would stop selling handguns in its 2,000 stores because its marketing surveys indicated a majority of customers now feel "uncomfortable" shopping for lingerie, sofas, lawn rakes and teddy bears in the same place where revolvers and semiautomatic pistols are stocked.
"They don't want to be around them," said Don Shinkle, a spokesman for Wal-Mart, with headquarters in Bentonville, Ark.


What's Unafraid of Plastic Owls or Love?
To the Editor:
"Hooting at Owls" (Topics of The Times, Dec. 14) has a hidden lesson in it.
Is there something to learn from pigeons that are not afraid of phony owls?
Pigeons are biblically ancient, so maybe they are Solomon-wise.
We humans look rather foolish, considering all the phone scams, financial scams and real estate scams we gobble up each day.
Pigeons are monogamous, mate for life and make wonderful parents.
There isn't much to brag about in that department for the human race.


Shaving as Easy as 1, 2, 3
IT may look like a ballpoint pen, but it's anything but.
The Pocket Shave, an all-in-one shaving kit made by Totes, is a Wilkinson Sword twin-blade razor with a supply of shaving cream in the handle.


K. Oberholtzer, 89, Leader of Crusades To Improve Schools
Kenneth E. Oberholtzer, an educator who crusaded for the modernization of the nation's public schools, died last Friday at the Kaiser Hospital in Walnut Creek, Calif.
He was 89.
His family said the cause was pneumonia.


Meggett Intensifies Beuerlein Feud
It is safe to say that Giants running back David Meggett and Phoenix quarterback Steve Beuerlein won't be kissing under the mistletoe anytime soon.
Meggett ripped Beuerlein at the Superdome after the Giants beat the New Orleans Saints Monday night.
It could have ended there.
But Meggett escalated the feud today, accusing the Cardinals of making racial comments to quarterback Phil Simms during the Giants-Cardinals game three weeks ago.


Market Place; Betting on bugs that get the sulfur out of crude oil.
THE problem with fossil fuels like coal and oil is that they come out of the ground with unwanted impurities.
The least wanted is sulfur, which is corrosive in refineries and power plants and, when the fuels are burned, is emitted as sulfur oxides that are linked to acid rain.
Indeed, the difference between a desirable "sweet" crude oil and an unwanted "sour" crude is its sulfur content.
But, as the sweet grades are consumed, the average amount of sulfur in the crude oil processed in refineries is rising.
Meanwhile, environmental rules are limiting the amount of sulfur than can be emitted from automobile tail pipes and smokestacks.


A Mystery on Every Plate
"If we are what we eat," as some wit has asked, "what the hell are we?" And how do we find out?
How hard both questions are to answer is dramatized by the Government's recent confession that its bible of food composition, the Department of Agriculture's Handbook 8, is "flawed and unreliable."


A Catalogue Of Victoriana
ITS size and heft -- approximately 13 by 18 inches and 360-odd pages -- make it unlikely that a salesman lugged this catalogue around.
"Maybe it was for shopkeepers and placed in stores for people to look at," said Barry Cenower, the owner of Acanthus Books in New York.


CHRONICLE
REA LUBAR'S Christmas greeting of 1983 is back -- by popular demand.
Ms.
Lubar, a public relations and marketing executive, is renowned among her friends for her parties.
For years, she said, they urged her to put together a cookbook.


Questions for the President


Miscellany
*
Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt Inc., has formed an advertising joint venture with a Chinese Government economic and trade development corporation, called CAL Bozell Strategic Communications.


Jackson Calls Sexual Abuse Charges 'Totally False'
Michael Jackson emerged from seclusion today and, fighting back tears, told a television audience that accusations that he had sexually abused a 12-year-old boy were "disgusting" and "totally false."
Mr.
Jackson also said that the law-enforcement authorities had examined and photographed his body this week as part of their investigation.
The boy who accused Mr.
Jackson of sexual abuse gave the police a detailed description of the entertainer's body, according to various reports.
The description, if accurate, could be significant in verifying the accusations.


Bridge
A survey of the older players of Eastern Long Island was discussed in yesterday's column.
Their lives revolve around bridge, and many will admit that they are addicted.
But they think of it as a positive addiction.
"I did feel my mind slipping," reported one woman after a two-month layoff forced by injury.
Another player who was out of action with an injury was asked if she could imagine life without bridge.
"No, truthfully, I can't. I am able to deal with this period because I know it is short. But if I had to give it up for the rest of my life, I can't imagine such a thing, no."


Taking Office as Mayor, One Party at a Time
The inauguration of New York City's newest Mayor, traditionally a daylong affair, appears to be extending into a weekend full of celebration.
Adding another party to his first weekend as mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that his close friend and deputy mayor to be, Peter J. Powers, would be the host of a New Year's Eve party that aides said would be attended by about 400 people involved in Mr.
Giuliani's arduous campaign and transition.


The Crafts of America Find Recognition at the Top
TWENTY years ago, Leon and Sharon Niehues were part of a back-to-the-land movement.
After they left Kansas for the Ozarks of Arkansas, he worked all day, splitting trees at local sawmills, and at nights and on weekends they taught themselves from a book to make baskets.
Not just ordinary baskets, but lacy, double-walled, two-toned, witty affairs that have been exhibited in museums and galleries from Portland, Me., to Tokyo, and command prices sometimes in the four figures.
The Niehues are among the many crafts artisans now giving ancient technology some modern twists and developing new methods to produce crafts with heightened appeal to the eye and the touch.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a strike at Catholic high schools in the Archdiocese of New York misidentified the school shown.
It was Archbishop Stepinac High School in White Plains.


RIGHTS GROUPS VOW A FIGHT
The Pentagon issued new rules today intended to put into practice its new policy allowing gay men and lesbians to serve in the military so long as they do not engage in homosexual acts and keep quiet about their sexual orientation.
The policy allows gay soldiers to acknowledge homosexual feelings but only if they can demonstrate that they are not engaging in homosexual behavior.
Under the rules issued today, visits to gay bars would not bring about an investigation, but holding hands with someone of the same sex, even while off duty, could.


Raines Signs With Chicago In Deal Worth $11 Million
On a day when some players took cuts in pay to re-sign with their teams, Tim Raines re-signed with the Chicago White Sox yesterday for a $500,000 raise.
Raines, a free agent after completing a three-year, $10.5 million contract with the White Sox, agreed to a new three-year deal for $11 million.


Post Office Considers a 32 Stamp for '95, to Break Even
Even as Americans jam post offices to finish their holiday mailing, the Postal Service is working on a rate proposal that could raise the cost of a first-class stamp to 32 cents in 1995.
Postal Service officials said today that they needed to raise rates in 1995 for the service to break even, as it is required to do over a period of years.
And because of the cumbersome process any increase entails, the service must make its request early in 1994, officials said.


YELTSIN CALLS VOTE A REBUKE BUT VOWS TO PURSUE REFORMS
In his first major assessment of Russia's parliamentary elections, President Boris N. Yeltsin today described the vote as a major reprimand.
He said that he would keep his current economic team and its reform program but that his Government would give more attention to the problems of the poor and introduce a "new, more open style."
At a Kremlin news conference, Mr.
Yeltsin acknowledged the successes of those who had used "primitive nationalism, outright lies and even dangerous provocations," but he avoided direct criticism of the person he saw as the major beneficiary of those tactics, Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky.


What's in a name? A beer maybe, or a garden tool. So much for great old sports traditions.
IMAGINE someday reading this in the sports section:
In baseball, the Atlanta Cokes beat the St.
Louis Budweisers, 6-4.
The Chicago Tribunes defeated the Philadelphia Cream Cheeses, 7-3.
And the Minnesota Cheerios shut out the Detroit Cadillacs, 5-0.


Review/Film: The Accompanist; Eternally in a Supporting Role, A Star Who Is Never Quite Born
Romane Bohringer is about to create a stir.
This plain, baleful-looking young French actress will soon be seen in two very different films, including Cyril Collard's "Savage Nights," which was shown at this year's New Directors/New Films festival and is to begin its commercial run early next year.
Her Cesar-winning performance in that film, as the wild, rebellious teen-age girlfriend of a man with AIDS, could not be less like her demure title role in "The Accompanist," the urbane new film by Claude Miller opening today at Lincoln Plaza Cinemas.
Both performances reveal Miss Bohringer as a demanding, furiously intense screen presence, someone who can behave quite passively and still take up all the oxygen in a room.
She has a raw, desperate quality that seems doubly startling against the sophisticated context of "The Accompanist," in which a veneer of elegance shields the principals from most forms of rude reality.


Seton Hall Survives A Scare From Aggies
To the extent that Seton Hall will have any routine games this season, the one tonight with Texas A&amp;M was supposed to be manageable.
The Aggies came in with a 4-2 record and one of the losses was to Northwestern.
So how tough could they be?
Seton Hall eventually won, 62-55.
But this was a game the Pirates very nearly gave away, and one that underlined the enormous hurdles awaiting them as they approach the Big East campaign.


Cooke Meeting Is Eyed
Gov.
WILLIAM DONALD SCHAEFER of Maryland said yesterday that he would meet with JACK KENT COOKE, the Washington Redskins' owner, to talk about Cooke's plan to move the Redskins to Laurel, even though the Governor insists that the team should remain in Washington.


Knicks Are in Search of Shooting Touch
The Knicks pondered two nagging questions today as they prepared to face the Atlanta Hawks.
Can they improve their anemic offense?
And when will they defeat a quality team?
Thursday night's game at the Garden will be an important test for the Knicks.
The Hawks are the surprise team of the National Basketball Association so far with a 17-5 record.
The Knicks are 16-6, but only 1-5 against teams that are above .500.


Giants' Buckley Moves Inside And Turns the Rush Inside-Out
To switch suddenly from playing outside linebacker to the inside is not as easy as it sounds.
On the outside, the violence is more one on one.
The linebacker takes on tight ends and tackles.
On the inside, he faces running backs, guards, tackles, centers, whoever a team throws at him.
"It takes a hell of an athlete to make a switch from the outside to the inside," said inside linebacker Carlton Bailey.
"I know I would have a hard time with it. I don't know if I could. You've got to hand it to Buck, though."


Skip Holtz Is Hired by UConn
The University of Connecticut introduced its new football coach today, 29-year-old Louis L. (Skip) Holtz Jr., the son of the Notre Dame coach and the offensive coordinator for the team.
Holtz had accepted the appointment made by Lew Perkins, the athletic director, on Monday and agreed to a four-year contract at a salary of $95,000 a year.


Dow Rises 17.04 Points as Blue Chips Rally
Stocks moved higher on a late blue-chip rally yesterday, keyed by a strong bond market that was responding to demand that was better than expected at yesterday's auction of five-year Treasury notes, and pumped up by some program buying.
Until the afternoon, trading had been sluggish, with investors showing little impetus to buy ahead of the Christmas holiday.
Even a slightly higher-than-expected change in the third-quarter gross domestic products revision data failed to draw much of a reaction from the stock and bond markets.


Baby Jesus and the Village Gentry
I'm about to move into an old house in Greenwich Village, in what used to be called the Knickerbocker Ward.
Great name, that.
It's got a Christmas ring to it.
Nostalgic.
You want nostalgia on the holiday.
The house went up in 1825 under the watchful eye of Clement Clarke Moore, the doting father who wrote "A Visit From St. Nicholas." He was senior warden of the Church of St.
Luke in the Fields when Greenwich still had pretensions to being a village and you could still find real fields.


RESULTS PLUS
SKIING  Super-G Champ at 18
Katja Koren, an 18-year-old Slovenian high school student, won the World Cup Super-G yesterday at Flachau, Austria, two days after Jure Kosir scored the young republic's first World Cup victory.
Kosir won the men's special slalom at Madonna di Campiglio, Italy.
Koren's victory caught everyone by surprise.
Bibiana Perez of Italy, another relative unknown on the women's tour, had already completed her interviews as the apparent surprise winner, when the Koren raced down the icy track with starting number 66 for the victory.
Koren won in 1 minute 15.62 seconds, just eight hundredths of a second ahead of Perez. (AP) Another Super-G Upset: A late starting position proved just what Hannes Trinkl needed for an upset victory in the men's World Cup Super-G at Lech Am Arlberg, Austria.
As a late starter, the Austrian junior skier was able to take advantage of improving conditions during the race.
Trinkl, skiing with starting number 51, won the race in 1 minute 1:04.42 seconds, beating another newcomer, Werner Perathoner of Italy, who had a time of 1:05.02.
Armin Assinger of Austria finished third in 1:05.10. (AP) Kazakhstan Star Still Dominates: Vladimir Smirnov of Kazakhstan scored his third World Cup cross-country victory in four races, winning the 15-kilometer pursuit freestyle in Dobbiaco, Italy.
Smirnovhad a winning time of 59:04.9 seconds. (AP) Russian Teams Finish 1-2: Russian teams finished 1-2 in the women's World Cup 20-kilometer relay at Dobbiaco, Italy.
The Russian A team of Larisa Lazutina, Olga Danilova, Lubov Egorova and Yelena Vaelbe, dominated the race in 49 minutes 49 seconds. (AP) WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  No. 1 Drubs No. 10  Tiffany Woosley hit her first six shots and finished with 18 points to lead No. 1 Tennessee to a 94-60 victory over No. 10 Louisiana Tech yesterday in Knoxville.
Woosley made seven of eight shots for Tennessee (8-0).
Vickie Johnson had 21 points and 10 rebounds for Louisiana Tech (6-3). (AP) SOCCER  Germany, Mexico Tie  World Cup champion Germany completed a disappointing North American tour with a scoreless tie against Mexico yesterday before 120,000 fans in Aztec Stadium in Mexico City.
Both squads are in the World Cup in the United States this summer.
Germany lost to Argentina, 2-1, last week at Miami and was unimpressive in a 3-0 victory over the United States on Saturday.
Nevertheless, the Germans finished the year No. 1 in the FIFA rankings. (AP) N.H.L.
Sharks Get a Point  Todd Elik's two goals and Arturs Irbe's 27 saves helped San Jose to a 2-2 tie last night with Toronto Maple Leafs and the Sharks' first-ever point in Maple Leaf Gardens. (AP)


People Don't Stop Being Homeless Till They Find Self-Esteem
To the Editor:
We saw Anna Quindlen's Dec. 16 column, "The Unworthy," about the homeless, and talked about it at lunch.
Although we agree with her that no one should ever be considered unworthy, no matter what his or her situation, we disagree with her basic belief that a home is step one.


South African Parliament Adopts New Constitution
South Africa's Parliament finally approved a new interim constitution, officially ending centuries of white domination, but the proceeding ended on a sour note today as pro-apartheid whites and conservative blacks threatened to boycott the country's first multiracial elections in April.
The legislature's strong endorsement of the constitution -- 237 votes to 45 -- was a boon to the spirits of Government negotiators and leaders of the main opposition group, the African National Congress, who had been badly shaken in recent days by mounting opposition to the pact.


WHERE TO FIND IT
ELECTRICAL outlets, open windows and cabinets filled with cleaning products are pretty innocuous -- until there's a toddler in the house.
Parents and grandparents who want their homes to be safe for young children have several options.
Baby stores and catalogues sell home-safety products, from plastic outlet covers to guardrails for beds.
There are also "baby proofers" -- specialists who make house calls, size up potential problems and then sell and install products.
And some architects offer custom childproof items.


Louis Drefus Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Film: The Accompanist; Eternally in a Supporting Role, A Star Who Is Never Quite Born
Romane Bohringer is about to create a stir.
This plain, baleful-looking young French actress will soon be seen in two very different films, including Cyril Collard's "Savage Nights," which was shown at this year's New Directors/New Films festival and is to begin its commercial run early next year.
Her Cesar-winning performance in that film, as the wild, rebellious teen-age girlfriend of a man with AIDS, could not be less like her demure title role in "The Accompanist," the urbane new film by Claude Miller opening today at Lincoln Plaza Cinemas.
Both performances reveal Miss Bohringer as a demanding, furiously intense screen presence, someone who can behave quite passively and still take up all the oxygen in a room.
She has a raw, desperate quality that seems doubly startling against the sophisticated context of "The Accompanist," in which a veneer of elegance shields the principals from most forms of rude reality.


What's Unafraid of Plastic Owls or Love?; Try Porcupine Wire
To the Editor:
The apartment building on East 69th Street is wasting its time and money trying to scare away pigeons with inflatable owls (Topics of The Times, Dec. 14).
The simple, humane solution to bird control problems is the installation of stainless steel needle wire (also known as "porcupine wire") in areas birds are defacing.


U.S. Gives Haiti's Military Rulers a New Deadline
The United States warned Haiti's military rulers today that it would expand an embargo against the country unless they stepped aside by Jan. 15 and allowed the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to return to power.
The current embargo applies only to oil and arms.
American officials said it could be widened to include restrictions on flights to and from Haiti, as well as other commerce that is not considered vital to sustaining the country's population.


Nassau Supervisors Fail to Approve Budget by Deadline
For the first time in its history, the Nassau County Board of Supervisors has failed to approve a new budget for the next fiscal year by the legal deadline, throwing the county's fiscal situation into disarray.
By law, the board was required to pass a budget by midnight on Monday for the fiscal year that starts Jan. 1, but the deadline passed as members split along party lines over two major issues, control over the county payroll and a Democratic proposal to establish a budget-review office.


'95 Budget Projects Drop In Deficit to $190 Billion
The Clinton Administration in February will propose a Federal budget for the next fiscal year that has a deficit "in the vicinity of $190 billion," the White House budget director said today.
The budget chief, Leon E. Panetta, said the Administration had been able to bring the deficit figure down to that level by making "a number of very tough decisions involving cuts across the board," in keeping with a discretionary-spending freeze voted by Congress last summer.


Review/Opera; A Donizetti Rarity
The operas of Donizetti stretch out to the crack of doom; the indomitable Eve Queler, with her Opera Orchestra of New York, is conquering them one by one.
Having previously given us "Lucrezia Borgia," "Roberto Devereux," "Dom Sebastien" and "Anna Bolena," among others, Ms.
Queler conducted "Linda di Chamounix" at Carnegie Hall on Sunday night.
This 1842 three-acter has a few familiar arias and duets, but it is seldom heard complete, at least in this country.
The concert performance shed light on a neglected score and brought the debuts of several talented young Italian singers.
"Linda" has splendid stretches of music, some of Donizetti's most subtle operatic writing.
It also has one of the more asinine librettos to emerge from 19th-century Italy.
Linda is a peasant girl with a watchful father who pursues a secret love with a seemingly penniless artist.
She goes mad when the boyfriend, actually a wealthy noble, makes plans to marry another woman.
She recovers sanity upon hearing his lovesick apologies.
It's "Luisa Miller" with a happy ending and hapless plotting.


Wings Re-sign Federov
SERGEI FEDOROV, who emerged as one of the National Hockey League's premier players while STEVE YZERMAN has been injured, agreed yesterday to a four-year contract with the Detroit Red Wings.
Terms weren't released.
He was reportedly seeking about $3 million a year.
Fedorov, 24, was earning $295,000 this season and was scheduled to receive $370,000 during his option year next season.


Arabs Kill 2 Israelis, Ending a Lull in Attacks
Two Israeli men were killed in the West Bank by Palestinian gunmen today in a drive-by shooting that ended a 10-day lull in attacks by opponents of the peace talks between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
The killings reignited rightist protests against the Israeli Government and led to raucous demands from opposition parties in Parliament that it break off negotiations with the P.L.O. that are under way in Paris.


Holocaust Museum Adjusting To Relentless Flood of Visitors
The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum here has a problem most museums would envy.
Since opening on the Mall eight months ago, the museum has literally been overwhelmed by the volume, and the long attention spans, of its visitors.
Throughout the summer, average daily attendance at the museum's starkly dignified brick-and-granite building was 4,200 people a day, twice as high as museum officials had expected.
And the visitors were spending an average of three hours, nearly twice as long as expected, in the permanent displays, which document the plight of European Jews from the time of Hitler's rise to power to the close of World War II, when the concentration camps were liberated.


Books of The Times; A Musical Masterpiece And Its Long Evolution
Handel's 'Messiah'  A Celebration  By Richard Luckett  Illustrated. 258 pages.
A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/Harcourt Brace. $22.95.
Considering that no year has passed without Handel's "Messiah" since it was first presented 251 years ago -- at least 21 performances have taken place this month in New York City alone -- one might wonder why "Handel's 'Messiah': A Celebration" is necessary.


Absolute Banana
To the Editor:
"Block That Acronym" (Topics of The Times, Dec. 14) asks about the acronym Banana, "What does the first 'a' stand for?" This facetious successor to Nimby (not in my backyard) expands to "Build absolutely nothing anywhere near anything." The coinage appears unrelated to its meaning, but is not guilty of "acronymic imperfection," as you charge.


Clinton's Staff Mix Business With Pleasure


Violent Playthings: Parents Ponder Choices
Marsha Chambers was sitting in her Brooklyn living room, watching the evening news as she drew up gift lists for her children.
The barrage of reports about kidnappings, murders, drive-by shootings and assaults seemed relentless, she said, and incongruous with the task at hand.
Then she looked down at her 11-year-old son's wish list.
There, between a deluxe Lego set and a Timberland sweatshirt, was a Super Shot Pump-Action Rifle.


Merger Talks Are Denied By Borden
Borden Inc. dismissed speculation yesterday that it was about to be sold, saying it was not holding merger talks with anyone and that it expected to announce details of its third restructuring plan since 1989 early next month.
Trading in the troubled food and chemical company's stock was suspended on the New York Stock Exchange at 2:01 P.M., pending the announcement.
At that point, the stock was up 12.5 cents at $19.25 on heavy volume.


Europe Floods Worst in 45 Years
Waters continued to rise over Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Germany and northeastern France today in the the worst floods in some areas in 45 years.
At least four people have died in the floods and the storms that produced them.
One man was swept away in Belgium today after falling into the Meuse on his bicycle, and a woman who washed away in Germany on Tuesday was still missing.


Lease in Tennis Deal Is Signed by Dinkins
Mayor David N. Dinkins signed a new long-term lease yesterday for the expansion of the National Tennis Center in Queens, which will keep the United States Open tennis tournament in New York City for at least 25 years.
The signing of the accord with the United States Tennis Association culminated more than two years of negotiations and government approvals and it provided Mr.
Dinkins with one of the final formal occasions of his four-year term.


Kansas Trims Indiana In Overtime
Kansas 86, Indiana 83
Freshman Jacque Vaughn hit a 3-pointer with 0.2 seconds left in overtime to give No. 6 Kansas an 86-83 victory over No. 12 Indiana last night in Lawrence, Kan.
It was the fifth straight time the Jayhawks have beaten the Hoosiers.
Damon Bailey had pulled Indiana into an 83-83 tie with 18.3 seconds to go with a jumper that gave him a career-high 36 points, all but 6 after halftime.


Mavs Skid to Record: 20 Losses in a Row
Bucks 96, Mavericks 86
Dallas Mavericks Coach Quinn Buckner says his team isn't getting discouraged by its season-long skid that reached its peak last night in Milwaukee with a record-tying 20th consecutive loss.
"There's definitely reason for optimism," Buckner said after the 96-86 defeat to the Milwaukee Bucks.
"We have some people that we think are going to be with us when we go for the whole deal down the road. I think that's the reason for optimism."


MAJORITY ELUDES LEADER IN SERBIA
President Slobodan Milosevic appeared today to have fallen just short of a majority in Sunday's elections for the Serbian Parliament.
It what had been billed as the announcement of final results, the official election supervising commission announced today that with 98.65 percent of the results counted, Mr.
Milosevic's Socialists had won 123 seats, leaving them 3 seats short of control of the 250-seat Parliament.


Skyline Chili reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Times and New York City Reach Final Accord on New Plant
The New York Times reached final agreement yesterday with New York City to build a $280 million printing plant in Queens, clearing the way for construction to begin as early as next summer on what would be one of the largest manufacturing centers in the city.
The Times, which opened a major printing plant in Edison, N.J., early in 1992 and had considered moving all of its printing operations out of New York City, will build the Queens printing and distribution plant on 31 acres in the city-owned College Point industrial park just west of the Whitestone Expressway.


Omnicom Acquires British Brand Expert
The Omnicom Group said yesterday that it had acquired Interbrand Group P.L.C., an international corporate identity and brand-consulting company based in London, adding that it would eventually merge the American operations of Interbrand with the Schechter Group, its corporate identity and brand-consulting company in New York.
Terms were not disclosed.
Schechter and Interbrand will function as separate operating units of Omnicom during 1994.
In January 1995, Interbrand's American offices, in Chicago, Los Angeles and New York, will merge with Schechter's to form Interbrand-Schechter.
The combined American units would have clients including H. J. Heinz, I.B.M., Mobil, Pepsico and Volvo.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Paramount Deal
Paramount Communications' board agreed to merge with QVC Network.
The board's acceptance of the $10 billion offer is bitter for Paramount's chairman, Martin S. Davis, who had led his board in rejecting QVC in favor of Viacom.  [ Page A1. ]
The Hollywood buddies of QVC Network's chairman, Barry Diller, said his apparent winning bid for Paramount was further proof that what Barry wants, Barry gets.  [ D5. ]


Helene Curtis Picks DDB Chicago Office
Helene Curtis Industries said yesterday that it had selected the Chicago office of DDB Needham Worldwide to handle advertising in the United States for its Finesse, Salon Selectives and Vibrance hair care brands and its Degree line of antiperspirants.
The account, with combined billings estimated at $80 million, had been handled for the last 10 years by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York; the agency and Helene Curtis decided to part ways last month.
Richard W. Frank, the vice president of marketing at Helene Curtis in Chicago, said that DDB Needham Chicago was awarded the account after a monthlong review that involved "a handful of shops," but he declined to identify the other participants.
Adweek reported that Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago, FCB/ Leber Katz Partners in New York, Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York and Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco were among those vying for the account.


Man Held in Son's Death
A Brooklyn man was arrested and charged yesterday with beating his 2-month-old son to death, the police said.
The man, Gregory Chavis, 35, who lives in a family shelter, was charged with second-degree murder and first-degree assault, said Officer Merri Pearsall, a police spokeswoman.
His son, Gregory Chavis Jr., died on Tuesday morning as he was being taken to Woodhull Hospital from the Bushwick Family Residence at 1675 Broadway in Brooklyn, where he lived with his father and mother, Officer Pearsall said.
The baby's body had many injuries, including a broken leg, broken ribs, a broken spine and a cracked skull.
Officer Pearsall said the boy's mother was not charged in his death.


Sunbelt Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lions' Sanders Receives Richest Pact for Runner
BARRY SANDERS of the Detroit Lions became the highest-paid running back in the National Football League yesterday when he signed a four-year deal for an average of $4.3 million per year, one of Sanders's agents, C. LAMONT SMITH, announced.
The pact, for almost $17.2 mlllion, gives Sanders, who was leading the league in rushing when he injured a knee on Thanksgiving Day, almost $1 million a year more than EMMITT SMITH of Dallas earns.


A. H. Raskin, 82, Times Reporter and Editor, Dies
A.
H.
Raskin, an authority on labor whose articles and editorials ran in The New York Times for more than four decades, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 82.
The cause of death was cancer, said his wife, Marge.


Jets' Moore Probably Won't Play at Buffalo
The Jets' plan to step up their offensive production got off to a bad start today.
Receiver Rob Moore, the main target in the deep-passing game, didn't practice this afternoon because of a sprained left foot and doesn't appear fit enough to play against the Bills Sunday.
Moore's probable absence couldn't come at a worse time for the Jets.
To make the playoffs, they need to win their last two games at Buffalo and Houston.
That means they will have to make big plays.
Although he hasn't been used in that role recently, Moore was the Jets' main deep threat early in the season.


New Governor Named For the Bank of Canada
John Crow, whose Draconian anti-inflation policies have made him a political target in a period of double-digit Canadian unemployment, is stepping down as the governor of Canada's central bank, the Government announced today.
But he is to be replaced by his deputy, Gordon Thiessen, a longtime Bank of Canada employee, who is expected to keep the same emphasis on price stability.


High Pay in High-Tech Field Poses a Problem for Clinton
President Clinton, who promised during his election campaign to work to help the high-tech industry and fix runaway executive pay, is being pulled into a nasty lobbying campaign where the two issues are colliding.
His current problem: what to do about high-paid executives in the high-technology industry?


Release the Whitewater Files
The White House is threatening to claim lawyer-client privilege to block the release of documents that, it now concedes, were removed from the office of Vincent Foster, a senior White House official.
The files might provide useful information to Federal investigators and the public about a controversial real estate transaction involving President Clinton and the owner of a failed Arkansas savings and loan association.
They might also shed light on Mr.
Foster's suicide.
Those are two good reasons why they belong in the public domain, not in the hands of President Clinton's lawyers.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
WHEN he was in elementary school, Ron Slaby wanted to be like his favorite cartoon character, Mighty Mouse.
"I remember thinking Mighty Mouse was pretty cool because he was small but could overcome the problems of the world," said Dr.
Slaby, a developmental psychologist at the Education Development Center in Newton, Mass., who studies the effects of television on children.


Skip Holtz Is Hired by UConn
The University of Connecticut introduced its new football coach today, 29-year-old Louis L. (Skip) Holtz Jr., the son of the Notre Dame coach and the offensive coordinator for the team.
Holtz had accepted the appointment made by Lew Perkins, the athletic director, on Monday and agreed to a four-year contract at a salary of $95,000 a year.


Holyfield-Moorer Bout?
The promoter DAN DUVA, saying he could have earned EVANDER HOLYFIELD $20 million for a heavyweight unification fight against LENNOX LEWIS, has instead reluctantly agreed to match his fighter against MICHAEL MOORER for half that amount.
Duva added, however, that "Evander may just decide to say the heck with it and quit."
"The heavyweight division has been thrown into chaos," charged Duva yesterday, after being rebuffed by both the International Boxing Federation and World Boxing Association.
They refused to consider a Holyfield-Lewis bout as a championship battle.
Lewis owns the World Boxing Council crown.


Yanks' Taylor Has Dislocated Left Shoulder
The Yankees' team physician confirmed yesterday that the team's prize pitching prospect, Brien Taylor, had suffered a dislocated left shoulder last weekend, leaving Yankee officials feeling uneasy over the strong possibility of surgery.
Dr.
Stuart Hershon examined the young left-hander at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan and recommended that Taylor have arthroscopic surgery to inspect the area and possibly perform some repair on his left shoulder.


Giants' Buckley Moves Inside And Turns the Rush Inside-Out
To switch suddenly from playing outside linebacker to the inside is not as easy as it sounds.
On the outside, the violence is more one on one.
The linebacker takes on tight ends and tackles.
On the inside, he faces running backs, guards, tackles, centers, whoever a team throws at him.
"It takes a hell of an athlete to make a switch from the outside to the inside," said inside linebacker Carlton Bailey.
"I know I would have a hard time with it. I don't know if I could. You've got to hand it to Buck, though."


Florida Governments Move To Set Teen-Ager Curfews
Alarmed by a surge in juvenile crime, including attacks on tourists, governments throughout Florida are moving to impose curfews on teen-agers.
But police departments have reservations about the idea, and civil liberties groups as well as young people are protesting.
In the latest such instance, the Dade County Commission last week approved, on a vote of 11 to 1, a draft proposal that would prohibit youths under 16 from being on the streets of Miami or any other city in Florida's most populous county after midnight on Fridays and Saturdays and after 11 P.M. on all other nights.
A final vote on the measure is scheduled for Jan. 18.
If passed, as seems virtually certain, it would take effect late next month.
Push for Statewide Curfew
The Dade County measure was inspired by a Dallas curfew that was upheld by a Federal appeals court last month.
In addition to Dallas, several other large cities around the country, including Atlanta, Hartford, Milwaukee, Newark and Phoenix, already have curfews, although the degree of restrictions and the level of enforcement vary from city to city.


INSIDE
M.I.T. Settles Antitrust Suit
Under an antitrust settlement with the Justice Department, M.I.T. can share financial-aid information with other universities.
Page A13.
Castro's Daughter in U.S.
The daughter of Fidel Castro arrived in Atlanta after the United States granted her asylum.
Page A10.
Wal-Mart Curbs Gun Sales
Wal-Mart said it would stop selling handguns in its stores, citing customers' fears, but it will still sell the weapons by catalogue.
Page D1.
Clinton Appoints New Yorker
After rejecting other posts, Harold M. Ickes was named President Clinton's deputy chief of staff.
Page A15.
Michael Jackson Speaks
Emerging from seclusion, the singer denied accusations that he sexually abused a boy.
Page A12.


Euro Disney in Danger of Shutdown
Auditors of Euro Disney said today that the troubled theme park would have to close if negotiations with creditor banks and with the parent Walt Disney Company did not soon result in agreement on a financial rescue.
"The group will need financial support to face its contractual obligations in the 1994 accounting year," said PS Audit, a unit of Price Waterhouse, the big accounting and consulting house.
"If the financial restructuring measures envisaged do not reach a conclusion in sufficient time, the group will have cash problems and will not be able to continue its activities."


Conagra Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Redmen Provide Lessons For Young Niagara Team
It didn't take much.
A few steals here, a couple of slams there and St.
John's rolled to a convincing 89-66 victory over Niagara last night at Alumni Hall.
Niagara (1-6) got off to a horrible start and spent the entire evening trying to recover.
The Purple Eagles' first two shots were off target and their next three possessions resulted in turnovers and led to three Redmen baskets.
Less than five minutes into the game, St.
John's had a 12-1 lead.
Niagara had 14 turnovers in the first half and St.
John's had 9 steals.


Terreri's Start Is Not Inspiring
Jacques Lemaire gave Chris Terreri his second consecutive start for the first time this season, but the experiment was unsuccessful.
Terreri had an uninspired outing on a night all the Devils would rather forget.
He allowed three goals on the first eight shots he faced and the Devils never recovered, losing to the Hartford Whalers by 6-3 at the Civic Center.


Alfred Munier, 78; Worked on Design For Lunar Module
Alfred E. Munier, an engineer who contributed to the space and nuclear-fusion programs during his 47 years with the Grumman Corporation of Bethpage, L.I., died on Dec. 16 at the Carillon House Nursing Facility in Huntington.
He was 78 and had homes in Lloyd Harbor, L.I., and Nantucket, Mass.
He had had a long illness, his family said.


NEW YORKER TAKES HEALTH CARE POST
President Clinton named Harold M. Ickes, a New York lawyer and Democratic Party stalwart, today to be his deputy chief of staff with primary responsibility for orchestrating the health care campaign for the White House.
Mr.
Ickes, 54, had turned down a potentially less influential job last week and was persuaded to join the Clinton Administration after he was given the higher-ranking position.
It makes him a lieutenant to the chief of staff, Thomas F. McLarty 3d, and on a par with Philip Lader, the other deputy.


Raines Signs With Chicago In Deal Worth $11 Million
On a day when some players took cuts in pay to re-sign with their teams, Tim Raines re-signed with the Chicago White Sox yesterday for a $500,000 raise.
Raines, a free agent after completing a three-year, $10.5 million contract with the White Sox, agreed to a new three-year deal for $11 million.


CHRONICLE
CAROLEE FRIEDLANDER, president of a women's jewelry design firm, Carolee Designs, has been elected president of the Committee of 200 for the coming year.
The committee is an organization for women who own companies with sales in excess of $10 million a year or who run divisions of corporations that have sales of more than $50 million.
Now 11 years old, its membership has grown to 350, exceeding its name.


No Headline
"I would not say that the policy that we are implementing here today is the policy that will be forever. Attitudes on this issue have changed a lot in the four or five years. Presumably that change has not stopped. And if changes occur, I would anticipate that further changes might occur in the military." -- LES ASPIN, the Secretary of Defense, on homosexuals in the military.  [ A14:3. ]


CHRONICLE
Is the "Queen of Mean" losing her edge?
Consider this.
Yesterday, after having read about the 1,000 toys for homeless children that were stolen from the Catherine Street Shelter on the Lower East Side over the weekend, LEONA HELMSLEY phoned HOWARD J. RUBENSTEIN, her spokesman.
"She told me, 'I want to replace them all,' " Mr.
Rubenstein said.
"I called the city and asked how much it would take to replace toys for the 5,000 children in shelters, and as a result she and Harry will draw a check for $25,000."


A Mexican General, in Prison, Says the Army Flouts Rights
A public clash between a general and the Mexican Army he says he is trying to reform has landed the general in prison and provided a rare look into one of Mexico's most secret institutions.
Locked behind the rough stone walls of a military prison, the general, Jose Francisco Gallardo Rodriguez, 47, awaits trial on charges that he defamed the army by saying in an article that human rights are violated in Mexico.


A Nasdaq System Is Pared Back
A stock trading system designed to serve small investors was pared back by regulators yesterday because of reported abuses of the system.
The Securities and Exchange Commission agreed to change the rules that govern an electronic small-order system of the National Association of Securities Dealers, which handles Nasdaq stocks.
Fewer shares will be available for investors to trade in the system, and no shares will be available for "short selling," or betting on a price decline, under the changes made yesterday.
The new rules, part of a one-year pilot program, will take effect Jan. 7.


Correction: C.I.A. Says Paper On Bosnia Policy Was a Draft
The Central Intelligence Agency said today that a document described in a New York Times article today as embodying the agency's conclusions on the crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina reflected ongoing discussions among analysts and not the settled judgment of the agency.
A C.I.A. spokesman described the document as an unclassified memorandum summarizing various arguments made at a symposium this month by Government intelligence specialists and academic experts on the Balkans.


Foe Urges Segarra to Leave Post on Board of Education
The Bronx Borough President yesterday accused Ninfa Segarra, a deputy mayor-designate in the Giuliani administration, of remaining silent in the face of school board corruption in the Bronx and called on her to resign as the Bronx representative on the New York City Board of Education.
"Ridding the schools of this cancer was part of your charge of office that you inexplicably chose to ignore," the Borough President, Fernando Ferrer, said in a two-page letter released yesterday.
"Your laxness and failure to respond to these vital issues can only be interpreted as an egregious failure."


Cognac Ads Shifted To Ogilvy &amp; Mather
The Seagram Wine and Spirits Group has unexpectedly moved the global account of its Martell Cognac brand, which has been handled since February 1988 by DDB Needham Worldwide in New York, to Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York.
Billings were estimated in excess of $30 million.
Seagram, in a statement yesterday, attributed the shift to Ogilvy Worldwide's strength in markets like China and Southeast Asia, where the brand has "significant growth potential." Ogilvy Worldwide handles other Seagram brands in this country like Seagram's Gin, Seagram's VO whisky and Seagram's 7 Crown whisky and other company brands globally like Perrier-Jouet Champagne, Sandeman ports and sherries and The Glenlivet Scotch whisky.


How the Deal-Making Began, Officially and Otherwise
The official start of the siege of Paramount came on Sept. 12, the day Paramount and Viacom announced that they would merge in an $8.3 billion cash and stock deal that valued Paramount at $69.14 a share.
But the real start was on April 20, the evening that Martin S. Davis, the chief executive of Paramount, accepted an invitation to dinner with Sumner M. Redstone, Viacom's chief executive.
That night, they dined in the Manhattan offices of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
Only days earlier, Robert Greenhill, the investment banker who had arranged the dinner, had faxed a memorandum to Mr.
Redstone about the man who would be his chosen merger partner.


Donors Send Money Found on Street and in Subway
Last year, Toni Sennott of Manhattan read about a family in Pearl River, N.Y., that saved $64.62 in coins found on the sidewalks, on the floors of restaurants, or entombed in the cushions of their couch.
Just after Christmas, the family sent the money to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
This year, Ms.
Sennott decided to do the same to teach her 8-year-old son about the difficult lives of people who really must subsist on coins found or given.
"Despite some embarrassment on the subway steps, when we stopped traffic for a penny, we persisted," Ms.
Sennott wrote recently.
"And to our surprise, when we counted it last night, it came to $31.50."


Seton Hall Survives A Scare From Aggies
To the extent that Seton Hall will have any routine games this season, the one tonight with Texas A&amp;M was supposed to be manageable.
The Aggies came in with a 4-2 record and one of the losses was to Northwestern.
So how tough could they be?
Seton Hall eventually won, 62-55.
But this was a game the Pirates very nearly gave away, and one that underlined the enormous hurdles awaiting them as they approach the Big East campaign.


Country Wide Transport Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Look, Up in the Sky, It's a Bird . . . They Hoped


Board Endorses Air Unions' Bid To Buy United
Clearing an important hurdle in their bid to create the nation's largest employee-owned company, two unions at United Airlines won approval yesterday from the airline's board for their $5 billion proposal to gain majority control.
Labor leaders at United, the nation's largest airline, now face the task of selling their offer to stockholders of United's parent company, the UAL Corporation, as well as to members of the pilots' and machinists' unions.


Accounts
*
Eye Care Centers of America, San Antonio, to the Richards Group, Dallas, and Advanswers Media/Programming, St.
Louis, to handle the creative and media portions, respectively, of its $8 million account, previously at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Chicago. *
Corporate Software Inc., Canton, Mass., to Orsatti &amp; Parrish, Boston, to handle the microcomputer software company's advertising and direct marketing account, previously handled on a project basis.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.


Mavs Skid to Record: 20 Losses in a Row
Bucks 96, Mavericks 86
Dallas Mavericks Coach Quinn Buckner says his team isn't getting discouraged by its season-long skid that reached its peak last night in Milwaukee with a record-tying 20th consecutive loss.
"There's definitely reason for optimism," Buckner said after the 96-86 defeat to the Milwaukee Bucks.
"We have some people that we think are going to be with us when we go for the whole deal down the road. I think that's the reason for optimism."


Russian Nationalist Stirs Up a Storm in Germany
Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, the Russian nationalist politician whose ties with German right-wing extremist groups have led newspapers here to call him "the Russian Hitler," spent the day with a former SS volunteer in Austria today and canceled an interview on German television.
He stirred up controversy in Germany all the same.


First Pacific
Shares of First Pacific Networks have risen 30 percent since the company announced an agreement last week to supply equipment for the first combined telephone and cable network in Moscow.
First Pacific, along with a division of the General Instrument Corporation, was selected by Mosteletechnic Ltd., a Russian company whose shareholders include the Moscow City government and Global One Telecom of Clearwater, Fla.


Earth Technology Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Super Rite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Live Christmas Evergreens
My holiday mail bag is stuffed with queries on the pros and cons of buying a live evergreen tree for Christmas and later planting it outdoors.


What's Unafraid of Plastic Owls or Love?; New Bird in Town
To the Editor:
Re "Hooting at Owls" (Topics of The Times, Dec. 14): There's indeed one owl, temporarily in the New York City region, that can scare away city-bred pigeons.
I give you the great horned owl, which with strong talons as sharp as ice picks can kill any bird or mammal worthy of its notice.
Not even an eagle would come to grips with this owl.


Panthers Finish Off Richter's Streak
Mike Richter's unbeaten streak came to an end in a 3-2 loss to the Florida Panthers tonight.
And the player most responsible was the goaltender from whom he won the Rangers' starting job, John Vanbiesbrouck.
The Beezer, as he was known to Ranger fans during his 10-year stay in New York, stopped 33 of 35 shots and protected Florida's one-goal lead by turning aside 16 shots in the third period.


Resorts Urge Changes in Federal Rent Rules
A user-fee policy for collecting rent from ski areas on United States Forest Service land has created a sizable controversy within the ski industry.
But there's one point on which most agree: something needs to be done soon to overhaul the system.
"Everybody is really fed up with it," said Tom Corcoran, president of Waterville Valley Resort, a 255-acre ski area in Waterville Valley, N.H.
"It was designed more than 20 years ago to be equitable, but it has brought up inequities."


Hillhaven Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


ON THE WAY HOME WITH: Diane Von Furstenberg; Always Room For Old Beaus
THE dark green Jaguar was on its weekend run from Fifth Avenue in Manhattan to the hills of Litchfield County.
Behind the wheel, a woman with major cheekbones and a quirky European accent was talking about "Christmas in Connecticut."
Not the 1940's movie in which a magazine writer (Barbara Stanwyck) and a war hero (Dennis Morgan) find love under the mistletoe -- not that celluloid chestnut.


Classical Music in Review
'La Cantata dei Pastori'  I Giullari di Piazza Here 145 Avenue of the Americas (near Spring Street) South Village
"La Cantata dei Pastori," a musical play that is being presented around town by the traditional Italian theater group I Giullari di Piazza, is a rarity among Christmas programs: it somehow manages to be both riotously entertaining and curiously haunting, even profound.
The source is a 17th-century Neapolitan shepherd's play, blending the story of Mary and Joseph with characters out of commedia dell'arte (the clown Razzullo, also known as Pulcinella) and more ancient legend (La Befana, the good witch of Christmas).
The plot concerns the efforts of various devils and demons to foil the birth of Jesus, with Razzullo caught in the middle.
The music -- tarantellas, villanellas and pastorales -- comes from various traditional sources.


Traders-In Are Getting $100 in Toys
Two hours after a Manhattan businessman offered to trade toy-store gift certificates for guns, an 18-year-old man and 23-year-old woman walked into a police station yesterday carrying a .25-caliber handgun and claimed their prize.
The two were the first to heed the call by Fernando Mateo, owner of Carpet Fashions Floor Coverings Inc., for New Yorkers to turn in their weapons to the police.
They went to the New York Police Department's 34th Precinct station house with the gun tucked inside a Christmas-card box and stuffed in a backpack.


Beware the Simple Pay Phone
HOW much does it cost to make a one-minute telephone call to the East Village from a pay phone in midtown Manhattan?
The price could be anywhere from 25 cents to $3.25 or more, a variation that is now common for local calls, depending on who owns the phone, who provides the service, whose building the phone is in and, perhaps, how foolhardy the caller is.


Holocaust Deniers Got More Than Visibility; Return to Sender
To the Editor:
I was disappointed that the Brandeis University student newspaper accepted an ad from a Holocaust denier (news article, Dec. 12).
Last month my high school newspaper, The Cardinal Times, received the same ad in a priority mail package.


Chancellor Backs Dismissed Superintendents
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday sought to persuade two corruption-plagued Bronx school boards to extend the terms of their reform-minded superintendents rather than dismiss them, but acknowledged that he has little power to prevent their ouster.
School officials said Mr.
Cortines considered suspending the boards this week in order to renew the superintendents' contracts himself, but put aside that option, at least for now, because state education laws are clear that local districts have the power to hire superintendents.


Clinton Defends Inman on Taxes
President Clinton said today that Bobby Ray Inman, the retired admiral he has nominated for Defense Secretary, should have paid the delinquent Social Security taxes he owed before he was approached for a Government job, but that he was satisfied that Mr.
Inman was still fit to serve.
"Obviously I can't say that I agree with the way Admiral Inman handled that," Mr.
Clinton said in an interview with radio reporters at the White House.
"I think people should just pay, but the fact is that what he did and how he did it was pretty much the same as some other people who had been nominated."


Pharmhouse Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Free Trade at the Movies Puts U.S. in New Role
To the Editor:
In "High Noon at Uruguay Gulch" (Editorial Notebook, Dec. 13), Karl E. Meyer defends French foot-dragging on the demands in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade concerning United States access to Europe's audiovisual market and France's insistence on a cultural exception.
The question has, at any rate, now been deferred (front page, Dec. 15).


Met-Coil Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


CLINTON TO YIELD ALL OF HIS FILES ON LAND DEALINGS
After several days of intense discussions with his closest advisers, President Clinton said today that he would instruct his lawyers to give investigators all documents relating to an investment that he and his wife made in an Arkansas land development company before he became President.
Senior Justice Department officials have said that they wanted to examine files on the land deal that were removed from the White House office of Vincent W. Foster Jr., a longtime friend and aide of the Clintons, after he killed himself in July.


Phillies Sign Dykstra To Contract Extension
LENNY DYKSTRA, who nearly led Philadelphia to a World Series title last season, has reached agreement on terms of a $24.9 million, four-year contract extension that runs through 1998.
On average annual value, the outfielder's contract would be the seventh-highest in the major leagues and the highest in Phillies history.


Alfin Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Medicus Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Man Is Killed in a Holdup
A man was shot and killed during a robbery in the Bronx last night, the police said.
The man, Louis Escarlante, 35, was shot by a robber inside the L &amp; S Bodega at 282 East Gun Hill Road in the Norwood section of the Bronx, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey.
Mr.
Escarlante, a co-owner of the store, was apparently there alone shortly after 7 P.M., when the robber came in and shot him, Sergeant McCluskey said.
The police said it was not immediately clear how much money or other property had been stolen.


Carl's Jr. Account To Grey Advertising
Carl Karcher Enterprises of Anaheim, Calif., said yesterday that it had selected the Los Angeles office of Grey Advertising to handle the estimated $20 million account for its Carl's Jr. fast-food restaurant chain.
Grey was awarded the account after a three-month review that also included two other Los Angeles agencies, Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners and Medelsohn/Zien Advertising.


Neediest Cases Builds a Child's 'Oasis'
There was an uneasy silence as more than 200 anxious children sat on stools and bleachers, staring at the empty leather wing chair at the Dunlevy Milbank Children's Center.
But when plastic bags full of boxy lumps were dragged across the floor on Wednesday afternoon, some could not help but break the rules and let out a gasp or a long "Aaaah."


Led by Scientists, Chiron Turns to Another
After a courtship of nearly four years, the Chiron Corporation has named Dr.
David W. Martin Jr. to the new position of senior vice president and president of the global therapeutics business.
Chiron first tried to hire Dr.
Martin, who is 52, in the fall of 1990, when he was senior vice president for research and development at Genentech Inc.
But Dr.
Martin instead accepted a position as executive vice president for research and development at the newly formed Du Pont Merck Pharmaceutical Company.


Apartheid's Edgy Sunset
It was once widely predicted that apartheid would end only with a bang in South Africa; whites used to talk of a "night of the long knives." It ended instead on Wednesday in Cape Town with a vote: 237 to 45.
By that margin, a Parliament elected by a white minority approved an interim Constitution that for the first time extends the franchise to South Africa's huge black majority.
A multiracial transition regime will now oversee the country's first truly democratic elections next April.
But the success of this experiment hinges on the response of three aggrieved groups each capable of wielding those knives.
Die-hard whites, ranging from Afrikaner separatists to fanatic racists, threaten a "liberation struggle" unless they are given an autonomous homeland.
Allied with them is Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi and his Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party.
The third group consists of leaders of apartheid-engendered homelands who cling to the fiction of their "independence" and the reality of their patronage powers.


Journey's End reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Denver's Blue Christmas
After Denver malls received violent threats against their Santas, area children were invited to visit St.
Nick at police stations.
Page A12.


Leetch an All-Star Starter
Brian Leetch of the Rangers was voted a starting spot on the Eastern Conference team for the National Hockey League All-Star Game, which will be played on Jan. 22 at Madison Square Garden.
Leetch was elected to play in the fourth All-Star Game of his career (he missed last year's game because of an injury) with a total of 176,129 votes.
He will be paired on defense with Ray Bourque of the Boston Bruins, who led all players in the balloting by fans with 227,601 votes.
Bourque will be making his 13th All-Star appearance.
Darius Kasparaitis of the Islanders was the third among defensemen with 114,108 votes.


Town &amp; Country reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


At the Bar
As law libraries go, the one at the University of Texas Law School is particularly agreeable.
Softening all the usual dreary tomes and tables are innumerable prints, textiles, masks and other objets d'art.
Of even greater appeal to bleary-eyed students, however, is a niche on the main floor.
It is there that they watch the exploits of Groucho Marx's Thaddeus J. Loophole, Walter Matthau's "Whiplash Willie" Gingrich and hundreds of other fictional lawyers on film.
"This is the part that keeps me sane," one student told a visitor.


Crown Casino Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Conpak Seafoods reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jets Earning Black-and-Blue Badges of Courage
Both of Jim Sweeney's ankles are badly sprained.
Dwayne White's ankles aren't any better.
Jeff Lageman has a herniated disk in his neck, and his shoulder is severely sprained.
Boomer Esiason has a twisted knee, a stiff neck and aching ribs.
The common denominator for all of them is that they are in terrible pain, but they will play for the Jets against Buffalo on Sunday.
"There are a lot of other guys that people don't even know about," said Lageman.
"Some guys may have a torn rotator cuff and the only other person on the team that knows about it is the trainer.


TSR Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Markets Closed
All domestic financial and commodity markets will be closed today in observance of Christmas Eve.
Some overseas markets will be open.
Normal trading will resume Monday.


Jets Reward Johnson by Giving Him a Contract Extension of $5 Million
A few weeks ago, Boomer Esiason said that Johnny Johnson was the best off-season acquisition the Jets made this year.
They certified that opinion today by giving Johnson a two-year contract extension worth $5 million and an option for the 1996 season.
The Jets' president, Steve Gutman, said that 22 percent of Johnson's contract -- or about $1.1 million -- will not count against next season's salary cap, which will be close to $39 million per team.
Johnson received $1.1 million up front, which means that he will have earned $2 million by the end of the season.


Restaurant Reviews
Restaurant reviews, news and advertising, normally in Weekend, appear today on pages A20-21.


Review/Photography; Observers of America in an Unlikely Pairing
The most intriguing aspect of "Walker Evans and Dan Graham," the provocative if disappointing show now at the Whitney Museum of American Art, is that it brings together the work of two artists whose names have probably seldom been mentioned in the same breath.
Evans, who died in 1975, was the magisterial photographer best known for his Depression-era studies of poor farm families in the American South, published with James Agee's text in the classic book "Let Us Now Praise Famous Men" (1941).
Mr.
Graham is an artist and critic who has worked in many forms since the 1960's, including videotapes, critical essays and architectural installations.


Nassau Board Approves Budget Reducing Taxes on Homeowners
The Nassau County Board of Supervisors compromised on several major issues today and approved a $1.8 billion budget for 1994 that will mean slightly higher taxes for businesses and slightly lower taxes for homeowners, county officials said.
The board, which missed a budget deadline on Monday, overcame a major roadblock by approving a Democratic proposal to establish a committee of fiscal experts to oversee the county's day-to-day financial operations.


Journey's End reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
COMPANY REPORTS ** Journey's End
Qtr to Oct 31
1993
1992
Revenue
12,000,000
12,200,000
Net inc
456,000
888,000
Share earns
.04
.09
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Aikman on Receiving End of $50 Million
Troy Aikman, the Dallas Cowboys' 27-year-old quarterback, agreed yesterday to an eight-year, $50 million contract that will make him the highest-paid player in professional football history.
The contract includes an immediate signing bonus of $11 million.
The agreement was reached at 4:15 A.M. in a telephone conversation between Jerry Jones, the Cowboys' owner, and Leigh Steinberg, the agent for Aikman.
It replaces the last two years of Aikman's original contract, which would have paid him $1.17 million this season and $1.37 million next season.
Those salaries would have left him no higher than the 31st highest-paid quarterback in a 28-team league.


Broderbund Stock Tumbles on Growth Concerns
Despite earnings that met or exceeded analysts' estimates, Broderbund Software Inc., the leader in home entertainment software, saw its shares drop sharply today after the company offered a cautious view of its growth prospects.
Broderbund, based in Novato, Calif., is known for its older titles like "Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego?" and for its popular newer Living Books series of interactive animated children's stories sold in the CD-ROM compact disk format.


The Spoken Word
TALKS AT THE WHITNEY, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"Walker Evans and Dan Graham," Sunday at 2 P.M.
"In a Classical Vein," Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
The lectures, by Richard Meyer, are free with museum admission: $6; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3611.
ART AT THE MET, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
"Understanding Modern Art," by Gail Stavitsky, today at 11 A.M.; "Portraits of Power," by Shirley Glubok, today at 3 P.M.; "Portraiture in Ancient Egypt: The Fayum Mummy Panels," by John McDonald, Sunday at 11 A.M.
Free with museum admission: $6; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.
TALKS AND WALKING TOURS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, near Delancey Street.
Sunday: "How We Lived: Life in a New York City Tenement," a lecture, 11 A.M.; "Immigrant Story," a drama, noon, (admission: $10, $8 for the elderly and $5 for students); "Tales From Many Lands," a storytelling show, 1 P.M. (admission: $5; $3 for children); "The Streets Where We Lived," a tour of the Lower East Side, 2 P.M.; "House of Heritage," a slide show on the history of 97 Orchard Street, 3 P.M.
Lectures and slide shows: $4, or $3 for children; walking tours: $12, or $10 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 431-0233.


Who Really Runs Japan? Stay Tuned
The smoldering battle between the independent-minded bureaucrats who have controlled policy making here and a new Government that has insisted politicians should set the nation's course burst into the headlines this week when a Cabinet minister did the unthinkable: He forced a top bureaucrat to resign because of his reported interference in politics.
Thus another showdown between elected representatives and career civil servants came to a climax.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a visit by Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, the Russian nationalist politician, with a former SS volunteer misstated the location of Reichenfels in some copies.
It is in Austria, not Germany.


'Fatah Hawks' Impose Order As Israelis Stand By in Gaza
An AK-47 automatic rifle slung over his shoulder, Khaled Tafish sauntered down a street in the Shabura refugee camp here with two armed companions.
Dozens of young men with pistols tucked into their belts nodded in greeting.
One tossed a hand grenade up and down in his hand.


Robert Matthews, 73, A Judge in New Jersey
Robert A. Matthews, who served 25 years as a judge on a series of state courts in New Jersey, died on Wednesday at the Princeton Medical Center in Princeton, N.J.
He was 73.
The cause was complications after cancer surgery, said his wife, Karen Thompson Matthews.


Review/Film: Heaven and Earth; A Woman's View Of Vietnam Horrors
MAKING his third film about the Vietnam War and its consequences, Oliver Stone suddenly finds himself on foreign terrain.
The reason: "Heaven and Earth," his latest and least controversial film on the subject, tells its story from the standpoint of a Vietnamese woman.
This is a tale of extraordinarily melodramatic hardship, involving rape, torture, disgrace, prostitution and a disastrous marriage to an American G.I., all heightened by the despoliation of the heroine's homeland.
Her name is Le Ly Hayslip.
But considering all these perils, it could have been Pauline.
A computer could have suggested that after describing the American soldier's combat experience ("Platoon") and its aftermath ("Born on the Fourth of July"), Mr.
Stone might round out his work with a shift of gender and nationality.
But a computer would not have factored in the essentials of Mr.
Stone's style.
His best direction is volatile, angry and muscular in ways that Ms.
Hayslip's story, that of a resilient, long-suffering victim, simply cannot accommodate.
Mr.
Stone tells this tale vigorously, but he has the wrong cinematic vocabulary for his heroine's essentially passive experience.


Survival Technology (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Anchor Lamina reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Dr. Milton I. Levine Is Dead at 91; Accented Lovingness of Mothers
Dr.
Milton I. Levine, a pediatrician in Manhattan who offered advice on raising children to several generations of parents, died on Wednesday in St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 91.
The cause was heart failure, said his grandson, Franz Paasche.


For Children
Model Train Exhibition
New York Botanical Garden  200th Street and Southern Boulevard  The Bronx  (718) 817-8700  Recommended for all ages  Through Jan. 2
The people at the New York Botanical Garden have been boasting about their model-train display since late November.
So on a rainy, raw afternoon, my 5-year-old son and I trekked up there.
We fell in love with it.


RUSSIAN RIGHTIST ANGERS GERMANS
Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, the Russian nationalist politician, touched off a chorus of angry calls to bar him from Germany today after threatening to invade Bosnia if the Turks intervened in the war there and asserting that the Russian military had a secret weapon that was more destructive than nuclear bombs.
Mr.
Zhirinovsky, whose party received extensive support from the military in the parliamentary elections on Dec. 12, said the Russian Army had what he called an Elipton weapon that could destroy the entire world.


Cortines Gives Administrators $6.5 Million for School Repairs
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday gave New York City public school principals and superintendents new powers to authorize some long-ignored minor repairs, along with $6.5 million to pay for them.
Under the plan school officials will be able to authorize an average of $6,500 in minor repairs on each school without needing a review by an elaborate bureaucracy.
The new repair program is the first part of Mr.
Cortines's broader plan to decentralize school operations for efficiency.


On Stage, and Off
Shoes' Makes Way
Didn't take long.
Yesterday, less than a week after "The Red Shoes" closed up shop at the Gershwin Theater, Garth Drabinsky, the president of the Live Entertainment Corporation of Canada, said that, as expected, he would fill the void with his revival of Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein's "Show Boat," now onstage in Toronto.
The only surprise in the announcement was that New York performances would not begin until next season.
Opening night has been scheduled for Oct. 2.
"Obviously we would have liked to come in on the wave of Tony hysteria, as we did last year," Mr.
Drabinsky said, speaking about "Kiss of the Spider Woman," the Tony-winning musical that Live Entertainment brought to Broadway last spring.
But the show is doing so well in Toronto, he said -- sales are about $1.5 million a week, with the total advance approaching $11 million -- "that I feel we're in for a very long run there."


Sir Philip Christison; General, 100, Took Japanese Surrender
Gen.
Sir Philip Christison, the British commander to whom the Japanese surrendered in Singapore at the end of World War II, died on Tuesday at his farm in Melrose in southern Scotland.
He was 100 and the oldest living British general.
Much decorated in two world wars, he lived through some of the fiercest fighting in both.
In 1944, his troops inflicted the first decisive defeat on the Japanese in Burma, now Myanmar.
It was the beginning of a Japanese rout and the reversal of what had been a disastrous Allied campaign.


AutoInfo Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Tokyo Journal; Silent Empress, Irate Nation (and Contrite Press)
Emperor Akihito did not quite call this an "annus horribilis" for Japan's royal family.
There have been no divorces -- there has never been one -- no secret tapes, not a hint of scandal.
There was even a huge royal wedding, the biggest in three decades, ushering in a brilliant American-educated Crown Princess.
But when Emperor Akihito stepped out on the balcony of the Imperial Palace this morning to greet thousands of well-wishers who came to celebrate his 60th birthday, and declared that the year had been "severe," everyone knew he was talking about more than just the economy.


Most of the Nets' Shots Find Nothing but O'Neal
The last time the New Jersey Nets played the Orlando Magic, they were beaten in good part by Shaquille O'Neal's ability to block shots -- he rejected 15.
Tonight, the Nets lost again, largely because of O'Neal's skill at dunking his shots and rebounding New Jersey's.
O'Neal had 34 points and 15 rebounds in leading the Magic to an easy 122-112 victory at Orlando Arena.
O'Neal was joined by rookie guard Anfernee Hardaway, who scored a career-high 31 points, 17 in the first quarter.
In essence, the Nets dug themselves a hole from which escape was just about impossible.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  LIFE CHANGING IN GAZA STRIP  While Israeli and Palestinian negotiators try to work out the fine points leading to an Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, life on the ground has already changed.
Israeli troops have quietly ceded whole sections of the sprawling Gaza refugee camps to Palestinian guerrillas, who four months ago were hunting Israeli soldiers and living on the run.
A1  HAITIAN PLANS MIAMI TALKS  Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, announced that he was organizing an international conference in Miami on Jan. 15 to help restore democracy to his country, but U.S. officials declined to endorse the talks because they excluded the military.
A3


Engle Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Thatcherism Killed British Coal Mining
To the Editor:
"Cannock Journal: Coal Has a Great Fall, Dragging Miners With It" (news article, Dec. 14) chronicles the end of a chapter in British history with the disappearance of the coal industry.
But you omit the main theme, Margaret Thatcher's politically motivated, Government-orchestrated social engineering.


Flamemaster Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Lois Guarino Robert Mann Gallery 42 East 76th Street Manhattan Through Jan. 8
A mystical air hangs over many of Lois Guarino's combination photographs, in which she mixes images of herself dressed in flowing gowns with celestial maps, phrenological charts and photographs of sculptural heads, for example.
With their blends of symbolic elements, her pictures are like autobiographical Tarot cards.


Van Kampen Merritt Trust for Investment Grade Muni reports earnings for As of Oct 31


Knicks Lose A Quarter But Find Momentum
Greg Anthony described the Knicks' dreadful third quarter last night as "A Nightmare on Elm Street." Actually, it resembled an episode of "The Twilight Zone."
Fortunately for the Knicks, they escaped.
Overcoming an 8-point third quarter, their lowest scoring ever in Madison Square Garden, the Knicks rallied for an emotional 84-75 victory over the Atlanta Hawks.
The Knicks held the Hawks to the fewest points by an opponent this season and tied Atlanta for the best record (17-6) in the Eastern Conference.


Microlog Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


It's 1990 All Over Again For Simms
Phil Simms has a long memory and a short fuse.
Even in a time of plenty -- the Giants' 11-3 record, a playoff berth and a division title within their grasp -- Simms came close to flaring up today during a discussion of what the season has meant to him.


Interphase Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Art in Review
Anish Kapoor Barbara Gladstone Gallery 99 Greene Street (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Jan. 8
Anish Kapoor seems to be dispensing with some of the visual tricks and easy seductiveness that have plagued his art.
His new pieces, while not without problems, are among the best work he has done.


Troopers Who Accuse the President Are Questioned on Their Own Pasts
For almost a week, two Arkansas state troopers have held the attention of the White House and much of the national press by saying they had firsthand knowledge that the President is a power-happy philanderer.
But until lately, the troopers, Larry G. Patterson and Roger L. Perry, had been spared the sort of questioning that has been directed at President Clinton's personal life.
Now, under closer scrutiny, it is apparent that they have had credibility problems of their own in the past.


Now on Knicks' Wish List: Manning and Jackson
Among the many moves the Knicks are interested in pursuing to repair their broken lineup is a megadeal with the Los Angeles Clippers that would not only bring the All-Star forward Danny Manning to New York but the former Knicks point guard Mark Jackson as well.
A person familiar with Knicks management said last night that the deal, while still in stage of being formulated, could send forward Charles Smith, a former Clipper, back to Los Angeles, along with forward Anthony Mason and guard Greg Anthony.


Robotic Vision Systems reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Art in Review
Howard Hodgkin Knoedler &amp; Company 19 East 70th Street Manhattan Through Jan. 15
Taken one at a time, the best of the paintings in this show of 24 works by the English artist Howard Hodgkin are as shockingly eye-popping and suave as anything he has done: "Lovers" (1984-92) is a big work by Mr.
Hodgkin's standards, at roughly 6 feet square, its enfolding curves of sherbet orange and green sweeping out of the picture onto its painted frame as if they were figures on television leaping from the set into the living room.
The thick, lustrous blue-black painted frame of "Patrick Caulfield in Italy" (1987-92) offsets a riot of blue, yellow, orange and green daubs and swirls.
"Kathy at the Ritz" (1991-93) and "Home" (1988-91) are virtual grenades of color, packing the same elaborate repertory of gestures into smaller formats.


Rule Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Inside Art
Good Marks for the Year
Sotheby's and Christie's are ending 1993 on a positive note.
Both companies released their year-end sales figures this week and business is up from last year.
Sotheby's reported sales of $1.32 billion, a 17 percent increase from last year's total of $1.13 billion.
Christie's sales totaled $1.09 billion this year, a 3 percent increase from last year's $1.06 billion.
"The art market has turned a corner," said David Tyler, Christie's finance director.
"Certainly these figures give us grounds for optimism in 1994." Both auction houses reported a surprising increase in jewelry sales, as well as steady improvement in sales of Impressionist and modern paintings.
This year's top-selling painting was Cezanne's "Still Life With Apples," from 1890-94, which sold on May 11 at Sotheby's in New York for $28.6 million.
Appraising the Situation
Christie's has been in the hot seat recently.
In Manhattan Surrogate's Court, the auction house has had to defend the appraisals it did for the Andy Warhol estate and its main beneficiary, the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts.
Outside the courtroom, but nonetheless an offshoot of the Warhol trial, Christie's has found itself in the uncomfortable position of having to explain the appraisal it did for the photographer Robert Mapplethrope's estate.
And a recent affidavit from a former Christie's employee has further muddied the waters.


In Battling for Biotech, Monsanto Is the Leader
As the range of products produced by biotechnology grows, so do the stakes in the battle to convince consumers that there are greater benefits than risks in tampering with nature.
For the next few months, at least, the Monsanto Company is destined to lead the battle.
Monsanto, the diversified chemical company that makes Ortho lawn and garden products and Nutrasweet, finds itself at the biotech front line because it won the race against companies like Eli Lilly, Upjohn and American Cyanamid to alter bacteria genetically into mini-factories producing a cow hormone called bovine somatotropin, or BST, that stimulates milk production.
Monsanto received Food and Drug Administration clearance for its Posilac brand of BST last month and can begin selling it to American farmers on Feb. 3.


Some Details Emerge on United Deal
Details emerged yesterday about the proposal by unions at United Airlines to gain control of the carrier, but industry analysts said they would have to wait several weeks before they had enough data to evaluate the offer.
For example, according to information provided by the company and the unions, the employee stock ownership plan that will hold 53 percent of the stock of United's parent, the UAL Corporation, if the deal is consummated, will result in new accounting methods for UAL.
That change makes estimating future earnings difficult.


Continental Pharma reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Transactions
Baseball  National League
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Agreed to terms with Jim Tatum, infielder, on a minor-league contract.
NEW YORK METS -- Named Mookie Wilson roving minor-league instructor and community liason.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Signed Rod Higgins, forward. Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Agreed to terms with Chris Jacke, kicker, on a three-year contract extension.
Re-signed Darryl Ingram, tight end.
Placed James Willis, linebacker, on injured reserve.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Signed J.J. McCleskey, receiver, to the active roster.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed Carlton Haselrig, offensive lineman, to a contract extension.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Agreed to terms with Jim Lachey, tackle, on a five-year contract extension and Ricky Sanders, receiver, on a three-year contract extension.
Hockey  National Hockey League
HARTFORD WHALERS -- Recalled Mike Lenarduzzi, goaltender, from Springfield of the American Hockey League.
East Coast Hockey League
DAYTON BOMBERS -- Placed John Roderick, defenseman, on the 14-day injured reserve list, retroactive to December 19.
Swimming
U.S.
SWIM TEAM -- Named Jon Urbanchek men's coach, Richard Quick women's coach, Ron Ballatore men's assistant coach and Mark Schubert women's assistant coach for the 1994 World Championships.


URS Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A Stunning Resignation At Baxter
Vernon R. Loucks Jr., chairman and chief executive of troubled Baxter International Inc., said today that James R. Tobin, the man Wall Street once regarded as likely to be his successor, would leave the company and its board immediately.
Mr.
Tobin, 49, had been president and chief operating officer since 1992.
His promotion to the position came after he received glowing reviews for overseeing a two-year cost-cutting restructuring in the company's domestic hospital supply business, which streamlined Baxter's distribution system and eliminated 4,000 jobs.
For the last month, since Baxter announced another revamping because of declining profits, Mr.
Tobin had been part of a four-man "office of the chief executive" with Mr.
Loucks and two executive vice presidents, Lester B. Knight and Tony L. White.


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
Hardy Partiers
NRBQ, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
It will be hard to find a better party anywhere.
The band, whether it's New Year's Eve or not, take the idea of carnival, of excess and celebration, to the limit.
They'll play a weird hybrid of country, jazz, blues and rock-and-roll, with the Beach Boys and Sun Ra thrown in for some surrealism.
They'll be joined by Terrance Simien and his Mallet Playboys, a rocking Louisiana zydeco band.
There are two shows: the first, at 7 P.M., costs $20; the second, at 11 P.M., costs $40 and includes a Champagne toast at midnight.
Both shows have a two-drink minimum.
PETER WATROUS Rhythm and Reggae
Rosco Gordon, 200 Fifth Avenue, Park Slope, Brooklyn, (718) 638-2925.
The pianist, singer and songwriter, best known for his rhythm-and-blues hits "No More Doggin' " and "Just a Little Bit," helped invent reggae in the late 1950's and early 1960's with his off-balance, syncopated sense of rhythm.
Then he vanished, only to turn up over the last five years running a dry-cleaning business in Queens.
He's a solid rhythm-and-blues performer, and a good pianist who has written some classic songs.
He'll be joined by -- and this is a fine idea -- some members of the Skatalites, once Jamaica's finest studio band.
The show starts at 11 P.M.
There is a $10 cover and a $25 minimum.
P.
W.
Classic Blues
Jimmy Witherspoon, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, near 17th Street, Manhattan, (212) 475-0049.
One of the last of the great blues shouters will treat an audience to the classic stanzas of the blues.
He can have a sweetness to his voice as well, and he's always ready to improvise on jazz standards, all of which will come with a blues nastiness to them.
Sets are at 8:30 and 11 P.M. and at 1 A.M.
There is a $25 cover and a $10 minimum.
P.
W.
Zanzibar Guitar
Matt (Guitar) Murphy, Zanzibar, 73 Eighth Avenue, near 14th Street, West Village, (212) 924-9755.
Before this guitarist was saddled with leading the Blues Brothers Band, from the movie of the same name, he was an exceptional blues guitarist who made James Cotton's mid-1970's band rock.
He's all speed and texture, and he uses whirling lines that can cause a commotion.
There are two sets, at 10:30 P.M. and 12:30 A.M. , and $75 gets you a four-course meal and Champagne, while $35 lets you stand at the bar.
P.
W.
Time-Warped Tunes
Michael White, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
Mr.
White, a clarinetist, leads what may be the best New Orleans-style band in jazz.
It's polyphonic, with tight ensemble parts giving way to the raucous group improvisations that bray and holler.
He has become a New Year's tradition at the Vanguard, and hearing his band invites audiences into a time warp; it makes a listener understand why the music so quickly became the popular dance music of its era.
There is a $40 cover and a $20 minimum.
Sets are at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M.
P.
W.
Piano Man
John Hicks, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
He's a florid pianist who always plays like he's never going to play again, and wants to get everything he knows in by the last chorus.
He'll be backed by the bassist Santi Debriano and the drummer Victor Lewis, who is one of jazz's greatest living drummers.
It will be interactive, a three-way musical conversation at its best.
The show starts at 9, and for $120 there is a five-course dinner and Champagne.
From 1 to 4 A.M., the cover is $20 and there is a $15 minimum.
P.
W.
Two Wily Veterans
Nancy Wilson and Gato Barbieri, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-0049.
Ms.
Wilson can be a viscerally moving performer, one of the best singers to graduate from Dinah Washington's vocal finishing school.
She can be smooth or rough and nasal, and both stances imply emotion.
Mr.
Barbieri is a showman whose best recordings, made in the 1960's, have a hard power.
The 7 P.M. show, for $180, includes a four-course meal and Champagne.
At 1 A.M., the $120 tickets include breakfast and Champagne.
P.
W.
Ulmer Power
James Blood Ulmer, Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
This year is Mr.
Ulmer's fifth New Year's Eve at the Knitting Factory, which sounds a bit like a tradition.
The guitarist has recorded with everyone from Ornette Coleman to Art Blakey and Joe Henderson.
His current music, which makes use of drones and odd tunings, is as distinct as anything that walks the planet.
It's hard-rocking, slippery music, charged with power.
Sets are at 9 and midnight, and the $20 cover buys a free drink and a Champagne toast.
P.
W.
Dark Side Sounds
Stephen Scott, Down Beat, 70 Grove Street, off Sheridan Square, Greenwich Village, (212) 620-4000.
Mr.
Scott is the most austere pianist of his generation, somebody who plays the dark side of every tune.
The music comes out moody and emotional.
He's anything but glib, and his sense of space is wonderfully Monkish, elegant and relaxed, yet taut.
He's a young master.
There are three sets, at 9 and 11 P.M. and at 1 A.M.
The $35 cover includes two drinks plus Champagne and party favors.
P.
W.
Adderley's Band
Nat Adderley, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-1785.
One of the best working bands in jazz features Mr.
Adderley's cool sound on horn, and Vincent Herring's explosive soloing on alto and soprano saxophones.
The rhythm section includes Rob Bargan on piano, Walter Booker on bass and Jimmy Cobb on drums and it swings with authority.
It's mainstream jazz at its most exciting.
The show starts at 9 P.M. and $99 includes dinner, Champagne and party favors.
The late show, which starts at 1 A.M., has a $25 cover and a $25 minimum, and includes a Champagne toast.
P.
W.
Trio at Zinno
Junior Mance and Kirk Lightsey, Zinno, 126 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 924-5182.
Mr.
Mance, a bluesy, sophisticated pianist, will open with a solo set at 6 P.M.
He'll be followed by a trio led by the pianist Kirk Lightsey and including Cecil McBee on bass and Marcus Belgrave on trumpet.
The first show features a dinner, for $25.95.
The second show, which starts at 8:30 P.M., costs $80 and includes dinner and Champagne.
P.
W.
Visiones, in the Village
Cecil Brooks 3d, Visiones, 125 Macdougal Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 673-5576.
Mr.
Brooks, a good young drummer, always leads swinging bands, and this one includes the trumpeter Jack Walrath and the pianist James Weidman.
Jeanie Bryson, a singer, will be on hand as well.
Sets are at 8:30 and 11 P.M. and at 1:30 A.M.
The first set has a $12 cover and a $10 minimum; the second, a $25 cover and a $10 minimum, and the 1:30 set has a $10 cover and $10 minimum.
For $100, stay for three sets and have a full dinner and Champagne; $65 buys three sets, three drinks and a Champagne toast.
P.
W.
Sharp in SoHo
Elliott Sharp, Nick and Eddie, 203 Spring Street, at Sullivan Street, SoHo, (212) 219-9090.
Mr.
Sharp, a guitarist and fixture of the downtown experimental scene, will be leading a trio that shows his roots.
From 9:30 to midnight, he'll be playing jazz standards.
At midnight he'll start playing blues.
The $75 ticket includes a four-course dinner and a Champagne toast.
P.
W.


Waiting in the Cold for a Hot Meal


Lewis R. Koller, 98; Was Physicist for G.E.
Dr.
Lewis R. Koller, a retired physicist who developed supersensitive photoelectric devices and equipment for the General Electric Company, died yesterday at the Josephine M. Lilly Care Center in Falmouth, Mass.
He was 98 and lived in Falmouth and Cambridge, Mass.
Dr.
Koller was a native of New York City.
He graduated from Cornell University in 1917 and then earned a Ph.D. in physics there in 1921.
After postgraduate studies in Cambridge, England, he joined General Electric's Edison Lamp Works in Harrison, N.J.


Crown Andersen reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Van Kampen Trust Insured Muni reports earnings for As of Oct 31


Fed Relaxes Discount Rules For Stocks at Bank in South
In another small move lifting restrictions on banks offering a full line of financial products, the Federal Reserve yesterday allowed the First Union Corporation of Charlotte, N.C., to give discounts on stock brokerage commissions to customers who keep minimum balances on deposit.
The Fed granted the bank an exemption from a 1970 law meant to prevent banks from restricting their lending to those who buy other services they offer.
In 1990 the Fed allowed banks to offer discounts on credit cards to depositors.


On My Mind; Female Genital Mutilation
On the desk is a brand new report on violation of human rights around the world.
It is one of the most saddening documents of its kind I have read -- for what is not in it.
In its 389 pages the report details human rights abuses country by country.
It includes a special report devoted to the particular human rights problems of women.


Journey's End reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Clinton Accusers Facing Scrutiny
For almost a week, two Arkansas state troopers have held the attention of the White House and much of the press by claiming knowledge that the President is a power-happy philanderer.
The troopers, Larry G. Patterson and Roger L. Perry, have been spared the sort of personal questions raised about President Clinton.
But under closer scrutiny, it is apparent that both men have had credibility problems.


Free Trade at the Movies Puts U.S. in New Role; Since Adam Smith
To the Editor:
"How Free Trade Prompts Growth: A Primer" (front page, Dec. 15) asserts that the "nearly universal conviction that open trade drives global prosperity rests more on observation than on well-developed theory." Not so.


Medicus Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


In Denver, Santa's Elves Wear Blue
Across the wall from a jail cell, 6-year-old Jessica Olsen sat on Santa's lap and shared her Christmas wish list, while an elf in a police uniform waited nearby with candy canes.
"I know why Santa's in the police station," the girl whispered after sliding off the bearded man's lap.
"A bad man said he was going to hurt him."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The Homeless Give an Anthem New Meaning for the Holidays
ADVERTISING'S power to provoke people to take action is diminished, even debased, by tasteless, often witless, advertisements intending to shock solely for shock's sake.
Now, though, there is a timely reminder, in the form of an emotional public service announcement with a most unlikely premise, of what advertising can accomplish when it is provocative for good reason.
The idea of a television commercial featuring homeless people singing "New York, New York" sounds like a skit from a satire on the excesses of Madison Avenue.
But just such a spot has become one of the most remarked on, and remarkable, examples of the puissance of public service advertising.


How a Classical Music Radio Station Gave Up the Ghost
To the Editor:
In case you missed it, on Dec. 17, around 11:45 P.M., the sweet sounds of Haydn's "Farewell" Symphony came to a close on radio station WNCN in New York City.
A few commercials, and then the general manager announced that WNCN would permanently go off the air, to be replaced by WAXQ.


Met-Coil Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Midnight Mass Comes Early As Urban Fear Battles Faith
In the days leading up to Christmas Eve each year, the Rev.
John Flynn, the pastor of St.
Martin of Tours Roman Catholic Church in the Bronx, gets a few calls asking when Midnight Mass begins.
It is not a trick question.


Accounts
*
Boston Cable Co-op to Rossin Greenberg Seronick, Boston, to handle its account, previously at Cuneo Sullivan Dolabany, Boston.
Billings were estimated at $3.5 million.


INSIDE
Economic Revival Continues
The economy continued to rejuvenate last month, with orders for durable goods surging and personal incomes and spending rising.
Page D1.
Towns Freed of Cleanup Cost
In a blow to companies in pollution cases, a judge in Connecticut said towns do not have to help pay to clean up toxic waste in dumps.
Page B1.
Health Care, the Game
Brimming with ideas for recasting the health care system?
A new computer simulation game shows how they might work.
Page A16.
Quarterback Hits Pay Dirt
The Dallas Cowboys and Troy Aikman agreed on a record eight-year contract worth $50 million.
Page B9.


New Gay Policy Isn't Last Word For the Troops
In the bachelor's quarters at Fort Wadsworth, the naval station on Staten Island -- and at other military installations across the country -- the debate over allowing gay men and lesbians in the military raged as strongly as ever yesterday, the day after Defense Secretary Les Aspin spelled out the Pentagon's new rules on homosexuality.
Most of those interviewed had only a vague idea of what was and was not allowed under the new rules.
But that did not diminish the intensity of their feelings.


Microlog Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


This Revolution Will Be Televised
Norman Braman wants to congratulate himself. Go ahead, Norman.
"A few of us saved the league $800 million or a billion dollars," said Braman, the owner of the Philadelphia Eagles.


Interphase Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Art in Review
James Lee Byars Michael Werner Gallery 21 East 67th Street Manhattan Through Jan. 7
James Lee Byars is an American-born artist who spent the 1960's in Japan and has since lived mostly in Europe.
His work has received a bemused reception in New York, partly because his spare sculptural installations (for one of them he painted a gallery all gold) are out of sync with recent art trends and partly because they depend for their effect on some knowledge of his career as a performance artist.


Flamemaster Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Complex Care reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


ARISTIDE ORGANIZES HAITI CONFERENCE
Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, said today that he was organizing an international conference in Miami on Jan. 15 to help restore democracy to Haiti, but American officials declined to endorse it because it excluded the Haitian military.
Facing pressures from the United States to set up a broad-based conference, Father Aristide backed a more limited meeting that would bring together Haiti's pro-democracy forces and representatives of the United Nations and Haitian refugee groups.


Alexander Mackendrick, Director Of Guinness Comedies, Dies at 81
Alexander Mackendrick, the director of the classic British film comedies "The Ladykillers," "Tight Little Island" and "The Man in the White Suit," died on Wednesday in Los Angeles.
He was 81.
The cause was pneumonia, said F. X. Feeney, a friend and the film critic of L.A.
Weekly.


Vans Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Review/Dance; Ailey Troupe's South African Lament
Political times can change.
It is possible to hope the day may come when Alvin Ailey's "Masekela Langage" will be viewed as a melancholy period piece, rather than as a depressingly topical social comment.
The work of 1969, to recordings by the South African trumpeter Hugh Masekela, was part of an all-Ailey program offered by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater on Wednesday night at the City Center.


Pettibone Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Engle Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Free Trade at the Movies Puts U.S. in New Role; The Mexican Case
To the Editor:
William Safire, in "Hold That GATT" (column, Dec. 9) opposes France's attempts to limit Hollywood penetration of its market, stating, "the French public prefers the American product." This is questionable.


Journey's End reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
COMPANY REPORTS ** Journey's End
Qtr to Oct 31
1993
1992
Revenue
12,000,000
12,200,000
Net inc
456,000
888,000
Share earns
.04
.09
Results are in Canadian dollars.


A Decorated Tree to Satisfy Every Christmas Longing
Here is a look by Karen Schoemer at a cross section of Christmas trees in Manhattan.
Hours are included for trees inside museums or office buildings. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Metropolitan Museum
Fifth Avenue at 82d Street, (212) 535-7710.
Hours: Sundays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; closed Mondays, Christmas Day and New Year's Day.
Open Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve: 9:30 A.M. to 4:45 P.M.
MONIKER: The Medieval Tree.
GETTING THERE: It's inside the museum, so you have to pay the suggested donation ($6; $3 for the elderly and students).
GENERAL ENVIRONMENT: Situated in the Medieval Hall, that solemn, cavernous first-floor gallery with high ceilings, pillars and an enormous metal gate dividing the room.
Wan light trickles in from some faraway, high-up source.
Strange, severe artifacts gaze down from walls and pedestals: pale, delicate tapestries of forest scenes, rounded counte nances of the Virgin Mary, statuettes of bearded and red-coated fellows with fixed, accusing stares.
This hushed, darkened sanctuary has the effect of making people behave as if they were walking through some ancient church or monastery: voices drop to low tones; laughter evaporates; expressions reflect the imposed reverence.
SIZE AND SHAPE: Tall and skinny, stretching up toward that distant source of light.
BEST VANTAGE POINT: As you enter the Medieval Hall, the tree unfolds like some proud, elaborate artwork unto itself.
DECORATIONS: This really is a rather highfalutin specimen: it has its own explanatory text posted nearby.
To be precise, we're dealing with a Baroque Neapolitan Christmas Creche, produced in Naples in the second half of the 18th century.
Dozens of figurines are spread around the base of the tree: shepherds with sheep, kings mounted upon elephants and camels, slaves carrying bundles of wood, oxen poking their heads out from behind lower branches, deer, goats, donkeys, rearing horses.
Bodies are made of wrapped twine and wire, and the attire is original 18th-century costumes: the rich guys have great big, pillowy hats and children carrying their garment trains, while the poor folks are suitably dressed in rags.
The heads and shoulders were made by Neapolitan sculptors, and there are even architectural backgrounds nestled among the branches: tile-roofed houses, vine-draped walls, a Baroque fountain, the remains of a Roman temple.
Scattered on the ground is that mossy green stuff, like the kind you see in model train sets.
The branches are decorated with angels in different-colored robes, holding little electric candles and incense.
Cherubs are poised in flight.
They seem to be literally bursting out of the interior of the tree.
OF SPECIAL NOTE: The manger is set up on the temple steps at the front of the tree.
According to the text, this is meant to represent the triumph of Christianity over ancient religions.
So this tree comes with a moral.
STAR: Gold-and-silver tinselly starburst.
HOW PEOPLE REACT: With utter fealty and deference.
Patrons of the Met come to pay homage to this tree.
Middle-aged intellectual types with spectacles down on their noses give private dissertations among their friends.
"We come every year," effused one fatherly type.
"This is our favorite thing." "It's beautiful," breathed another.
A gray-haired woman in a plaid dress said to her companions: "I'm sure there's a postcard in the store. If we can't get one today, I'll send one to you." Even the children seemed impressed: they scampered around, oohing and ahhing at the different animals.
SOUNDTRACK: Gregorian chants and medieval carols echo through the air.
NEARBY ATTRACTIONS: Now that you've paid admission, why not enjoy the rest of the museum?
Take in a couple of Rembrandts and Rubenses.
Admire the installation of the antique French storefront.
Marvel at van Gogh, the punk rocker of art history.
And if you need a real respite from all this decorum, find yourself a couple of Winslow Homers, which will knock you out with their simplicity and emotional directness.
OVERALL BESTOWAL OF CHRISTMAS SPIRIT: A very big deal. New York Public Library
Fifth Avenue at 42d Street; (212) 869-8089.
Holiday hours: Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.; Monday and Thursday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Tuesday and Wednesday, 11 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
Closed Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, New Year's Eve and New Year's Day.
MONIKER: No special name, although a scientist studying this sort of thing might dub it the Ornithological Tree.
GETTING THERE: One must endure the crush of the Grand Central area, but the library itself is done up with great festivity.
Even the lions wear wreaths around their necks, embellished with bows and lights.
GENERAL ENVIRONMENT: The tree is installed in the vestibule, opposite the front doors and between the stairwells.
It's a pretty addition to the noble, neo-classical design of the room, with its vaulted ceiling, white marble archways and pillars.
The interior features more holiday touches: pine garlands, big red bows, menorahs.
SIZE AND SHAPE: Kind of prickly and pointy, rising up a good portion of the two-story hallway.
BEST VANTAGE POINT: It's quite nice to sit on the marble stairs and watch the people come and go around the tree.
DECORATIONS: This tree is so generously decorated you can hardly see any green.
Hundreds of electric candles poke out from the tips of branches, giving the tree a vaguely pagodalike look.
There's a dusting of fake snow on the needles, plus the glitter of tiny white lights.
The real attraction are the ornamental birds in a variety of poses and sizes: bluebirds with spread wings, cardinals with cocked heads, giant yellow-eyed owls with speckled feathers, screeching blue jays.
Some birds are nesting; others seem poised for flight.
There are brown birds and white birds, pink birds and yellow birds.
More birds grace the pine rope garlands, which keep spectators at bay.
Fake snow is sprinkled on the ground; birds hop through it.
Birds, birds, birds!
You could go a little bird-crazy looking at all of them.
OF SPECIAL NOTE: I tried to get a little more information from a kindly-faced woman at the information desk.
With her gray hair pulled tight in a bun, ivory skin and Christmasy red sweater, she seemed pleasingly evocative of the Mrs.
Claus type.
Are the ornaments old?
I asked her, and she looked a bit confused.
"No, no," she answered.
"This is the same tree we have every year. I haven't been informed that it's anything unusual. A few years ago, three, four years ago, we had a very special tree, a Japanese tree that was all made out of paper." Origami?
"Yes, yes. All handmade. It was very beautiful. But this is just your simple, ordinary tree."
STAR: No star on top. Nothing.
HOW PEOPLE REACT: Most stop for a moment on their way into the library.
A few parents bring their children in especially to see the tree.
Elderly women with scarves on their heads and several shopping bags in their hands stand and gaze admiringly.
SOUNDTRACK: The scuffle of feet, the hum of busy voices, the muffled roar of Fifth Avenue traffic.
NEARBY ATTRACTIONS: Millions of books, magazines and periodicals, as well as the Dead Sea Scrolls exhibition.
OVERALL BESTOWAL OF CHRISTMAS SPIRIT: Functionally sound.
This tree may not warrant a special trip (unless you're an ornithologist), but for those passing through the library it's a welcome reminder of the season.
Lincoln Center
Broadway at 65th Street. Lights go off at 1 A.M
MONIKER: You might call it the Symphony Tree.
GETTING THERE: Easy, except at peak performance hours.
GENERAL ENVIRONMENT: Situated in the Fountain Plaza.
And really, woefully little has been done to dress the place up otherwise.
A couple of small potted trees with white lights stand around, but other than that, the tree rises up stark and lonesome from its concrete bed, uncomfortably evoking those suburban housing developments where each tract of land has been flattened and cleared of vegetation except for a single transplanted tree.
It somehow looks lost and unnatural, all alone there in that big empty plaza.
Unadorned steel barriers surround it, adding to the alienation factor.
Cables anchored to the ground hold it in place.
SIZE AND SHAPE: Smooth, trim. A great big triangle.
BEST VANTAGE POINT: From a distance -- hurtling down Broadway in a speeding cab, for instance -- it's nice to look up and see the tree flash past.
But up close, it's a little disappointing.
DECORATIONS: Covered from tip to foot with bright-colored lights: red, blue, purple, gold, green.
Interspersed among them are weird shapes in white lights that are meant to be the outlines of musical instruments and related motifs.
However, the shapes are so nebulous that it kind of defeats the purpose.
A little girl was walking by, holding her father's hand.
"Guitars!" she screamed.
Well, no, actually, they're violins.
"Saxophones!" she shrieked.
Wrong again, that's not a saxophone, it's a -- what?
Bassoon?
Wait -- it's a trombone!
Yes!
And an anatomically incorrect trombone at that.
It's missing a mouthpiece, so it looks rather like a giant white paper clip that flares at one end.
A friend and I were intently studying a couple of big white blobs in the northeastern region of the tree.
We crept up to the metal barriers.
We were the only people there.
"Oh, I get it," said my friend, after several moments' pause.
"Look, you can see the pale outlines of the shapes underneath the lights. Those aren't blobs. They're drama masks." Lo and behold, he was right: we could faintly make out these tracer patterns with the faces of comedy and tragedy.
Then there were these thin, somewhat vertical blobs.
My friend said they were conductors with raised arms about to bring down their batons.
To this day I do not quite believe him.
OF SPECIAL NOTE: On the far side of the tree there is in fact a guitar, but it's much smaller than the violin.
So does that mean the violin is actually a viola?
How about a cello?
Oh, my, how confusing.
STAR: A white snowflake light on top.
HOW PEOPLE REACT: A couple walked up with their arms around each other.
Although it was only about 5:30 on a weekday afternoon, few people racing through the plaza were stopping to look at the tree, which made its metal barriers seem all the more pointless.
"Wow," said the man.
Strangely, he was looking not at the tree but at a point in the night sky.
"Wow, it's a beautiful moon tonight," he said.
SOUNDTRACK: All the music is sequestered inside the buildings.
NEARBY ATTRACTIONS: All of Lincoln Center.
All of Columbus Circle.
Record stores, movie theaters, clothing stores, anything!
Just keep moving.
OVERALL BESTOWAL OF CHRISTMAS SPIRIT: This symphony might need a little bit more work.
Japan Airlines
655 Fifth Avenue, at 52d Street. Spotlights on 24 hours a day.
MONIKER: The Origami Tree.
GETTING THERE: Ack!
Midtown Manhattan on Christmas Eve!
Tourists from all lands stampeding between Rockefeller Center, Bergdorf Goodman and F. A. O. Schwarz!
This is no New Yorker's idea of a smart place to be.
But believe me now: it's worth it.
GENERAL ENVIRONMENT: The tree is just inside the Japan Airlines office, but the enormous picture windows allow an excellent view.
For peak festivity and communal experience, stand out front and press your nose against the glass.
SIZE AND SHAPE: Exactly 12 feet 7 inches.
The shape is a perfect cone: no branches sticking out, no spindly parts on top, no sagging or irregular branches.
As perfect as geometry.
Every available square millimeter of surface space is covered with origami ornaments of incalculable variety.
And get this: the tree turns.
That's right, it spins on some unseen, highly technological axis.
BEST VANTAGE POINT: From a distance, it's impossible to discern the details of the literally thousands of origami ornaments; the tree looks like one giant crumple of paper.
Even from up close, the details are still nigh impossible to sort out, but certainly the closer the better.
DECORATIONS: As you stand outside watching the tree turn, a few of the bigger, more obvious ornaments begin to stand out.
Like the gorilla holding an old-fashioned, Y-in-the-middle subway token.
Or the Statue of Liberty, surrounded by a circle of little stars.
There are green origami cactuses and silver dive-bombing airplanes.
Red lobsters and pale blue sailboats.
Dinosaurs, a rhinoceros and flying dragons.
As you look at it a little longer, strange, cryptic shapes begin to pop up.
Handbags.
Cameras.
Shoes.
Plus lots and lots of red hearts, all made from paper.
As I was standing on 52d Street, trying to get a handle on all this, I heard a polite voice over my shoulder.
"Can I help you?" said the voice.
There was an older fellow in a bright red, hooded jacket and a tweedy snap-brim cap, looking at me out of a pair of sky-blue eyes.
"Do you have any questions about my tree?" said the fellow.
He craned his neck and peered at my notebook.
"What are you writing?"
"Your tree?" I said. "Did you make all the ornaments?"
"I made 90 percent of them: I made all except the ones that are by the person who originally designed them," he said.
He was off and running, just from that one question.
"My name is Michael Shall," he continued.
"This is my tree. I designed it and put the ornaments up. Every day I go in there and clean and care for it and clean off the pretzel crumbs. That's because people point and say, 'Look at that one!' " He flung his arm out to demonstrate tourists pointing with pretzels in their hands.
"I just got back from Holland, where I did a 46-foot origami tree," he offered.
"It was trimmed by mountain climbers hanging down on ropes."
He smiled in the warmest, most persuasive way.
"I'm an origami specialist," he said.
"I want the whole world to fold paper."
Mr.
Shall went on to dispense an incredible wealth of information, not just about his tree but about himself.
He said he had been in his unusual profession for 17 years and that he had decorated some 99 trees.
He is the origami specialist for the American Museum of Natural History, and he designs its origami tree, too, but he doesn't personally trim it.
The Japan Airlines tree gets a fanatical amount of care.
Sure, at first it appears to be a random assortment of designs.
But Mr.
Shall has constructed his tree with the meticulous precision of a Shakespearean sonnet.
Every ornament means something to him and is juxtaposed with ornaments with related meanings.
"Look, you see right there, where it says 'I Love A.M.N.H.'?" he said.
"That's because I love the Museum of Natural History. And you see the figure placed just below it? That's the president of the museum waving her arm, saying, 'Come to my museum!'
"You see that cat down there?" he said, pointing to an ornament near the bottom on the tree.
"That cat has a clipped tail. That's because it's my cat, and he lost his tail during the trimming of the tree. He had a tumor and had to have it removed. I had to come in and fold the tail down. Would you like a peppermint?" He offered me a Life Saver.
"You see that one there? That's King Kong holding a subway token. You see over there? That's a pair of pears. Right down there, I have the inside of my house. I have an ornament for everyone in my building. Edna, she's my landlady. That shoe over there, that's for a woman in my building who likes to wear incredibly high heels."
He said there were more than 5,000 pieces of origami altogether on and around the tree, and that the trimming took him 240 hours.
He pointed out a clown in the upper reaches of the tree.
"You see that one?" he said.
"That's me."
OF SPECIAL NOTE: The origami creche at the base of the tree.
"Someone from a newspaper came to take a picture, and they said: 'Where's Jesus? There's no Jesus in the manger,' " Mr.
Shall recalled.
"I said: 'Of course not. That's because it's not Christmas yet.' " Mr.
Shall leaned forward and divulged a bit of secret information.
"He's asleep under the manger," he admitted.
"I keep him there because one year I lost the baby Jesus. I was up all night on Christmas Eve frantically folding a new one."
STAR: A brightly, sparkling gold star.
A side note: the tree is officially called "Paper Magic: The Origami Holiday Tree." Mr.
Shall's designs are not creed-specific.
HOW PEOPLE REACT: Look, I can't vouch for everyone, but I was completely enthralled.
SOUNDTRACK: Find Mr. Shall and allow him to supply the running commentary.
NEARBY ATTRACTIONS: Pale by comparison.
OVERALL BESTOWAL OF CHRISTMAS SPIRIT: If the heart of the season is the giving of joy, Mr.
Shall and his tree bestow more than their share.
City Hall
Broadway and Park Row. For information and hours: (212) 788-4636.
MONIKER: The Low-Budget, New-York-Is-Still-in-a-Slump Tree
GETTING THERE: You just need to weave between all the town cars with tinted windows parked in front of City Hall.
GENERAL ENVIRONMENT: In the middle of the park in front of City Hall.
The park is low-key, but clean and relatively serene: just quiet trees, shrubs, a few paved paths and benches.
City Hall is decorated with red, white and blue banners, which aren't exactly holiday-specific but add to the festive feeling.
SIZE AND SHAPE: A tiny bit lopsided -- vaguely S-shaped, even.
BEST VANTAGE POINT: From inside the park, or from Park Row.
DECORATIONS: Fiscally conservative -- just colored lights in long vertical strings.
It's simple but effective, especially for an outdoor tree.
The City Hall Tree is a kind of junior sibling to the Rockefeller Center tree: same principle, but lacking the grand scale.
OF SPECIAL NOTE: A sign is posted in the park: "Holiday Tree and Lighting Courtesy of Country Living." So the city didn't even pay for it.
STAR: A pretty, white-lit five-point star.
HOW PEOPLE REACT: A couple of folks were sitting on the park benches, happily gazing.
And the workers coming to and from City Hall would give it a happy glance.
The pigeons, however, paid it no special attention.
SOUNDTRACK:The park seemed peaceful and quiet in the gray afternoon winter light.
NEARBY ATTRACTIONS: The gorgeous, turn-of-the-century brownstone and brick buildings across the street once housed New York's Newspaper Row.
OVERALL BESTOWAL OF CHRISTMAS SPIRIT: The area has a subdued, old-town charm, although it feels more somber and reflective than celebratory.
Rockefeller Center
Off Fifth Avenue between 49th and 50th Streets. Lighted 24 hours a day.
MONIKER: THE TREE -- capital THE, capital TREE.
The big daddy, the big kahuna, only, the king of them all.
GETTING THERE: See Japan Airlines tree.
GENERAL ENVIRONMENT: At this time of year, Rockefeller Center is probably the most international spot in the city.
As you bustle through the promenade toward the skating rink, you are likely to hear all manner of foreign languages.
Even the stores around here have a multicultural aura: Librairie de France, Teuscher Chocolatier, Crabtree &amp; Evelyn, etc.
And if all this is starting to feel like a Benetton ad for world peace, then just put a lid on your cynicism, because at the end of the promenade, on the other side of the skating rink, with the vast sky-scraping facade of 30 Rockefeller Center serving as its backdrop, is the most beautiful, heart-stopping, majestic and awesome tree of all time, transcending commercialism and crowds and all the hype that comes with the holidays.
SIZE AND SHAPE: Its mammoth branches droop provocatively, all shaggy and forest-green, as if laden with imaginary snow; it towers so tall and mighty that nearly all of New York City fits beneath it.
BEST VANTAGE POINT: Anywhere in the promenade, from the street all the way to the rink.
When you turn that corner and see it for the first time, it takes your breath away.
DECORATIONS: What ornaments could deck it?
Just colored lights shivering and twinkling among the branches.
OF SPECIAL NOTE: Do not underestimate the tree's power of romance.
Bring your significant other.
STAR: Again, simple yet utterly tasteful: just a white, bright, five-point star.
That's all you need.
HOW PEOPLE REACT: Uniform delight.
All who walk the promenade raise their eyes toward it; to all faces, it brings that spontaneous, un-self-conscious smile.
Teen-agers are giggling and chatting; maintenance workers will wink at you.
Middle-aged men smile at young girls, and it doesn't feel creepy.
Elderly women in hats and gloves momentarily forget their age.
Strangers talk to one another without fear or hesitation.
I'm telling you, it's magic.
SOUNDTRACK: Christmas carols from the skating rink; jingle bells from the sidewalk barkers, soliciting money for the homeless or the Salvation Army.
NEARBY ATTRACTIONS: Go ahead, go ice skating.
It's one of those touristy New York experiences that all New Yorkers should try at some point in their lives.
OVERALL BESTOWAL OF CHRISTMAS SPIRIT: Incomparable.
For just a moment, the tree can make the world melt away, can dissolve the hubbub and hectic stress of the holiday season.
For just a moment, it can bring a silent and somehow holy breath of peace into your heart.


Shoney's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Bassett Furniture Industries Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


American United Global Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Bob Shepard, Announcer, 76
Bob Shepard, a radio and television announcer of a generation ago, died on Dec. 17 on a visit to Manhattan.
He was 76 and had homes in Boca Raton, Fla., and Wilmington, Vt.
The cause was a heart attack, said his daughter, Carolee Shepard.


TV Weekend; One More Toast to the Memory of a Ballet Genius
Holiday!
Festive!
What comes next?
Best bet this weekend is tomorrow's "Balanchine Celebration," three hours of excerpts from the June marathon performance that closed the New York City Ballet's retrospective of 73 works by the master choreographer George Balanchine.
The PBS broadcast begins, curiously, at 5 P.M.
What originally were two separate 90-minute "Great Performances" presentations have been strung together for one quick fix.
Evidently programming executives were eager not to interfere with reruns of two French films beginning at 8.
Alors!
The event at the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center began in the afternoon, stopped for eating breaks that included blini and caviar, continued into the evening, and ended with the entire audience and ballet company enthusiastically offering vodka toasts.
Produced by Judy Kinberg and directed by Matthew Diamond, the team whose television credits include a superb adaptation of Paul Taylor's "Speaking in Tongues," this telecast captures the special excitement of the occasion.


Quiet Chief at Eye of UAL's Storm
Stephen M. Wolf, the chairman of United Airlines, stands out in the airline industry, and not only because of his 6-foot-6-inch frame, signature suspenders and the fact that he runs the world's largest carrier.
In a business where blunt, candid talk is more the norm among his peers, Mr.
Wolf weighs his words with the same care he uses to cultivate an appearance of studious moderation.
An intensely private man, Mr.
Wolf's guarded ways have earned him the nickname Dr.
Unknown from some former managers.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the defection of Fidel Castro's daughter misstated the site of the defection in some copies.
It was Madrid, not Washington.


SciMed Life Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


George B. Farnam, 80, Dairy Industry Leader
George Bronson Farnam, a leader in the Connecticut dairy industry and former state legislator, died on Tuesday at his home in Vero Beach, Fla.
He was 80 and lived in Wallingford, Conn., until 1980.
He had been ill for a long time, his family said.


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
Tune at Rainbow Room
New Year's Eve at the Rainbow complex, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, (212) 632-5000.
For traditional New York glamour, the Rainbow complex on the 65th floor of the General Electric Building is hard to beat.
Recent movies like "The Prince of Tides" and "Six Degrees of Separation," which have scenes set in the Rainbow Room, have only added to its mystique.
For those with the resources, it offers three different dinner-with-entertainment choices.
In all three locations, the events begin at 9 P.M.
At the Rainbow Room, Tommy Tune, an entertainer whose exuberance and versatility make him the one-man equivalent of an old-time movie musical (preferrably starring Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers), is performing his solo cabaret act.
There will be dancing to the Rainbow Room Orchestra.
Black tie is required, and the price is $375 a guest, including dinner, dancing and the show.
Rainbow and Stars, the cabaret around the corner, will have a performance of "The Leonard Bernstein Revue: A Helluva Town," the latest and one of the strongest in its series of shows saluting Broadway composers.
The program includes most of Bernstein's best-known theater songs performed by singers -- Lauren Mitchell, J. Mark McVey, Patrick Quinn and Ruth Williamson -- who lend them an appropriately semi-operatic grandeur.
Dress is black tie, and the price is $325 a person, including dinner, dancing and the show.
The Rainbow Pavilion next door will feature a return New Year's Eve engagement by the Impalas, the Brooklyn vocal group best known for its 1959 hit, "Sorry (I Ran All the Way Home)." The group will alternate sets with Uptown, a six-piece pop band.
Dress is black tie and the price is $325 a guest, including dinner, dancing and the show.
STEPHEN HOLDEN An Alto in the Tea Room
Ann Hampton Callaway, the Russian Tea Room, 150 West 57th Street, Manhattan, (212) 265-0947.
Ann Hampton Callaway's rich, rangy alto is arguably the most the beautiful voice in New York City's cabaret world.
It is especially well suited to traditional pop ballads like "How Deep Is the Ocean" and "My Foolish Heart," which she imbues with an almost sobbing intensity.
New Year's Eve shows are at 9 and 11:30 P.M.
There is a $45 music charge and a $30 minimum, and a $50 prix fixe menu.
A la carte selections are also available.
Dinner seatings are at 8 P.M. for the first show and 10:30 P.M. for the second show, which is already sold out.
S.
H.
Brazilian Ballroom
The Raquel Lima Show, featuring Pe De Boi and Nando Gabrieli, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005.
The Ballroom's New Year's Eve extravaganza kicks off the club's fourth annual winter series of Brazilian music with the double bill of a hot jazz singer (Raquel Lima) and a rising young crooner (Nando Gabrieli), both of whom are appearing with a nine-member samba band, Pe De Boi.
Miss Lima is an improvisatory scat singer adept in several Afro-Brazilian styles.
Mr.
Gabrieli, a protege of Sammy Cahn, is only 28, and has been compared with the young Frank Sinatra.
The festivities begin at 10 P.M., with dancing after the show until 4 A.M.
Tickets are $65 and there is a two-drink minimum.
The show continues through Jan. 8 at regular prices.
S.
H.
Come to This Cabaret
Weslia Whitfield, the Oak Room at the Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-6800, extension 159.
A pop-jazz singer with impeccable taste in material and a relaxed and inviting living-room manner, Weslia Whitfield has been San Francisco's most popular cabaret performer for several years, and now she is catching on in New York.
On New Year's Eve, she will introduce her new January show, " 'S Wonderful: the Lyrics of Ira Gershwin" at the Oak Room, where she has already appeared twice this year.
The performance is at 9:30 P.M. with dinner seating at 7:30 P.M.
The price is $195 a person.
That includes dinner, the performance, favors and dancing in the lobby.
She will also perform at 11 P.M. in the Gallery on the second floor; the cost is $175 a person and includes dinner, favors and dancing.
S.
H. 2 Packages of Laughs
Caroline's Comedy Club, 1626 Broadway, between 49th and 50th Streets, (212) 757-4100.
New York City's sleekest and most comfortable comedy club is offering two different entertainment packages on New Year's Eve.
An 8 P.M. dinner package includes a comedy show with five performers: Susie Essman, Dave Attell, Jim David, George Gallo and John Henson.
The price, which includes dinner, beer or wine and the show, is $55 a person.
For the 10:30 P.M. countdown celebration, the performers are Walli Collins, Nick DiPollo, Ms.
Essman, Mr.
Gallo and Mr.
Henson.
The price is $110 a person and includes a choice of party platters, party favors, the show and admission to a post-show dance party.
S.
H.


Last-Minute Shoppers Get a Final Glimpse of the Man in Red


Home Video
They come with titles like "The Crawlers" and seem as numerous as the name suggests.
This month, like every month, at least a dozen new B movies ("Blood Warriors," "Point of Impact," "Nukie," "Teen-Age Bonnie and Clyde") are available on videocassette.
And this month, like every month, video analysts are assessing the health of the B species.
At present, its condition is guarded.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
HEAD IS CHOSEN FOR WELFARE AGENCY
Mayor-elect Giuliani named the Commissioner of Social Services in Denver, which has 15,000 welfare recipients, to run New York City's vast Human Resources Administration, which distributes welfare to more than a million people.
A1.
Among her colleagues in Denver, Marva L. Hammons has carved out a reputation as an innovative manager at the forefront of efforts to return welfare recipients to the work force.
B3.
Leonard Braun, who does not live in New York City or New Jersey, is serving on the transition teams of both Mr.
Giuliani and Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey.
B3.
The Gracie Mansion headboard that cost the city $11,500 to make will not go with Mayor Dinkins when he leaves office next week, a spokesman for the Mayor said.
B3.
MIDNIGHT MASSES GETTING EARLIER STARTS
At St.
Martin of Tours Roman Catholic Church in the Bronx and at a number of other churches around the city, Midnight Masses are being held hours earlier because of fears of violence.
A1.


Company Briefs
ALLIANCE ENTERTAINMENT CORP., New York, formerly Trinity Capital Opportunity Corp., said it planned to acquire Airline Inc., a distributor of pre-recorded music, for about $35 million in cash, stock and notes.
BOEING CO., Seattle, said Maersk Air, a Danish airline, had placed a $72 million order for two Boeing 737-300 jetliners and planned to order up to 12 of its new 737-300X aircraft.


Nichols Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Arkansas Barely Beats Tulsa in Overtime
Arkansas 93, Tulsa 91
Corliss Williamson hit a jump hook from the baseline with 3 seconds left in overtime last night as top-ranked Arkansas escaped in a road game against Tulsa with a 93-91 victory.
Arkansas (7-0) trailed by 89-87 when Clint McDaniel made a 3-point play and later added a free throw.


Stocks Close Mixed in Quiet Trading
Most stock market averages rose slightly yesterday in a quiet session ahead of the Christmas holiday.
Only the Dow Jones industrial average edged lower, falling near the close after trading higher most of the day.
The market will be closed today.
Analysts said the Dow's strong performance in early trading yesterday prompted selling in anticipation of the three-day break.


Peerless Carpet reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Mavericks Go 2-0 in Minneapolis
Nuggets 106, Rockets 93
Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf scored 24 points as the Denver Nuggets beat Houston by 106-93 last night, denying the Rockets' bid to match a record for the best one-loss start in National Basketball Association history.
Houston, which entered the game at 22-1, was trying to equal the 23-1 start by the 1969-70 Knicks.
The loss was the first in 11 home games this season for Houston and broke the team's seven-game winning streak.
For Denver, the victory was the first on the road after nine straight losses.


Christmas Eve
Many services will be curtailed today since Christmas is on a Saturday.  NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES State offices and courts are open today and closed tomorrow.
New York City offices are closed today.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only, tomorrow; General Post Office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Regular mail delivery today.


First Cash Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Yes to Drug Study
To the Editor:
In "No, Fight Harder" (Op-Ed, Dec. 15), Joseph A. Califano Jr. dismisses Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders's suggestion that the Government study the legalization of drugs.


First Team Sports Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Art in Review
'Work on Paper' Willem de Kooning Barbara Mathes Gallery 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through Thursday
Willem de Kooning forged an inimitable, if widely attempted, fusion of drawing and painting, so it is no surprise that a 50-year survey of his works on paper can sum up his achievement to a remarkable degree.
The show starts with a marvelous study of a woman's head, begun in 1927 and completed in 1935, a time when de Kooning's hero was Ingres, his line was exceptionally fine and his signature small and neat.


Russian Crime Groups Harassing Expatriates
Officials of National Hockey League teams and players' agents are concerned that athletes from the former Soviet Union are being targeted for extortion by Russian gangsters running protection rackets.
Mike Smith, the general manager of the Winnipeg Jets, said he knew of at least one player drafted by his team who was "roughed up" in Russia by men who he believes to be members of organized crime groups.


Van Kampen Merritt Trust For Investment Grade Penn Muni reports earnings for As of Oct 31


New Jersey Court Upholds 'Courtesy' Blackball
In a ruling significant for both its constitutional and political impact, the State Supreme Court today left intact the right of the State Senate to use a secret veto system known as senatorial courtesy to block a judge from a tenured term on Family Court.
The case that led to today's ruling -- the renomination of Judge Marianne Espinosa Murphy by Gov.
Jim Florio -- became an issue in New Jersey's recent gubernatorial and legislative races.
It contributed to the defeat of Senator John H. Dorsey, one of the state's most powerful politicians, who touched off the controversy with his use of senatorial courtesy against Judge Murphy.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary yesterday about A. H. Raskin, an authority on labor whose articles and editorials ran in The New York Times for more than four decades, misstated his source of information about an assault by Joseph S. Fay on the garment union leader David Dubinsky at a 1940 convention in New Orleans.
Mr.
Raskin was present and witnessed the attack.


Art in Review
Francesco Clemente Gagosian Gallery 980 Madison Avenue (near 77th Street) Through Jan. 8
Francesco Clemente is an ambitious and imaginative artist, but his paintings often tend to have a watery, insubstantial quality, as if they had been sketched out rather than worked through.
The dream-state vision conveyed is entrancing, though one misses the kind of resistance and argument that painting at its most challenging can offer.





SofTech (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Holiday Hours for Some Major Museums
To help in planning outings this weekend and next, here are the holiday hours for some of New York City's major museums:
AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY AND THE HAYDEN PLANETARIUM, Central Park West at 79th Street, Manhattan, (212) 769-5100). Christmas Eve: 12:30 to 5:45 P.M. Closed Christmas Day. Sunday: Noon to 5:45 P.M. Monday through New Year's Day: 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.
BRONX MUSEUM OF THE ARTS, 1040 Grand Concourse, near 165th Street, Morrisania, (718) 681-6000.
Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve: 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sunday, Wednesday and Thursday: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Closed Christmas Day, New Year's Day, Monday and Tuesday.
BROOKLYN MUSEUM, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park (718) 638-5000.
Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Sunday, Wednesday and Thursday: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Closed Christmas Day, New Year's Day, Monday and Tuesday.
CHILDREN'S MUSEUM OF MANHATTAN, 212 West 83d Street, (212) 721-1223.
Daily: 10 to 5 P.M.
Closed Christmas Day and New Year's Day.
COOPER-HEWITT MUSEUM, 2 East 91st Street, Manhattan, (212) 860-6862.
Christmas Eve: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Sunday: noon to 5 P.M.
Tuesday: 10 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Wednesday through Friday: 10 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Closed Christmas Day and New Year's Day.
FRICK COLLECTION, 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan, (212) 288-0700.
Closed Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, New Year's Eve, New Year's Day and Monday.
Sunday: 1 to 6 P.M.
Tuesday through Thursday: 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
SOLOMON R. GUGGENHEIM MUSEUM, 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 88th Street, (212) 423-3500.
Christmas Eve, New Year's Eve and New Year's Day: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Closed Christmas Day.
Sunday and Monday through Wednesday: 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Thursday: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
SOLOMON R. GUGGENHEIM MUSEUM IN SOHO, 575 Broadway, at Prince Street, (212) 423-3500.
Christmas Eve, New Year's Eve and New Year's Day: 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Closed Christmas Day.
Sunday and Monday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Wednesday: 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Thursday: 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Closed Tuesday.
JEWISH MUSEUM, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92d Street, (212) 423-3200.
The museum is always closed Fridays and Saturdays and is closed Christmas Eve, Christmas Day and New Year's Eve and New Year's Day.
Sunday: Sunday: 11 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.
Monday, Wednesday and Thursday: 11 A.M. to 5:45 P.M. and Tuesday, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.
METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART, Fifth Avenue and 82d Street, (212) 535-7710.
Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve: 9:30 A.M. to 4:45 P.M.
Closed Christmas Day, New Year's Day and Mondays.
Sunday and Tuesday through Thursday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
MUSEUM OF MODERN ART, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan, (212) 708-9400.
Christmas Eve: noon to 5 P.M.
Closed Christmas Day.
Sunday through Tuesday: 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Thursday and Friday: noon to 8:30 P.M.
Closed Wednesday.
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF DESIGN, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, (212) 369-4880.
Christmas Eve, noon to 5 P.M.
Closed Christmas Day, New Year's Day, Monday and Tuesday.
Sunday: Noon to 5 P.M.
Wednesday and Thursday: Noon to 5 P.M.
QUEENS MUSEUM OF ART, New York City Building, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, (718) 592-9700.
Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve: noon to 3 P.M.
Closed Christmas Day and New Year's Day.
Sunday: noon to 5 P.M.
Monday through Thursday: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
STATEN ISLAND INSTITUTE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES, 75 Stuyvesant Place, St.
George, (718) 727-1135.
Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M..
Closed Christmas Day and New Year's Day.
Sunday: 1 to 5 P.M.
Monday through Thursday: 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
STUDIO MUSEUM IN HARLEM, 144 West 125th Street, (212) 864-4500.
Closed Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, New Year's Eve and New Year's Day.
Sunday: 1 to 6 P.M.
Closed Monday and Tuesday.
Wednesday and Thursday: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
WHITNEY MUSEUM OF AMERICAN ART, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, (212) 570-3611.
Christmas Eve, New Year's Eve and Sunday through Tuesday: 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Closed Christmas Day and New Year's Day.
Thursday: 1 to 8 P.M.


Spending of Award Is Prohibited
A man who won a $4.8 million judgment against the New York City Transit Authority after a transit police officer shot and paralyzed him may not spend the money until a lawsuit against him is resolved, a judge ruled yesterday.
But the ruling by Justice Stephen G. Crane of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, may have no practical effect on the man, Bernard McCummings, or his ability to use the money.


In Big Cases, Lots of Briefs And 'Friends'
Hard cases may or may not make bad law, but for the select circle of lawyers who practice regularly before the United States Supreme Court, big cases certainly make work.
A grant of review by the Court in a case with important economic or social implications typically sets off a frenzy of brief-writing, not only by the parties but also by many organizations seeking to appear as "friends of the Court." The opportunity to speak to the Justices on an issue that matters is one that few with a stake in the outcome care to pass up, particularly when the actual parties cannot be expected to address the distinct concerns of all who might be affected.


A Tree to Satisfy Every Christmas Longing
BY the time Christmas Eve rolls around, few New Yorkers need an incentive to get into the holiday spirit.
If anything, people need a respite from the pressures and the hectic pace the holidays entail.
All week long you've been running around, frantically buying presents, finishing up loose ends at work, scribbling cards, making travel arrangements, planning daunting meals.
You've been worrying about your escalating credit-card charges and vacuuming long-neglected corners.
You're frazzled, harassed and out of breath.
Christmas Day, you've decided, is practically going to be an anticlimax.
That's where trees come in.
If you have just a few spare minutes today, do yourself a real favor and take yourself to a tree, one of those big, bright, fanatically coiffed and sometimes overly gaudy trees that New York does so well.
They're spread out all over Manhattan: at Rockefeller Center and City Hall, Lincoln Center and the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
There's a decidedly unusual one in the Japan Airlines office, and another in the New York Public Library.


Bed Bath &amp; Beyond Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Jeweler Is Slain In a Robbery In Brooklyn
A man who had owned a jewelry store in Brooklyn for only a month was shot and killed by robbers Wednesday evening at closing time as his wife and other employees watched, the police said yesterday.
Seung Ok Kim, 42 years old, of Queens, apparently offered no resistance when up to five men entered Golden Tiffany Jewelers at 64 Graham Avenue in the Williamsburg section about 7 P.M. and began scooping up jewelry from display cases.
Nonetheless, he was shot several times in the chest, the police said.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing Next Weekend
"ABE LINCOLN IN ILLINOIS," Beaumont Theater, Lincoln Center, 150 West 65th Street.
Robert E. Sherwood's 1939 drama, directed by Gerald Gutierrez, about Lincoln's formative years.
Through Jan. 2.
Performances: Tuesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $42.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"LATER LIFE," Westside Theater, 407 West 43d Street, Clinton.
A comedy by A. R. Gurney about a man and a woman who meet after a 30-year separation.
Through Jan. 2.
Performances: Tuesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Saturday at 7 and 9:30 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $37.50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"THE LOMAN FAMILY PICNIC," Manhattan Theater Club, Stage 1 at City Center, 131 West 55th Street.
A black comedy by Donald Margulies, set in Brooklyn in the 1960's, about a family preparing for a bar mitzvah.
Through Jan. 2.
Performances: Tuesday through Friday at 8 P.M.; Saturday at 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2:30 P.M.
Tickets: $40.
Information: (212) 581-1212.
"A GRAND NIGHT FOR SINGING!" Roundabout at the Criterion Center, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
The songs of Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein.
Through Jan. 2.
Performances: Tuesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $60.
Information: (212) 869-8400.
"FORBIDDEN BROADWAY 1994," Theater East, 211 East 60th Street, Manhattan.
A musical parody of Broadway shows and their stars.
Closes Jan. 2.
Performances: Tuesday through Friday at 8:30 P.M.; Saturday at 7 and 10 P.M.; Sunday at 3:30 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $37.50; theater and dinner packages are $50 to $62.50.
Information: (212) 838-9090.
ROY LICHTENSTEIN, Susan Sheehan Gallery, 41 East 57th Street, Manhattan.
Prints.
Through Dec. 31.
Hours: Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Sunday.
Free.
Information: (212) 888-4220.


Canal Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Sheldahl Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday about former I.B.M. employees and their wives who are coping with layoffs scrambled the identities of the group shown at a regular meeting.
The members were, clockwise from the left foreground, Lynette and John McKinney, Gilbert Curl, Virginia and John Young and Virginia Curl.


A Fractious Old West in a Modern Moral Universe
The Old West has rarely looked as opulent as it does in "Tombstone," the director George P. Cosmatos's retelling of the Wyatt Earp story.
In this capacious western with many modern touches, the Arizona boom town and site of the legendary O.K.
Corral has a seedy, vaudevillian grandeur that makes it a direct forerunner of Las Vegas.
The streets may be dusty, but they are very wide.
The gambling halls and theaters have a gilt-edged Victorian glamour that contrasts sharply with the shoot-'em-up exuberance of patrons who when roused to enthusiasm are liable to fire their guns into the air.
And in time-honored nouveau-riche style, the affluent citizens of a city made rich from silver enjoy dressing to the nines.


Review/Art; At the Met, Arrays of Rare Asian Subtleties
The Metropolitan Museum of Art is shaping up as an increasingly important national showcase for Asian art.
Its long-awaited Indian and Southeast Asian galleries are scheduled to open this April, and important Chinese and Japanese works continue to enter its collections.
As is usually the case with museum acquisitions, both discerning patronage and plain luck play a role, and three current exhibitions are examples of these factors at work, sometimes separately, sometimes together.
Discrimination of a high order lies behind the two shows sharing the Douglas Dillon Galleries this winter.
One, titled "A Study in Scholarly Taste," is a sampling of gifts and promised gifts of paintings to the museum from the renowned Kinmay W. and P. Y. Tang Family Collection.
The other is a display of more than 50 purchases by the Metropolitan in the last nine years under the auspices of the international group of collector-advisers known as the Friends of Asian Art.


Engineered Support Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


No Headline
"The culture of violence has changed a lot of things. Maybe some day that stuff will work again. Maybe some day we'll go back to when the front door was always unlocked, too." THE REV.
JOHN FLYNN, whose Bronx parish has Midnight Mass at 8 P.M.  [ A1:5. ]


Time to Plan for Raindrops and Stray Reindeer
The town's steep-roofed wooden houses are blanketed with snow like a scene off a Norwegian Christmas card, and down at City Hall and in the nearby brick and glass offices of the Olympics organizing committee, local boosters say that Lillehammer is ready.
"If we had to, I think we could start running the games tomorrow," declared Steinar Soerlie, the city manager in Lillehammer, where the XXVII Olympic Winter Games are scheduled to open, just 50 days from today.


I.R.S. Issues Simple Rules: Lobbyist Can Estimate Time
To the delight of lobbyists, the Internal Revenue Service proposed unusually simple regulations today to begin taxing lobbying expenses.
But the agency postponed until next year the key issue of defining what lobbying is.
At President Clinton's urging, Congress voted during the summer to eliminate the tax deductibility of lobbying.
But trade associations and big corporations said that regulations putting the law into effect would force them to keep prohibitively detailed records.


Restaurants
The women at the next table are scooping up caviar with soup spoons.
They pile heaps of the glistening black eggs onto buttered blini, then lean over to keep the melting butter from running down their arms into their gold watches.
Having finished 250 grams of caviar, they call for another tin.
They eat with admirable nonchalance, as if such quantities of caviar were an everyday thing.
The waiter asks, in Italian, if they want more Champagne, more vodka.
They do.
Talking, sipping and chewing, the woman in the white fur hat urges more caviar upon her friends as casually as your mother might encourage you to have a little more chicken.


Hail to the Chief


Designatronics reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Champion Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Fresh evidence of an improving economy was reported by the Government.
New orders for durable goods surged 2 percent in November, marking the longest streak of gains since 1987.
The Commerce Department also reported that personal incomes rose 0.6 percent and personal spending grew 0.4 percent.  [ Page D1. ]
Sales of domestically built vehicles rose 31 percent in mid-December.
Nearly every company that builds vehicles in North America sold more of them.  [ D1. ]


Diner's Journal
No More Coach House
The Coach House, at 110 Waverly Place in Greenwich Village, has closed.
The restaurant, long a landmark and once considered the best American restaurant in New York City, closed in the summer for vacation and never reopened.
It has now been permanently closed by the owner, Leon Lianides, who is 76 years old and has not been in good health.
The restaurant and building are for sale at an asking price of about $3.5 million.
The Coach House opened in 1949 in what had been a stable for the estate of the Wanamaker family.
The restaurant, a clubby place, became a favorite of James Beard's, but was eclipsed by a new wave of American restaurants like An American Place, Gotham Bar and Grill and Arcadia.
Its specialties were black bean soup, corn sticks, rack of lamb, prime ribs, chicken pot pie and pecan pie.
"He was a good standard-bearer, one of my idols," Joseph Baum, the president of the Rainbow Room complex, said of Mr.
Lianides.
A San Francisco Link
Not content with commuting just to restaurants in the Hamptons, Drew Nieporent has taken on a West Coast place.
He is one of four partners in Rubicon, opening on Jan. 10 at 558 Sacramento Street in San Francisco's financial district.
Robert De Niro, who owns TriBeCa Grill with Mr.
Nieporent and others, and Francis Ford Coppola, whose winery in Napa Valley makes a red called Rubicon, are also partners.
The fourth is John Gaul, who owns Gaul Construction in San Francisco and New York.


Headboard of Dinkins Stored Away
The Gracie Mansion headboard that drew headlines in 1990 because it cost the city $11,500 to make will not go with Mayor David N. Dinkins when he leaves office next week, a spokesman for the Mayor said yesterday.
Instead, the hand-crafted headboard will be shipped to a city warehouse and presumably become one of the hundreds of artifacts abandoned by city officials when one mayoral administration succeeds another.


Review/Film; Cheerful, Short and No Big Blights
"Grumpy Old Men" is the kind of holiday movie a lot of people are searching for.
It's cheerful, it's well under two hours and it doesn't concern any major social blights, unless you think Jack Lemmon tossing a dead fish into Walter Matthau's car is cause for alarm.
Those rare qualities might make the film, which opens tomorrow, one of the season's more entertaining simply by default.
What gives it a jolt in its own right is that Mr.
Lemmon and Mr.
Matthau have only got wilier in the years since "The Odd Couple." They can do wonders even with this middling material about two neighbors in their late 60's, lifelong friends who express their affection by pretending to hate each other.


Rail Lines Raise Visibility Of Officers After Shooting
The region's three commuter railroads have increased the visibility of the police on trains to ease the minds of travelers in the wake of the shooting this month on a crowded Long Island commuter train.
The Long Island Rail Road and the Metro-North Commuter Railroad have put more officers on the trains, railroad spokesmen said today.
And New Jersey Transit has ordered officers to be stationed on platforms when trains arrive, and has asked some plainclothes officers to wear uniforms while patrolling the cars, an official said.


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
International Mix
Nana Vasconcelos, Hassan Hakmoun and others, the Cooler, 416 West 14th Street, West Village, (212) 229-0785.
An international lineup features the Brazilian percussionist and singer Nana Vasconcelos, whose body becomes his instrument when he's not playing drums, bells or the one-stringed berimbau, and Hassan Hakmoun, a Moroccan sintir (plucked lute) virtuoso and singer who plays the propulsive riffs of traditional Gnawan music.
Music begins about 10 P.M.; admission is $25.
JON PARELES A Spectacle of Herself
Janet Jackson, Madison Square Garden, Seventh Avenue at 32d Street, (212) 307-7171.
State-of-the-art video-era spectacle -- song, dance, fireworks -- by the Jackson family's overachieving younger sister, who sets out to seduce and dazzle her audience.
Tony Toni Tone opens at 9 P.M.; tickets are $50 and $75.
J.
P.
Soukous and Soca
Tabu Ley Rochereau/Pan Rebels Steel Orchestra, Harambee, 127 West 43d Street, Manhattan, (212) 819-1133.
Tabu Ley Rochereau is a suave crooner who leads one of Zaire's longest-running soukous bands, playing gleaming, lilting, repatriated rumbas.
He shares a bill with the Pan Rebels, a Trinidadian steel-drum orchestra that peals out jubilant soca tunes.
The club is offering three packages, all including a Champagne toast: one with dinner and reserved seating for $120 a couple or $65 for individuals; one with dinner for $95 a couple and $60 for single tickets, and general admission for $25.
Doors open at 8 P.M., with dinner and recorded music at 9:30; live music begins around midnight.
J.
P.
Testosterone Alert
Robert Gordon, the Lone Star Roadhouse, 240 West 52d Street, Manhattan, (212) 245-2950.
Since the late 1970's, when he was a member of Tuff Darts, punk-rock has meant rockabilly to Robert Gordon.
He yowls, leers and swaggers through his own songs and rediscovered obscurities like the testosterone boast of "Red Hot." For the early show, Mr.
Gordon performs at 11 P.M., following the Hassan Hamid swing band, which begins about 9:30 P.M; tickets are $30 including a Champagne toast.
The late show, with Mr.
Hamid's band at 12:30 A.M. and Mr.
Gordon about 2 A.M., costs $20.
J.
P.
Funk at Maxwell's
Luscious Jackson, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Minimalist funk grooves and knowing, off-handed vocals from women who are proud to be cool.
Sexpod opens at 10:30 P.M.
Tickets are $12.50 in advance, $15 at the door.
J.
P.
Wine in the Wetlands
God Street Wine, Wetlands, 161 Hudson Street, TriBeCa, (212) 966-4225.
A neo-hippie band that mixes the usual strong Grateful Dead influences with touches of progressive-rock precision and, now and then, a rap.
Doors open at 9 P.M.; admission is $20.
J.
P.
Happy Together Again
The Turtles featuring Flo and Eddie, the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6300.
Along with Turtles hits like "Happy Together," Howard Kaylan and Mark Volman (Flo and Eddie) parody the year in rock in this annual engagement.
On New Year's Eve, there is one show at 10:30 P.M.; tickets are $27.50.
The group also appears Wednesday and Thursday and Jan. 1, with shows at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.; tickets are $17.50.
J.
P.
Audible Export
Nina Hagen, Tunnel, 220 12th Avenue, at 27th Street, Chelsea, (212) 695-7292.
Blasphemy, erotic bravado, operatic vocals and dance-music rhythms from one of Germany's strangest exports.
Doors open at 10 P.M., with recorded music until Ms.
Hagen performs at 2 A.M.
Admission is $40.
J.
P.
The G-7 of Blues
Bob Gaddy, Jimmy Spruill, Jimmy Dale and others, Tramps Cafe, 45 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
A New York blues summit, with half a dozen singers, pianists and guitarists trading boasts and woes.
Shows at 9 and 11 P.M. and 1 A.M.; admission is $15.
J.
P.
Traveling Men
Blues Traveler, Roseland, 239 West 52d Street, Manhattan, (212) 247-0200.
Speed-demon harmonica solos and drawn-out blues jams for a tie-dyed, barefooted crowd that missed the real thing in the 1960's.
Appearing Thursday (tickets $20 in advance, $25 on the day of the show) at 8 P.M., and New Year's Eve (tickets $30 in advance, $35 on New Year's Eve) at 10 P.M.
J.
P.
Big Band on 53d Street
The Artie Shaw Orchestra, the Citicorp Atrium, 53d Street and Lexington Avenue, (212) 371-3367.
The suave arrangements of Artie Shaw's big band brought him pop success without entirely erasing his jazz credibility.
The 17-piece band, now directed by Dick Johnson, makes a rare New York appearance; Mr.
Shaw, who is 83, no longer performs.
Tickets, including a five-course dinner at Alfredo the Original of Rome, are $149 a person, including tax and tip; the band performs between 9 P.M. and 3 A.M.
J.
P.


MedChem Products reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Small Comfort for Gay Soldiers
The Pentagon's new rules on homosexuals are a sad reminder of the shellacking President Clinton and the gay soldiers whose cause he once championed suffered at the hands of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Congress.
The rules, which institute a policy announced July 19, were described by Defense Secretary Les Aspin as "a greatly improved policy" and "the right solution" to "an enormously divisive and emotional issue."
In truth they are but a modest advance that does away with the worst abuses of the old system while entrenching the archaic and homophobic ban on gay soldiers more firmly than ever.


Executive Changes
AW COMPUTER SYSTEMS INC., Mount Laurel, N.J., said Charles W. Welch Jr., its president, had been named chief executive.
COLTEC INDUSTRIES, New York, named Paul G. Schoen, Anthony J. diBuono and Laurence H. Polsky executive vice presidents.


Value Line Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Decorated for Christmas, a Tree Shares a Safe Place With Soldiers


Pac-Man It's Not. The Future of a Presidency and U.S. Health Care, Maybe.
November 1995.
National health care has been law for a year, and universal coverage is almost a fact.
But costs are already running above projections, and Bob Dole is making wisecracks about voodoo Democrat economics.
A value-added tax or Oregon-style rationing would solve the budget problem, but would be suicide to introduce before the elections . . .
A page from Hillary Rodham Clinton's future?
Perhaps.
But with a little help from Silicon Valley, the future is now, and open to anyone with access to a zippy I.B.M.-compatible personal computer.
SimHealth, a $29.95 computer game produced by Maxis Business Simulations with a grant from the Markle Foundation, gives back-seat ambulance drivers the chance to design their own health care system from scratch and to observe the consequences, including the possibility of being voted out of office.


A Rush to Judgment on City Taxes
With reckless disregard for the public, and with very little discussion, the New York City Council this week rammed through a tax abatement bill that may be good for developers but could well be bad for the city.
Though the bill was introduced at Mayor David Dinkins's initiative, he should veto it, forcing the Council to give the measure the careful deliberation it requires.
The bill in question would broaden an existing real estate tax abatement program to cover a swath of midtown and lower Manhattan; the program now covers the rest of Manhattan and other parts of the city.
It would freeze real estate taxes on residential buildings for 10 years at rates set before the building was constructed.
The rates would rise gradually for another 10 years until they reach their normal level.


Mining &amp; Allied Supplies Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Chronicle
Just when you thought it was safe to pick up a newspaper without seeing the Donald and the Bride, a reminder of them surfaces.
Executives of Harry Winston, the jeweler who lent a 325-diamond tiara to Marla Maples for her wedding to Donald Trump on Monday, have placed the tiara in the window of the store on Fifth Avenue and 56th Street.


Warring Parties in Bosnia Extend Cease-Fire but Peace Talks Stall
Mediators seeking a peace accord in Bosnia and Herzegovina said today that they had secured promises from all the warring factions to extend a cease-fire to Jan. 15, the target date for a new effort to negotiate a peace.
The truce was to expire on Jan. 3, a day after the end of the Serbian Orthodox celebration of Christmas.
But the mediators, Lord Owen of Britain and Thorvald Stoltenberg of Norway, acknowledged that they were not optimistic.
Lord Owen said at a news conference that heavy fighting today in central Bosnia and the continued shelling of Sarajevo did not augur well.


Waters Continue to Rise in Europe's Worst Flooding in Decades


GIULIANI APPOINTS A DENVER OFFICIAL AS WELFARE CHIEF
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday named the Commissioner of Social Services in Denver, which has 15,000 welfare recipients, to run New York City's vast Human Resources Administration, which distributes welfare to more than a million people.
He chose Marva L. Hammons, who has spent much of her career as a social-services administrator in Colorado, where she was noted for championing a program intended to move people off welfare and into jobs.


Another Coleman Suit
A woman who claims she was injured by the explosive VINCE COLEMAN tossed in a Dodger Stadium lot last July sued the Mets outfielder and ERIC DAVIS, the former Los Angeles outfielder, yesterday.
It was the second lawsuit stemming from the incident.
The family of 2-year-old AMANDA SANTOS sued Coleman and Davis, now with Detroit, in October.


Castro's Daughter Pleads for Her Own
Fidel Castro's estranged daughter, who defected to the United States on Tuesday after what she described as a cloak-and-dagger escape from Cuba, surfaced here today to tweak her father for his misrule and to plead with him to let his granddaughter join her in freedom.
Appearing haggard and tense at a news conference, Alina Fernandez Revuelta told how she had secretly obtained a Spanish passport, gained weight, donned a wig and applied layers of makeup so that her appearance would match that of the woman whose identity she had assumed.
On Sunday, she said, her chance came and she seized it, boarding a flight to Madrid and then heading to the United States after her request for political asylum was quickly granted.


Dr. Jobe to Examine Taylor's Hurt Shoulder
Brien Taylor, the top prospect among Yankee pitchers in the minors, has an appointment with one of the top orthopedic surgeons, Dr.
Frank Jobe, next Monday in Inglewood, Calif., to determine if he needs arthroscopic surgery on his left shoulder.
Taylor dislocated his pitching shoulder in a fight near his home in Beaufort, N.C. last Saturday night, the circumstances of which are still not fully clear.


Cold, Hungry and Broke, Bosnians Won't Give Up
They have no jobs and little to eat.
They are cold, and they are mourning their dead.
But the war refugees crammed into this steel city had an emphatic message for Bosnia's Muslim President during a recent stopover: "Don't sign the peace plan."
Heeding appeals from both civilians uprooted by the war and from the military, President Alija Izetbegovic rejected a new peace proposal this week that would have left Bosnia a landlocked, Muslim-dominated republic encircled by Serbian and Croatian enemies.





CARA Operations reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 5


Durables Orders Post Sharp Gain
Fresh evidence of a rejuvenated economy appeared today, with factories posting the longest streak of gains in big-ticket orders since 1987 and consumers enhancing their ability to keep on spending.
New orders for durable goods, items ranging from radios to steamrollers that are expected to last three years or more, surged 2 percent in November, the Commerce Department reported.
The advance, the fourth consecutive, showed that factories were clearly participating in the economy's pickup this fall.


6 Mexican Unionists Who Lost Their Jobs At G.E. Are Rehired
Six of 11 workers who said they were dismissed from a General Electric factory in Mexico for trying to organize an independent labor union will be rehired, union leaders say.
The six were let go from the Compania Armadora electric motor plant in Ciudad Juarez, across the border from El Paso, just weeks after the North American Free Trade Agreement was approved in the United States Congress on Nov. 17.


Review/Opera; Hampson In 'Barbiere' At the Met
The problems with this season's first Metropolitan Opera performance of "Il Barbiere di Siviglia," on Wednesday night, were not with the singing nor even with Robin Wagner's rotating set from the 1982 production, which turned Doctor Bartolo's residence into a pastel playhouse.
After all, here was Thomas Hampson as Figaro, a role he has made something of a trademark.
"Largo al factotum" was exuberant, handsome and precise; it seemed a sonic celebration of ego, perfect for an aria of self-praise.
Ruth Ann Swenson was almost a model Rosina: while she may have tired during the final scenes (her voice was not firmly projecting in the lower range), elsewhere she had an almost delicious innocence and musicianship, always leaping for the high-pitched cadence, making the florid figuration an expression of her character's playful intelligence.


BKC Semiconductors reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Czechs Move Quickly to Privatization
Frantisek Keis, a 33-year-old construction worker, stood in line at the end of the day, waiting his turn to pay the equivalent of $35 for a book of vouchers entitling him to bid for shares in some of the hundreds of Government-owned companies going private.
"I see this as a way of getting the Czech Republic to become a capitalist country," said Mr.
Keis, who has started a construction company and was still in his work clothes.
"When you have concrete owners they take care of things."


Remembering a Championship Past, Mets Hire Wilson
Joe McIlvaine sat adorned in a Santa Claus tie.
He had made his list of desired infielders.
But the Mets' general manager was at Shea Stadium yesterday, on the team's last official day of business before the new year, with little to do other than remember what was, what might have been and what could still be.
The first part, remembering what was, was undoubtedly the sweetest part.
For McIlvaine and the Mets paused before breaking for the holidays by remembering one of the most glorious moments in franchise history.
And celebrating the fact of that moment was the living, breathing form of Mookie Wilson.


Art in Review
Euan Uglow Salander-O'Reilly Gallery 20 East 79th Street Manhattan Through Thursday
Euan Uglow is a 61-year-old English painter, virtually unknown here.
His subjects are figures and still lifes, which he renders in a linear, streamlined manner that acknowledges the process of their making; marks with which the painter plotted the placement of the figures and objects are left visible.
The colors are cool, calm, lyrical.
The work is serious, assured and soft-spoken.
It can put an American viewer in mind of Richard Diebenkorn: the soft palette, the abstraction of figures, the inclusion of signs of the work's evolution, the quiet hum of authority.


Dr. Alan Ross, 72; Conducted Research In Child Psychology
Dr.
Alan O. Ross, a retired psychology professor at the State University of New York at Stony Brook who conducted research on child psychology, behavioral therapy and personality, died on Tuesday at his home in East Setauket, L.I.
He was 72.
The cause was a brain tumor, said his brother, Warren R. Ross.


Towns Escape Cleanup Costs At Toxic Sites
In a case that addresses a problem facing towns and cities across the country, a Federal judge has ruled that 23 municipalities do not have to help pay to clean up toxic waste from two landfills in Connecticut.
The ruling, if upheld on appeal, would be significant defeat for a strategy by corporations sued by the Environmental Protection Agency to draw other waste producers -- from towns and cities to small businesses and individuals -- into multimillion-dollar cleanup cases.


Half a Loaf Is Enough For UConn
Coming into tonight's game against Fairfield, Connecticut Coach Jim Calhoun was concerned that his Huskies would have trouble focusing.
After all, UConn was 6-0, ranked 15th in the Associated Press poll while Fairfield, a member of the Metro Athletic Athletic Conference, was 1-3 against mediocre opposition and had lost to Connecticut 8 straight times and by an average of 27 points the last 6 years.
That concern was borne out in the first half when Connecticut never got its fast-break offense in sync, turned the ball over nine times and led by only 34-28.


First Team Sports Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Art in Review
Diana Thater David Zwirner Gallery 43 Greene Street (near Broome Street) SoHo Through Jan. 22
The tradition of video installation art is a sometime thing: short, intermittent and prone to technological pyrotechnics.
But Diana Thater, a young artist from Los Angeles who is making her New York debut, stands it in good stead.
Like Bill Viola, Ms.
Thater uses her medium to immerse the viewer in images of nature, which she pushes toward dizzying, painterly extremes.
Thrown up on the wall by three projectors using filters of different colors (red, blue and green), her shifting images of trees and foliage create a disorienting swirl that is never quite in register: a late 20th-century version of Impressionist painting, freed from its frame.


Healy Gives The Capitals Nothing for Christmas
Playing without Mark Messier for the first time this season and with Glenn Healy in goal for the first time in 12 games, the Rangers played with vigor and desire tonight and skated away with a 1-0 triumph over the Capitals.
Adam Graves scored the lone goal 9 minutes 52 seconds into the third period, when he leaped on a loose puck in the crease after a backhanded deflection by Greg Gilbert.
It was his 22d goal of the season.


Ex-Officer Accused of Assault Defends Himself at Trial
A retired Yonkers police officer took the stand in his own defense today and denied that after arresting and handcuffing two immigrants from Northern Ireland he took them to a deserted train station parking lot and clubbed them with a night stick.
Instead, the officer, Bruce W. Nickels, 46, portrayed himself as the victim of a group of drunken revelers who had attended a christening party that continued into the early morning hours of Dec. 2, 1991.
He said one woman, Margaret Nolan, lunged at him and dug her nails into his hands so hard that in trying to fend her off he struck her in the forehead with his night stick, splitting the skin.


Sports of The Times; Wilkens Tackles Wilkins
DOMINIQUE WILKINS was annoyed.
That was obvious to Lenny Wilkens, and everyone else in Boston Garden, from the start.
He had been in a bad shooting slump.
He had a sore ankle and began a game against the Celtics Wednesday night bothered by the flu and the fact that on Atlanta's opening possessions, he couldn't get his itchy fingers on the ball.


Reputation for Innovation Precedes H.R.A. Choice
Among her colleagues in Denver, Marva L. Hammons has carved out a reputation as an innovative manager at the forefront of efforts to move welfare recipients back into the work force.
Before being tapped yesterday by Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani to serve as commissioner of New York City's gargantuan Human Resources Administration, Ms.
Hammons spent her entire adult life working in various Colorado social services agencies.
Beginning as a social worker in Adams County, she eventually rose through the ranks to become, in August 1991, the first black woman to head the Denver Department of Social Services.


First Cash Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Africa Takes Action on Genital Mutilation
To the Editor:
Your columns and letters have expressed American points of view on the practice of female genital mutilation, a ritual that affects no fewer than 100 million African women and girl children.
Some writers consider the practice a crime and torture, and reproach Africans for not taking action to stop it.
Another calls it a joyous occasion for the girls who undergo the operation.
The motives behind this mobilization could be genuine human concern about the "poor Africans." But at the same time those who are dealing with the problem and who are familiar with the situation cannot help asking whether or not the writers have cared to inform themselves about the efforts that Africans are making to deal with the problem.
Those who are genuinely concerned about the hazardous consequences of female genital mutilation will be glad to learn that African women and men have organized themselves under the umbrella of the Inter-African Committee on Traditional Practices Affecting the Health of Women and Children, and they are campaigning in their own way to eradicate the custom.
This committee was set up in 1984, following the will of the African participants in a seminar on traditional practices held in Dakar, Senegal.
Since then, 24 national affiliates, or committees, have been established.
In collaboration with their respective governments and other nongovernmental organizations, they are conducting programs to educate, inform and sensitize their populations about these practices.
Those in the United States who are genuinely concerned about female genital mutilation would be well advised to visit Benin, Burkina Faso, Egypt, Ethiopia, Guinea, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sudan and Uganda to discuss and consult with the nationals of these countries and to witness the changes that are taking place.
BERHANE RAS-WORK  President, Inter-African Committee Geneva, Dec. 15, 1993


Lendl Prefers Baseline To the Sideline For 1994
Play it again, Ivan.
Despite a disastrous 1993, Ivan Lendl, invincible of yore but lately incapable of clinging to the top 10 where he once held court for an epic 615 weeks, has vowed to return to the tennis circuit for at least one more full season of singles competition.


Wolf (Howard B.) Inc.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Peerless Carpet reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sales of Domestically Built Vehicles Increase 31%
Led by the General Motors Corporation, almost every company that builds cars and light trucks in North America sold more of these vehicles in mid-December, the auto makers reported today.
Over all, sales of what are counted as domestically built vehicles -- those assembled in the United States, Canada and Mexico -- shot up 31.1 percent in comparison with a strong period a year ago.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
3.08
2.85
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.04
3.15
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.18
3.29
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.22
5.24
6.36
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.21
6.21
7.36
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.23
7.24
8.39
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.53
5.54
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


MedChem Products reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Concord Fabrics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Engineered Support Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Mining &amp; Allied Supplies Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


The Job Is Not Finished Until the Paperwork Is Done


Abroad at Home; Freedom Of the Press
The press has its own version of Gresham's Law: the tendency, in the competition for readers, to let the scandalous and sensational drive out serious news.
An example is the press in Britain, where the tittle-tattle of the tabloids has lately infected the news judgment of the quality papers.
In the last week the American press has faced -- and most of it flunked -- a test of its resistance to the cheap and scurrilous.
A story about the sex life of President Clinton, though dubious in its evidence and its promoters, nevertheless proved irresistible to most newspapers and broadcasters.


Cowboy Owner Loses
An arbitrator ruled yesterday in favor of an injured Dallas Cowboys wide receiver, JIMMY SMITH, saying the player was due his entire 1993 salary despite missing the season following appendicitis on Aug. 25.
The team owner, JERRY JONES, had denied Smith his salary, $350,000, claiming appendicitis was a non-football condition.


Saztec International (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Into the Wilderness: The 200-Year Heritage Of Jews in Canada
In 1761, two years after French Canada fell to Britain, British soldiers were still sheltering in the safety of Montreal.
But Ezekiel Solomons, a Jewish fur trader, was canoeing west along the St.
Lawrence River and into the Great Lakes territories still dominated by French traders and their Indian allies.
Twice captured and nearly put to death by Indians, several times bankrupted, Solomons and three cousins pushed their fur-trading network into the wilderness well beyond Lake Superior, bartering blankets, trinkets, dry goods and liquor for hundreds of pelts.
In 1771, a decade later and several hundred miles to the east, Elizabeth Judah was stitching a sampler of the Ten Commandments.
It is one of the oldest items in the Jewish Museum's current exhibition on Jewish life in Canada.
Some of the cloth has disintegrated, but many of the lines remain almost as bright and as legible as when the 8-year-old girl cross-stitched them 222 years ago in the small town of Three Rivers, Quebec:"Take not the name of god in vain/ Nor dare the Sabbath day profane."


Books of The Times; Memoir Fragments From Calvino
The Road to San Giovanni By Italo Calvino Translated by Tim Parks. 150 pages.
Pantheon Books. $19.
Modern Italian literature has never quite recovered from the untimely deaths of Primo Levi, Leonardo Sciascia and Italo Calvino, whose works defined an era of European turmoil.
In calm tones, Levi's writings and his life explained what a terrible burden a man with a number tattooed on his arm carried, knowing that others at Auschwitz hadn't been lucky enough to survive.
In his fiction, with great courage, Sciascia exposed the roots of the Mafia and the corruption and hypocrisy at every level of society in his native Sicily.
And Calvino, in his constantly surprising stories, created dreamscapes that resembled the magical tales of the Latin American writers, perhaps because he was born in Cuba.


Chronicle
MELBA MOORE, the Tony award-winning actress and singer, has gone on public assistance in New York City, impoverished, she says, by her manager and former husband of 15 years, CHARLES HUGGINS.
Speaking on Wednesday from Gainesville, Fla., where she was working without a salary for the Hippodrome Regional Theater on an autobiographical play, Ms.
Moore said, "I went on public assistance about three weeks ago, to make sure that I could get my back rent of two months paid." Ms.
Moore lives in a $1,400-a-month apartment in Manhattan with her 16-year-old daughter.


Transit Expert Serves on 2 Transition Teams
A man who doesn't live in New Jersey or New York City, but knows how to get around in both, is serving on the transition teams of Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman here and Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani in New York.
Leonard Braun, "71 and cranky," is one of the people asked to help choose the new transportation commissioners for the city and state.


Israel-P.L.O. Talks Adjourn Without Resolving Disputes
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization ended two days of talks today after failing to resolve differences that have held up carrying out the agreement they signed in September.
The two sides agreed to meet again in Cairo next week.
Before leaving the Trianon Palace hotel in Versailles, where the negotiations took place, Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel indicated that a breakthrough did not appear imminent.


For Some, a White Christmas Is No Holiday


On the Barricades Against Violence in the Schools; As Fears Over Security Grow, New York's School Safety Force Struggles to Keep Up
It was 4 P.M., well after the close of another New York City school day last week, and the squawking radios at the headquarters of the school safety force of the Board of Education had fallen silent.
Gary Armstead, operations coordinator, was leafing through the day's reports on violence in schools across the city.
Safety officers had rescued a student slashed in the head with a box cutter by a high school classmate, as well as an intermediate school teacher slugged in the face by a teen-ager.
One officer had been injured breaking up a cafeteria brawl, and another had been shaken up when a student she was escorting to the dean's office punched her to the floor.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Hasek Notches Another Shutout  Goaltender Dominik Hasek continued his red-hot play last night, notching his fifth shutout in 13 games as the Buffalo Sabres defeated the visiting Montreal Canadiens, 5-0.
It was the defending Stanley Cup champions' sixth loss in seven games.
Buffalo hasn't lost a game at the Aud this month, going 5-0-1.
The Sabres got off to a furious start, but couldn't score.
In the first two minutes, Buffalo took six shots, hitting the post twice.
Despite having the second-best power play in the National Hockey League, the Sabres also wasted three chances with the man advantage, including a 5-on-3 opportunity.
But the Sabres opened up the game in the second period, with goals by Alexander Mogilny, Donald Audette, Bob Sweeney and Rob Ray.
It was the first of the season for Ray. (AP) Penguins 4, Bruins 3: Joe Mullen scored twice and visiting Pittsburgh survived a two-goal rally by Boston to notch its fifth straight victory against the Bruins.
Mullen, whose first two-goal game of the season was Tuesday against Tampa Bay, now has a point in eight straight games and has at least one goal in each of Pittsburgh's last five road contests.
Martin Straka and Doug Brown also scored for the Penguins.
Cam Neely had two goals and Joe Juneau had the other for Boston, which had won three straight entering the game.


Designatronics reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Devils' Power Play and Lemieux's Shot Both Come Back
Claude Lemieux and the Devils power play have both struggled for much of this season.
Tonight, both broke out as the Devils held off the Toronto Maple Leafs, 3-2, in front of 11,449 at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
A 30-goal scorer a year ago when he led the Devils in points (81) for the second consecutive season, Lemieux had just 7 goals and 19 points coming into tonight's contest.
He added two more goals on what had been an anemic Devils power play, including the game-winner on a rebound with 15 minutes 24 seconds remaining.
It was only his second multiple-goal game of the season.


Ag Services of America (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


German Metal Group Turns to Its Bankers
The new management of one of Germany's largest engineering and metals companies, Metallgesellschaft, and representatives of the company's two main German banks discussed today how to cover losses in oil futures run up by an American subsidiary.
Published reports have said that the most likely plan will be a combination of divestitures by the company, which is based in Frankfurt, and new capital from Deutsche Bank A.G. and Dresdner Bank A.G., which together own 23 percent of its shares.


In El Salvador, a Town Stricken by Civil War Celebrates Christmas


Nichols Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Righetti Signs With A's
DAVE RIGHETTI, the free-agent pitcher whose 252 career saves are a major league record for a left-hander, agreed yesterday on a one-year contract with the Oakland Athletics.


Washington Talk; Deficit Cuts: Success Gets Little Notice
There was a time not long ago when the capital was consumed by the budget deficit, by the fear that it would exceed $300 billion and by intense partisan attacks as each party blamed the other and said the other guy's solutions were no better than snake oil.
Honest, there was.
But was that the same city where Leon E. Panetta, the budget director, announced this week that the Clinton Administration's first real budget would put the deficit at about $190 billion instead of the $302 billion projected by President George Bush, and hardly anybody noticed?


Holiday Attractions, Both Standard and Irregular
Here is a sampling of holiday activities around New York City this weekend.
Unless noted, admission is free.
Today
RADIO CITY "CHRISTMAS SPECTACULAR," Radio City Music Hall, 50th Street and Avenue of the Americas.
The annual Christmas show with the Rockettes.
Weekend shows: Today at 11 A.M. and 2, 5 and 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 5 P.M. and Sunday at 9 A.M. and 12, 3, 6 and 9 P.M.
Tickets are $33 to $42.
Through Jan. 8.
Information and show schedule: (212) 307-1000.
"STAR OF CHRISTMAS," Hayden Planetarium, American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West and 81st Street.
The annual holiday sky show.
Weekend shows: Today at 1:30 and 3:30 P.M.; Sunday at 1, 3 and 5 P.M.
The museum and planetarium are closed Christmas Day.
Through Jan. 2.
Admission: $7 for adults; $4 for those 2 to 12; $6 for the elderly and students.
Information and schedule: (212) 769-5900.
CHRISTMAS PAGEANT, Church of the Heavenly Rest, Fifth Avenue at 90th Street, Manhattan.
A Children's Christmas Pageant, with music and live animals. 3:30 and 5 P.M.
Information: (212) 289-3400.
FAMILY PAGEANT, St.
George's Church, 209 East 16th Street, East Village.
A Christmas Eve Children's Celebration with music, children in costume and live animals. 4 P.M.
Information: (212) 475-0830.
"BLESSING OF THE ANIMALS," Central Presbyterian Church, 593 Park Avenue.
Animals, live or toy, will be blessed at an informal service, that will also feature caroling. 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 838-0808.
"A CHRISTMAS MOSAIC," St.
Malachy's, the Actors' Chapel (Roman Catholic), 239 West 49th Street, Manhattan.
A performance of music by Langlais and Praetorius, as well as traditional carols and dance, presented by Christopher Zunner. 11:15 P.M.
Information: (212) 489-1340.
CHRISTMAS LIGHTS TOUR, New York Gray Line.
A two-hour bus tour past the Christmas light displays in midtown Manhattan.
Daily at 7 P.M. through Jan. 1 except Christmas Day.
Tickets: $18 for adults, $9 for children.
Information: (212) 397-2600.
Tomorrow
"THE PLAY OF ST. NICHOLAS," Cathedral of St.
John the Divine (Episcopal), Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
A re-creation of three medieval plays depicting the miracles of St.
Nicholas.
Ensemble for Early Music; Frederick Renz, director. 8 P.M.
Also Dec. 26 at 3 P.M.
Tickets, $25; $10 for children under 17.
Reservations: (212) 749-6600.
CHRISTMAS AT CLEAR COMFORT: ALICE IN A WINTER WONDERLAND, Alice Austen House, Hylan Boulevard, off Bay Street, Rosebank, S.I.
A view of New York City Harbor and a stroll past the stately trees on the grounds of the estate.
Led by the Urban Park Rangers. 2 P.M.
Information: (718) 667-6042.
Sunday
CHORUS TREE, South Street Seaport Market Square, Fulton Street, between Water and South Streets, lower Manhattan.
"The Chorus Tree," performances of holiday songs by the St.
Cecilia Chorus, in a Christmas tree formation in Market Square.
Sunday at 3 and 4 P.M.
Also Dec. 30 and 31 at 6:30 and 7:30 P.M. and Jan. 1 and 2 at 3 and 4 P.M.
Information: (212) 732-7678.
"THE NUTCRACKER." New York State Theater, Lincoln Center.
The Balanchine version by the New York City Ballet.
Sunday at 1 and 5 P.M.
Limited standing room tickets only, at $10, are available for each performance and go on sale at 11 A.M.; tickets must be purchased in person.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
"LA CANTATA DEI PASTORI," Cathedral of St.
John the Divine (Episcopal), Synod Hall, Amsterdam Avenue at 110th Street, Morningside Heights.
A traditional Neapolitan Christmas celebration with music, puppets and masks.
I Giularri di Piazza; Alessandra Belloni, director. 3 and 6 P.M.
Tickets, $15.
Information: (212) 662-2133.
CHRISTMAS BIRD COUNT, Wave Hill, Independence Avenue and 249th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx.
The annual census of birds in the Bronx and lower Westchester. 9 A.M. to 1 P.M.
Meets at Wave Hill House.
Admission is free.
Information: (718) 549-3200.
VICTORIAN CHRISTMAS CELEBRATION, Historic Richmond Town, 441 Clarke Avenue, Richmondtown, S.I.
The shops and homes of the historic restoration are filled with the sights, sounds and fragrances of a Victorian holiday. 1 to 6 P.M.
Admission: $4 for adults; $2.50 for those 6 to 18 years old; free for children under 6.
Information: (718) 351-1611.


PMR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Two Children Are Found Strangled in an Apartment in Brooklyn
Two young children were strangled with an electrical cord inside an apartment in Brooklyn yesterday, and a woman with stab wounds was found nearby, the police said.
The children, a 4-year-old boy and a 6-year-old girl, were found dead at around 7:45 P.M. in the apartment at 56 Marcus Garvey Boulevard in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
But the police said they were not sure who had killed them, or why.


Confessions Of a Scientific Innocent
WE stop in front of the python skeleton.
"Disgusting," I say, surveying the long loop of bones.


New York's Court Interpreters: Overworked Link
When New York's immigrants must appear in court, precious hours often slip away because an interpreter is nowhere to be found.
Judges become furious, then desperate.
That was why a State Supreme Court clerk in Queens once ran to a Korean deli and prevailed upon the owner to help out, and why, during a hearing in a Brooklyn homicide case, a judge asked a Vietnamese co-defendant to do the honors.
The co-defendant complied, and on those grounds the conviction is being appealed.


Zack Mosley, Creator Of 'Smilin' Jack,' 87
STUART, Fla., Dec. 24 (AP),-- Zack Mosley, who mixed humor with aviation in his "Smilin' Jack" comic strip, died on Tuesday at Martin Memorial Medical Center here.
He was 87.
The cause was a heart attack.


To Stay in Touch With Crime, A Police Chief Moves Near It
It has been dark for nearly five hours in this bleakest of Portland neighborhoods, and the usual nighttime clatter of the inner city filters through the fog, ever louder by the hour.
But inside the home of Charles and Sandy Moose, the blinds are open, and there is no sense of cowering futility.
They sit in the living room, admiring the shine of new floor finish on their old house.


Retired Doctors Help Cut Health Costs
Every time Dr.
Jack B. McConnell left his dream home here for the brief drive to the store, he passed through a nightmare.
The three-mile trip took him past his yacht club and golf club to roads lined with leaky clapboard houses without heat, running water or sewage disposal.


Indian Tribes Close Ranks to Protect Casinos From Cheats and Rivals
The con artist was tracked by the Indians across a half dozen reservations, their ceiling TV cameras zooming in on her hands as she played at blackjack tables and coolly cheated tribal casinos out of $3,000 a sitting.
"In the old days, the tribes never got together on anything this way," said Roger Miller, a Mohican who is security director for the Potawatomi tribe's bingo and casino hall here and the founder of Wisconsin's new Indian Gaming Intelligence Association, which covers 11 tribes and 17 casinos.
"It was divide and conquer. But with gaming, we're experiencing the same growing pains and lack of expertise, and so we help each other out now."


METRO DIGEST
OH, AND HAPPY BIRTHDAY TO YOU, TOO
Compared with the Big Birthday today, celebrations of the arrival of less-heralded children on Dec. 25 can get lost under the tree.
"You kind of get gypped your whole life," said one Christmas baby.
Despite their second-class nativities, Little Richard, Isaac Newton and Humphrey Bogart survived.
Page 35.
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI ADDS A JOB TO SUBTRACT OTHERS
Having named a Deputy Mayor whose portfolio includes social services, and then named a Commissioner to run social services, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani created a third position to help them -- to be called Director of Social Services.
Mr.
Giuliani said the creation of the new job, along with two similar posts for education and health policy, would in fact shrink the Mayor's office and make it more efficient.
Several other specialized offices that deal with issues ranging from AIDS to drug abuse to family services will either be pruned or combined, he said.
Page 1.


Warsaw's Exuberant Exchange
Wieslaw Rozlucki has a problem.
The Warsaw Stock Exchange index soared 700 percent this year, and so Mr.
Rozlucki, the president of what some financial analysts are calling the world's strongest-performing market in 1993, is wondering how he can sustain the success.
"Certainly no other market has done so well this year, and I don't know of any other case like it in history," said the usually circumspect Mr.
Rozlucki at the end of another hectic trading day in a room that used to be the library in the Communist Party headquarters.
"The question is: how long can it continue? This is the big question for everyone."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  BLOODSHED IN THE HOLY LAND  The Israeli commander of a special military unit that hunted fugitive Palestinians was gunned down in Christmas Eve violence in the Gaza Strip.  1  YELTSIN PROPOSAL QUASHED  The Commonwealth of Independent States rejected a proposal to grant special status to Russians living in member countries.  1  Children were taken hostage in Russia.
A4


Shutout Doesn't Ease Frustration for Healy
Glenn Healy tried hard to look happy after his shutout of the Capitals Thursday night, but the Ranger goalie's frustration at playing so sporadically this season overshadowed his accomplishment.
What has been particularly frustrating, Healy said, is that he feels he has had no moral support from his coach, Mike Keenan, in Healy's first season with the Rangers.
Healy's situation has been made even more difficult by the outstanding play of the team's regular goalie, Mike Richter, whose 20-game unbeaten streak (17-0-3) finally ended Wednesday night against the Florida Panthers.


Breaking Even in a Seasonal Business
Tom Ruffino has been operating a Christmas Tree lot in Lake Grove, L.I., for 30 years.
The day after Thanksgiving each year, he begins selling the trees ordered months earlier from Canada.
But profit margins have been squeezed in recent years, he said by large stores that can but in bulk, like Home Depot.
By Reducng his inventoty this year, he hopes to sell out and make a profit.
"Years ago," he said, "It was a social thing. Families would come in, we'd drink wine and have a good time." Over the last three seasons, the Christmas tree business has barely broken even, he said.
The owner of R&amp;R Landscaping in Central Islip, he considers the holiday tree sales a supplement to his core business.
And the tree sales allow him to support a few employees, who will then be let go until landscaping picks up again in the spring.
"When I sit down and figure out how little I really make, I think I must be crazy to do this," he said.
"Every year I say I'm going to quit, but my wife tells me it's in my blood. Maybe it is."


Devils Turn It Up a Notch As Power Play Awakens
In a little more than 24 hours, the Devils went from playing some of their worst hockey to playing some of their best.
Now, after a couple of days off for the holidays, they have the team with the best record in the National Hockey League to look forward to.
One night after looking horrible in an embarrassing 6-3 loss at Hartford, the Devils thoroughly dominated Toronto at Byrne Meadowlands Arena to win by 3-2 Thursday night, as both Claude Lemieux and the Devils' power play awakened from slumps.


Corrections
A brief report in the "On Stage, and Off" column in Weekend yesterday incorrectly summarized Arthur Miller's new play, "Broken Glass," which is to open in March at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven.
The character who is paralyzed is Sylvia Gellburg, not her husband.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Bosnia peace talks misstated the date of the Serbian Orthodox celebration of Christmas.
It is Jan. 7, not Jan. 2.


CHRONICLE
From East and West, they've converged once more on Aspen, Colo.
The winter denizens -- movie moguls and captains of industry -- have been swarming into the resort for the holidays.
"The town is packed to the rafters and has been since Dec. 18," HARLEY BALDWIN said yesterday from his vantage point, the Caribou Club, a private club he owns.
"The skiing is excellent, the sun is out and there is a God in the heavens."


Against Nets, Hardaway Answers His Doubters
Anfernee Hardaway heard the whispers, and they kept him awake nights.
The whispers said, "mistake." They said, "Webber." They said that Hardaway, the 6-foot-7-inch guard from Memphis State, might not be all he had been advertised to be when the Orlando Magic gambled on him in June and traded Chris Webber to Golden State for Hardaway and three first-round draft picks.
Against the New Jersey Nets Thursday night, Hardaway answered the whispers with a shout.
He played his best game as a professional, lighting up Orlando Arena with his quickness and grace.


Venezuela Economic Plan Won Approval
To the Editor:
"Venezuela Victor: Will Vows Be Kept?" (news article, Dec. 6) is not an objective appreciation of Venezuela and its newly elected president, Rafael Caldera.
You erroneously assert that Carlos Andres Perez, president until last May, resigned from office.
Mr.
Perez was removed from office by the National Congress by constitutional means after the Supreme Court found sufficient evidence to try him on charges of corruption.


The British Novelist Who Turned A Class System Upside Down
When Sue Townsend's novel "The Queen and I" was published in Britain last year, she sat back and braced herself for what she was sure would be a deluge of hate mail.
After all, the novel, which was published in the United States in September by Soho Press, imagines nothing less than the overthrow of the British monarchy and the banishment of the royal family to a rough-and-tumble public housing project.
Queen Elizabeth II is forced to eke out a mingy existence on state benefits.
Prince Charles grows a ponytail and gets into trouble with the law.
Princess Diana and Princess Anne take up with men of dubious character.
Prince Philip descends into a state of filth and madness.
Worst of all, the beloved Queen Mother dies.


Palestinian Gunmen in Gaza Slay an Israeli Army Colonel
Before Bethlehem's silent night came a day of political clamor and bloodshed in Israeli-held territories today.
The bloodshed was in the Gaza Strip, where Palestinian gunmen raked an army jeep with automatic rifle fire, killing a senior officer, Lieut.
Col.
Meir Mintz, and wounding two, possibly three, other soldiers.
One of the wounded was an unidentified army major.


Stalemate in Sarajevo but Some Muslim Gains
Limping and bent beneath a box of food he had roped to his back, Saban Kiamet, a Muslim, said tonight that he was sad that he would not be able to celebrate Christmas this year "in a civilized fashion" with his friends.
"They're all gone," he said, after scurrying between two shipping containers set across a small street to shield pedestrians from sniper fire.
A Serbian sniper shot a man on the same corner the day before, the second of three days of heavy fighting here.


Noted Russian Ensemble Seeks a Place to Rehearse
The Moscow State Symphony Orchestra is homeless.
One of the best-known musical ensembles in Russia and the world for 50 years, the orchestra was unceremoniously thrown out of its permanent rehearsal quarters in Trinity Church, a whitewashed brick landmark with two octagonal towers on the Garden Ring Road, in July.
The orchestra's plight and the measures it has taken in the ensuing months illustrate the problems that cultural institutions in Russia have been facing since the collapse of Communism between 1989 and 1991.


Tokyo Chief Apologizes for Failing on Reform
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa apologized to the Japanese public today for failing to bring about political reform by his self-imposed deadline of the end of this year.
"I have to offer my frank apology to the people of the nation," he said in a televised news conference.


For Haiti, Sanctions That Bite
Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, has been subjected to unrelenting pressure in recent weeks to try to resolve his country's political crisis.
The junta that runs Haiti has refused to step aside, as its members had agreed to do, and allow Father Aristide to govern.
This week the Haitian military declined to meet with a delegation from the "Four Friends" group of countries: the U.S., Venezuela, Canada and France.
In response, the international community finally is beginning to apply pressure where it is due: on Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras and his cronies.
The United States has an obligation to make sure that the pressure continues.


Ali Suing Adviser
MUHAMMAD ALI has sued his longtime spiritual and business adviser, contending that he forged Ali's signature in fund-raising letters for a foundation that promotes Islam.
The lawsuit, filed in Cook County Circuit Court because the Muhammad Ali Foundation is based in Chicago, also charges that the foundation is using Ali's name and likeness without permission.
The suit seeks to nullify a 1991 agreement between Ali and the foundation head, JABIR HERBERT MUHAMMAD, saying it was obtained under undue influence or duress. (AP)


Christmas Day
NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES State offices and courts in New York State and New York City are closed.
POST OFFICE


Robert V. Roosa Is Dead at 75; Served as U.S. Treasury Official
Robert V. Roosa, who served as Under Secretary of the Treasury for monetary affairs from 1961 to 1964 and was a retired Wall Street investment banker, died on Thursday at the United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 75 and lived in Harrison, N.Y..
The cause was prostate cancer, said a daughter, Meredith Inderfurth.


Birthdays Lost in a Christmas Eclipse
Compared with the Big Birthday today, celebrations of the arrival of less-heralded children on Dec. 25 can get lost under the tree.
"It made me what I would describe as existentially nervous," said James Christopher Jones, a Manhattan interior designer, who will turn 47 today.


Bridge
Bridge books and columns are well-provided with examples of brilliant moves by experts, who then bask in the limelight.
Invariably omitted are the occasions on which an expert tries to be brilliant and emerges with egg on his face.
A fine example is the diagramed deal from the 1993 Spingold Knockout Team, played in July in Washington.
It will be seen that North-South went off the rails in the bidding, and reached six hearts lacking two aces, a misfortune that the Blackwood convention, now 60 years old, was intended to prevent.
The two-club response was game-forcing in the partnership style, but nevertheless it would seem that South had done enough by reversing and then cue-bidding.
If he had bid four hearts after his partner's four-club cue-bid, the bidding would have ended at a safe level.
His jump to five hearts demanded that his partner continue if he had first- or second-round diamond control.
He had, and he did.


First Lady's Photos Send Girls Wrong Message; Eternal Question
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 12 Week in Review article about the Annie Leibovitz photo portraits of Hillary Rodham Clinton repeats comments like "the American First Lady's new 'pussycat' look" and "bedroom eyes," trivializing the Leibovitz photo shown.


Dance Notes
Kwakiutl Traditions
For nearly a half-century, the language and rituals of the Kwakiutl Indians of Alert Bay, British Columbia, were suppressed as pagan by the Canadian Government.
One of those rituals was the Red Cedar Bark Ceremony, a winter rite performed in part to pray for an abundance of game.
But now the ceremony is being seen and heard not just by the Kwakiutls (pronounced KWAY-cues) but also by dancegoers around the United States, as performed by the touring American Indian Dance Theater.
The company continues through Jan. 2 at the Joyce Theater.


A Stand-Up Coach Is Serious About the Game
The pressure on Wagner Coach Tim Capstraw is building, but not necessarily because he faces his mentor, P. J. Carlesimo, and Seton Hall on Monday.
The pressure Capstraw feels may be like Jerry Seinfeld's.
Everyone expects him to be funny all the time, and he tries to be accommodating.


UConn Women Get Grades and Ranking
Only one thing stood between Pam Webber and a perfect grade-point average at Hollidaysburg High School in western Pennsylvania, where she was the senior class valedictorian in 1991 and the student-athlete of the year.
"I got a 90 in driver's ed -- imagine, in driver's ed," Webber said this week after completing her fall semester final examinations at the University of Connecticut.
"Otherwise, I got straight A's."


CLINTON TO REQUIRE STATES TO FINANCE ABORTIONS OF POOR
The Clinton Administration has decided to require states to pay for abortions for low-income women made pregnant by rape or incest, the Federal official in charge of the Medicaid program said tonight.
The official, Bruce C. Vladeck, said the Government intended to issue a directive by Jan. 1 requiring the states to pay for such abortions for those who want them.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Agreed to terms with Eddie Anderson, safety, and Jeff Jaeger, kicker, on three-year contracts.


Medtronic to Acquire Medical Device Maker
Medtronic Inc., a diversified medical device maker based in Minneapolis, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Electromedics Inc., a similar but smaller company, in a cash or stock deal valued at $96.9 million.
Medtronic raised a previous offer by 12.5 cents a share, offering $6.875 for each of the 14.1 million Electromedics shares, payable in Medtronic stock or cash, or a combination of the two.


Washington at Work; Tension With White House Leaves C.I.A. Chief Out in the Cold
When President Clinton sought a new Defense Secretary, no one in his Administration appeared better qualified than R. James Woolsey Jr., the Director of Central Intelligence.
Mr.
Woolsey, who has served Mr.
Clinton loyally for most of a year, is a onetime Under Secretary of the Navy and a former senior arms control negotiator, has represented major military contractors as a lawyer and once served on the staff of the Senate Armed Services Committee.
Yet, he was passed over in favor of someone outside the Administration, Bobby Ray Inman, a retired admiral who did not know Mr.
Clinton and who professed that he needed time to become comfortable with the President before accepting the job.


Markets Closed for Holiday
All domestic financial and commodity markets were closed yesterday in observance of Christmas Eve.
The Canadian stock exchanges were also closed, but there was trading in Mexico.
The major European stock exchanges, except for the German market, were open, but some ran abbreviated sessions.
There was limited trading in currency, precious metals and commodities in Europe and minimal currency activity in New York.


Remember The Batteries?
Christmas morning is when people remember the phrase "batteries not included." And the search begins.
Page 47.


London Journal; For the Troubled Anglicans, Peace Is Still Elusive
It was the last Sunday before Christmas, and the voices of two choirs and nearly 300 worshipers swelled the 16th-century void of St.
Giles Cripplegate.
With priests and deacons dressed in seasonal vestments, and illuminated by flickering candles, it was a rich display of both Christian celebration and Anglican theater.
Yet as parishes all across Britain join their voices this Christmas weekend in similar services, the Anglican church is confronting, behind the scenes, a much less harmonious reality.
Once a powerful British force of unity and purpose, the Church of England these days is a troubled institution, with many of its clergy and laity divided and uncertain over the church's future.


Harris L. Friedman; Researcher and Professor, 80
Dr.
Harris L. Friedman, a retired drug researcher and professor of pharmacology at the Medical College of Wisconsin, died on Dec. 12 at his home in Londonderry, N.H.
He was 80.
The cause was heart failure, said his son, Dr. Neil K. Friedman of Manhattan.


Darrell Yates Rist; Writer, 45
Darrell Yates Rist, a writer and co-founder of the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation, died on Thursday in St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 45 and lived in Manhattan.
His companion, Robert M. Cataldo, said he died from an AIDS-related illness.


Garlands of Ivy Deck the Cloisters


When Donating Property to Charity, an Appraisal May Be In Order
Charitable spirits making end-of-year donations of personal property -- like artwork, antiques or jewelry -- may well need to hire an appraiser.
For tax purposes, a gift of property valued at less than $500 to a nonprofit group can simply be deducted without filling out any special forms.
A donation valued at $500 to $5,000 can be deducted on Form 8283 of your tax return, by reporting a few details on Section A. If the property's value exceeds $5,000, you must complete Section B and include a certification by an appraiser.


Coghlan at the Garden
EAMONN COGHLAN, the world indoor mile record-holder and seeking to become the first runner over 40 to break 4 minutes for the distance, will compete in the Masters Mile at the Millrose Games on Feb. 4 at Madison Square Garden.
Coghlan, 41, won the event last year in 4 minutes 5.95 seconds -- at the time the fastest indoor mark for a Masters competitor.
He later lowered the record to 4:01.39 at the USA-Mobil Indoor Championships at the Garden.
It was the fastest Masters time ever, indoors or outdoors. (AP)


A Miracle of Christmas in the Spirit of Peace: Trading Guns for Toys


2 Japanese Companies Set Merger
Two of Japan's leading chemical manufacturers said today that they would merge, creating one of the 10 largest chemical companies in the world and speeding the restructuring of one of this nation's least competitive industries.
Mitsubishi Kasei, one of Japan's largest general chemical manufacturers, will combine with Mitsubishi Petrochemical, the country's biggest petrochemical company, in a stock transaction.
The new entity, tentatively called the Mitsubishi Chemical Company, would have consolidated sales of more than $14 billion.


Editorial Ghosts
Christmas comes at us like an avalanche.
It starts the day after Thanksgiving (earlier in some shopping malls) and tumbles down upon us, picking up speed through December with shopping sprees, Christmas sales, catalogues, greeting cards, trees, lights, tinsel, wreaths, chestnuts, roasting fires, snowmen, office parties, reindeer, wrapping paper, midnight Mass and Santa Claus.


Player Not Punished
JOHN FASHANU escaped punishment for elbowing the Tottenham captain, GARY MABUTT, during a British soccer game last month.
A Football Association commission said yesterday that it decided not to recommend a misconduct charge against Fashanu, who plays for Wimbledon. (AP)


Finding an Education System's Fatal Flaw
The four-volume report issued this week by a special state commission on public education diagnoses as the central malady of the state's education system the Balkanization of education policy making in Albany.
While the report offers prescriptions for everything from inadequate child health care to soaring property taxes, nowhere in it does the commission, which was appointed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, offer a remedy for this most systemic of problems.


For the Listening Room, the Sounds of Silence


Review/Music; 'Rosenkavalier,' the Film, in Reconstruction
Richard Strauss has always been shadowed by suspicions that he was a film composer in disguise.
Debussy was the first to make the slur, calling "Ein Heldenleben" an exercise in musical cinematography.
It's true, to a certain extent; Strauss practiced a quick-cut, montage style assiduously copied by Hollywood composers.
But in the end, the accusation makes precious little sense.
One might as well say the films of Eisenstein are inferior because they are edited like MTV.
Strauss did try one cinematic venture in 1925: "Der Rosenkavalier," a silent film of the opera with live orchestral accompaniment.
Berndt Heller, an academic specialist in movie scoring, has put together an elaborate reconstruction that Leon Botstein and the American Symphony Orchestra presented at Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday afternoon.


Waters Inching Back From a German City
After cresting in Cologne, the floodwaters of the Rhine began to creep back, leaving thousands of families in Germany homeless for the holidays and threatening cities down river in Germany, France and the Netherlands with the possibility of danger, damage and evacuation.


Review/Music; Festive Sounds Of Ancient Christmases
Even without added attractions, the annual concerts by the Aulos Ensemble in front of the Neapolitan Christmas tree in the Medieval Sculpture Hall of the Metropolitan Museum of Art have become one of the most charming musical celebrations of the season in New York.
But this year there was indeed more: Julianne Baird, a soprano who brings special eloquence and expressivity to early music, took part in the little hourlong program, which was given twice on Tuesday evening.
A half-dozen carols were beautifully done at the second performance.
In the "Sussex Carol," a listener hardly knew what to admire more: Ms.
Baird's solo opening or her superbly matched duet with Marc Schachman, the oboist.
In "When Christ Was Born on Earth," Ms.
Baird joined the players on equal terms, sweetly humming along with Mr.
Schachman, Myron Lutzke, the cellist, and Arthur Haas, the harpsichordist.
"Es ist ein Ros' entsprungen" was haunting, and Ms.
Baird delivered "Greensleeves" with such hearty conviction that a listener could only share her optimistic wish for the new year.


Elderly Paid Dues, But Get the Brushoff
To the Editor:
I'm one of those middle-class elderly people who, after working 50 years, is getting Social Security.
I get the feeling that it's becoming ever more acceptable to discuss getting rid of the elderly as soon as possible.
We are even being convinced that we should die or commit suicide so as not to bother anyone, particularly poor struggling youth.


CHRONICLE
Roses have been arriving by the dozens in the Washington office of DONNA E. SHALALA, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, from grateful University of Wisconsin football fans.
It is their way of saying thanks to the university's former chancellor, who played a role in the development of the team that will play in the Rose Bowl game on New Year's Day.
It will be the first time Wisconsin has played in the Rose Bowl in 31 years.
When Ms.
Shalala became the school's chancellor in 1988, she had never headed a school that had a football team.
But after the university endured a losing streak in 1989, she replaced the athletic director, Ade Sponberg, with Pat Richter, who in turn dismissed the head football coach, Don Morton, and appointed Barry Alvarez.


Neediest Cases Assists With a Christmas Tree
Seven-year-old Naisha L. runs to the window where she can see twinkling colored lights in the windows of other apartments in the Astoria Projects in Long Island City, Queens.
"Look, it's Christmas outside," she says.
For Naisha, Christmas has yet to move inside.
Her mother, Beatrice L., can remember a really good Christmas during the early 1980's.
But that was before Naisha and her three siblings were born.


Q and A
Tax-Free Spending Account  Q. What are the advantages of a flexible spending account?
JENNIFER KRUCHER, Woodside, Queens  A. Flexible spending accounts established by employers allow employees to put part of their salary away before taxes to pay for certain types of expenses.
If you choose to contribute to such an account, your salary is reduced by a predetermined amount each payday.
That money is then accumulated and reimbursed to you for medical expenses or dependent care costs, as permitted under your company's plan.
By using this type of account, you can pay for medical care not covered by health plans or day-care costs with money that is not subject to income or Social Security taxes.
The tax break can be significant, especially for people in the top brackets.
Charles Kerby, a principal in William M. Mercer, a consulting firm, noted that "under I.R.S. rules governing this benefit, if someone doesn't spend all the money in his or her F.S.A. by the end of the year, the money is forfeited."
This use-it-or-lose-it rule "makes it very important to estimate future medical or dependent care costs accurately," he said.
I.R.A.
Distributions  Q. When withdrawing money from an individual retirement account, how do you determine what part is taxable and what part is tax-free?
JOAN NORMAN, Roslyn, L.I.
A.
If you have made only tax-deductible contributions to an individual retirement account, all distributions are taxed as ordinary income in the year received.
But if you have also made nondeductible contributions to any I.R.A., a portion of all distributions will be tax-free.
"The formula for determining the nontaxable portion is calculated by multiplying the total current year's distributions by a fraction," said Robert A. Clarfeld, president of Clarfeld &amp; Company, a New York accounting firm.
The numerator of the fraction is the amount of nondeductible contributions, and the denominator is all I.R.A. balances as of Dec. 31 of that year.
Valuing Index Options  Q. Certain broad-based index options, like the American Stock Exchange major market index and the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index, are marked to market value at the end of each year.
Others, like the Philadelphia Stock Exchange Gold &amp; Silver Index are not.
How are options on the Japan index treated?
H.
HAHN, Port Jefferson, L.I.
A.
Whether an index option is marked to market value at the end of the year is determined by Section 1256 of the Internal Revenue Code.
For an index option to be marked to market, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission must have designated it a contract market or the Treasury Department must have stated that the option meets the requirements for that market designation.
Otherwise, the value of an index option is listed at the price paid.
"The Japan index options are not marked to market at year-end," said Robert Gordon, president of the Twenty-First Securities Corporation.
"If a futures contract begins to trade on the Japan index, this would change."


CLINTON TO SUBMIT PAPERS NEXT WEEK
A set of papers detailing President and Mrs.
Clinton's involvement in an Arkansas land deal before Mr.
Clinton became President will be turned over to Federal investigators sometime next week, Administration officials said today.
The papers were found in the White House office of Vincent W. Foster Jr. after he committed suicide in July.
Mr.
Foster, the deputy White House counsel at the time of his death, was a lawyer in private practice in Little Rock before the last Presidential election and had served as the Clintons' personal lawyer.


ATP Denies Allegations Of Drug Use on Tour
BORIS BECKER's allegations that some players on the ATP Tour are getting away with drug use is unfounded, tour officials said yesterday in Frankfurt.
A published report quoted Becker, a three-time Wimbledon champion, as saying that it was a "joke" that no tennis player had been punished for drug abuse by the ATP.
An ATP statement said: "To this day, no player has been confirmed positive for the use of any substance which would have resulted in a suspension."


Why Creatures Aren't Stirring
It is Christmas morning.
After a shopping odyssey that provided an-oft-scary glimpse at the ferocity of American consumerism, there is finally a chance to relax.
The children swarm around the tree and tear open gifts, pouncing on their new turbo-mega-monster trucks and cuddly-cutesy-chatty dolls.
But then a resentful silence suddenly descends over the living room.
The batteries . . . the batteries!


Review/Pop; Tour of Latin Dance Music Guided by a True Ensemble
About a third of the way through the drummer Bobby Sanabria's second song on Monday night at S.O.B.'s, the band's intensity quietly shifted.
Another voice joined the chorus, somebody in the band picked up a cowbell and added a new percussion figure, and suddenly the group reached the level all great dance bands have to reach to make a living.
What had been eight men working became a unit willing to turn the communal experience into something transcendental, to use physical movement and music's sensuality as a release from the mundane.
The song, "The Peanut Vendor," ended up being an Afro-Cuban suite.
It started out smoothly, with Hiram Remon singing almost introspectively.
Figures and rhythmic riffs were added.
The performance changed mood, picking up the gravity of a great groove, and as it hit the improvisation section, the band blossomed.
Lewis Kahn on violin improvised first, then turned the last few notes of his solo into a riff that was picked up by the rest of the band; the saxophonist Gene Jefferson improvised next.
Mr.
Kahn shifted the riff around, and the band picked that up as well.
Mr.
Sanabria soloed next, his rhythmic patterns, abrupt and short and precise, standing stock still amid the tumult.


Christmas in Bethlehem, With a Difference


Singapore Secrets Act
To the Editor:
"Trial in Singapore Tests Press Curbs" (news article, Dec. 5) criticizes Singapore's Official Secrets Act for being so broadly worded that it bars the release of any information that the Government deems confidential.
This law was enacted in British-governed Singapore based on the laws of Britain.
The Singapore Government will not allow anyone to use the excuse of "Western-style freedom of speech or information" or "investigative reporting" to divulge classified information.
This attitude may strike Americans as quaint.


8 Killed in South African Attack Police Blame on Faction Struggle
Gunmen in troubled Natal province entered a squatter camp Thursday night and began shooting at random, killing eight people in an attack that the South African police attributed to a struggle between rival black factions.
Four men died immediately in the attack outside Durban, and three women and an infant died later in a local hospital, the police said today.


Gospel on Film and Live
"Good Time Sunday," a documentary film by Gary Keys about gospel music, is being shown as part of a program of live gospel performances by groups from Harlem at Anthology Film Archives, 32 Second Avenue, at Second Street, East Village, through Jan. 2.
Program times this weekend are tonight at 6 and 8 P.M. and tomorrow at 4 and 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 505-5181.


Rhine Floods Worst in Century; 50,000 Homeless
Seen from across the roiled and angry Rhine, as waters began to recede, the soaring stone mass of Cologne Cathedral looked like a great ship riding out a storm today after the worst flooding here this century.
The cathedral, begun in the 13th century with a nave and spires built in the 19th, remained high and dry over the muddy brown waters of the river, which burst its banks and flooded parts of the medieval quarter earlier this week.


Let the Independent Counsel Speak
After some shameful delays, Congress is nearly ready to revive the independent counsel law that lapsed a year ago.
The Senate passed a renewal bill last month and the House version is ready for floor action when Congress returns next month.
Unfortunately, the Senate has approved a damaging modification in the law.
The House should fight the change.
The law, passed in the wake of Watergate, provides an independent prosecutor to investigate charges of criminality against the highest officials of the executive branch.
It recognizes that when the President's men and women are investigated, the Attorney General has an inherent conflict of interest: he or she is both the top prosecutor and the President's lawyer.


Holocaust Museum Has Place in New York
To the Editor:
Menachem Z. Rosensaft suggests that because there is a Holocaust Museum in Washington, there is no need for the Museum of Jewish Heritage in New York (letter, Dec. 18).
How many of New York's two million Jews, and equally important, how many of its six million non-Jews, will ever see the Holocaust Museum?
The United States Holocaust Museum is about the Nazis.
It defines the Holocaust as "what the Nazis did." In that context, the Gypsies are as much victims of the Holocaust as the Jews.
The Poles who were killed and cremated at Auschwitz, many of whom were dedicated anti-Semites, would also be victims of the Holocaust.


Playoff Crunch: 14 Teams, 8 Spots
The National Football League kicks off the next-to-last weekend of the regular season today with an unusual game between two unusual teams.
As a holiday treat, on a day with few sports events, the Houston Oilers (10-4) will oppose the 49ers (10-4) at Candlestick Park in San Francisco.
Both teams clinched division titles last Sunday and are trying to achieve the best records in their conferences and thus assure the home-field advantage throughout the playoffs in January.


First Lady's Photos Send Girls Wrong Message; Power and Beauty
To the Editor:
The controversy regarding Hillary Rodham Clinton's decision to be photographed by Annie Leibovitz for Vogue has become heated ("Hillary Rodham Clinton Strikes a New Pose and Multiplies Her Images," The Week in Review, Dec. 12).
The arguments against the photo graphs are numerous.
According to Sheila Tate, a former aide to Nancy Reagan and George Bush, Mrs.
Clinton has changed her image so many times, "it doesn't feel genuine."


INSIDE
Old Enemies, New Partners
Indian tribes with casinos are seeking to protect their profits by sharing information about corrupt managers and gamblers who cheat.
Page 6.
Strains in Washington
Strains between the White House and the C.I.A. may have cost its director a chance to be Pentagon chief.
Page 10.
Giuliani Creates New Post
Mayor-elect Giuliani created a Director of Social Services in a move he described as a consolidation.
Page 33.


Smallpox Virus, Frozen in 2 Labs, Escapes a Scalding End for Now
The smallpox virus, one of the biggest killers in history, has won a temporary stay from its planned execution next week because some scientists have begun to argue that the virus could yield useful medical knowledge about smallpox and maybe other diseases.
Health officials in the United States and Russia, who hold the last known stocks of the smallpox virus, had planned to destroy them simultaneously by New Year's Eve.


Thompson Is Hitting by the Book in Winter Ball
Ted Williams.
Pete Rose.
Frank Robinson.
Joe Morgan.
Rod Carew.
Bobby Bonds.
Tony Perez.
They never played in the same lineup together, but could have surely won many a championship or two together if they had.
But they have won something together, something unbeknownst to them all.


Giants Prove More Fun As Winning Investment
He shelled out $75 million to buy half of the Giants one month after they won the Super Bowl.
But for two seasons, all Bob Tisch had to show for it was a better seat and a ring they gave him.
Still, Tisch sounds the same, and is doing the same thing this week that he was doing a year ago -- skiing in Aspen -- when he watched the disintegration of a once-proud team.


Knicks Hoping to Get Jackson To Fill the Void at Point Guard
Yes, the Knicks would take Mark Jackson back. In a New York minute.
"Sure, we have interest in Mark," a Knick official, who asked that his name not be used, confirmed yesterday.
"He's an excellent point guard. We felt that way when we traded Mark in the first place, but we were in the process of trying to improve our team. Obviously now, with Doc Rivers out, we've got a situation to address. If he's available, we're interested."


A Third Aide Is Appointed By Giuliani
Having named a Deputy Mayor whose portfolio includes social services, and then a commissioner to run the social-services agency, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday created a third position to work with them: Director of Social Services.
Mr.
Giuliani said that creating the position, along with two similar posts for education and health policy, would actually shrink the Mayor's office and make it more efficient.
Along those lines, several other specialized offices that deal with issues including AIDS, drug abuse and family services will either be pruned or combined, he said.


Italy's Parliament Confronts Premier in Confidence Vote
Just when it seemed that Italy was about to emerge from its political doldrums and dissolve Parliament to make way for new elections, the legislature blocked the process today with a demand for a confidence vote on the Government.
The maneuver seemed to be a rear-guard action by lawmakers who stand to lose their jobs -- and, more important, their immunity from prosecution -- when Italians go to the polls next spring to pass judgment on the politicians who benefited from the country's huge corruption scandal.


Last Call Sounds for Last Gin Mill on the Bowery
AL'S, the last rummy bar on the Bowery, has closed.
They had a free open bar there last Saturday night, and then after the regulars yawed out the doors were shut, leaving the most famous skid row in the world without a single no-frills gin mill for the alcoholic down and out.
"I guess you could call it the end of an era," said Bruce, who had been the regular 4-P.M-to-4-A.M. bartender for 12 years.
You could indeed.


Beliefs
On the day before Christmas Eve, the crowds buzzed and hovered around the teeming figures of the Metropolitan Museum of Art's elaborate Neapolitan creche.
Only a few people wandered by one of the museum's great treasures, Andrea Mantegna's "Adoration of the Shepherds."
It is a small painting, about 15 by 20 inches, and it emits a heavenly repose and an earthly realism that speak directly to the season's contradictions.


Small Presses Are Nothing Like Vanity Presses
To the Editor:
Your Book Notes column of Dec. 8, graciously describing the Small Press Book Fair, includes the unfortunate line that some small presses are "vanity presses formed for their owner's work." Horrors!
Self-publication is an honorable tradition that has produced some of the world's literary masterpieces.
A "vanity press," on the other hand, is a profit-making enterprise hired by an author who lacks the gumption or commitment to self-publish.
The vanity press takes over from copy editing through fulfillment, all for a profit on top of expenses.
By contrast, a self-publisher personally handles or oversees every step in the publication process.
A vanity press does not care if it sells any books, since its profit comes from the author's fee; a self-publisher lives for little else.


Leisurely Approaches To Last-Minute Rush
There is a universal truth known by last-minute Christmas shoppers everywhere.
Anxiety has to precede pleasure or it is no fun at all.
By that measure, then, the pleasure factor must have been diminished somewhat yesterday, because shoppers in the New York metropolitan region seemed in unusually good spirits, shoulders down, anxiety level low.


This Year, A Better Christmas
Beatrice L. of Queens can remember a really good Christmas in the early 1980's.
But that was before any of her four children were born.
For Beatrice and her family, the joy of the holidays was usually lost in the struggle to survive.
But this year will be different, thanks to an agency supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Article, page XX.


Business Digest
The Economy
For millions of regular users of computer networks, holiday traditions are being updated and adapted to the infinite, conceptual realm called cyberspace, including the giving of electronic gifts, sending electronic Christmas cards and, yes, last-minute shopping at the electronic mall.  [ Page 1. ]  Cyberspace Santa Clauses have been receiving and answering requests for toys, peace on earth, and advice on relationships.  [ 48. ]


Review/Theater; Pessimistic Outlook on Europe In Shaw's 'Heartbreak House'
"We are useless, dangerous and ought to be abolished," declares Hesione Hushabye, George Bernard Shaw's notion of an aristocratic femme fatale in his play "Heartbreak House." Echoing that sentiment, her dashing husband, Hector, observes, "We do not live in this house; we haunt it."
The idea that human beings might be the plague of the planet runs through the drama, which was written during World War I and reflects the playwright's gloomy assessment of the soul of Europe during a time of mass slaughter.
Part drawing-room comedy, part Shakespearean lament, "Heartbreak House" sees the romantic machinations of the guests in an English country house as emblematic of the malaise gripping the Continent.
And in the Jean Cocteau Repertory Theater's surreal interpretation, the spare, abstract production only underscores the discontinuity between the play's smart chatter and its core of profound disquiet.


Review/Dance; Maintaining Equanimity As a Choreographic Constant
Brenda Daniels, a soloist with Ton Simons and Dancers, also gives programs of her own under the heading Brenda Daniels Solo.
Examples of Mr.
Simons's group works and Ms.
Daniels's solo choreography were on view on Dec. 16 at the Merce Cunningham Studio.
Mr.
Simons, a Dutch-born choreographer, offered three pieces from his company's repertory.
Each was meticulously crafted.
In an allegro excerpted from "Private Debates/Public Exhibition," recorded music by Mozart sent Ty Boomershine, Joan Norvelle, Rachel Whiting, Samuel Wuersten and Ms.
Daniels bounding briskly across the space.


No Headline
"A lot of people come in and they say, 'Thank God! You're open!' Nothing moves like batteries. It's our biggest mover on Christmas Day." -- DAVID JONES, a convenience store clerk in Plano, Tex.  [ 47:3. ]


Building Fusion Reactor Makes Little Sense
To the Editor:
While I applaud the ingenuity and skill shown by the scientists and engineers at the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory in reaching a new mark in the production of bursts of fusion energy (front page, Dec. 10), I find the surrounding commentaries misleading and overoptimistic.
The last time I heard a description of what a commercial deuterium-tritium fusion reactor might look like, it was an impractical device that could never be successful.
It would cost billions of dollars, and yet every six months it would have to be shut down and torn apart in order to remove thousands of pounds of weakened walls, made radioactive by the neutrons produced in the fusion reactions that generate the energy.


Rams Move Considered
GEORGIA FRONTIERE, owner of the Los Angeles Rams, says she doesn't want to sell the team but is exploring the possibility of moving it to Baltimore.
"It's something that you have to consider," Frontiere said in an interview in The Los Angeles Times yesterday.
Baltimore officials, in their quest to lure a National Football League team, have offered to lease a stadium -- yet to be built -- for $1 a year and allow a team to keep all ticket, luxury box, concession and parking revenue. (AP)


Ex-Soviet Lands Rebuff Yeltsin On Protecting Russians Abroad
In a renewed display of tension over the resurgence of Russian nationalism, the former Soviet republics grouped in the Commonwealth of Independent States rejected a proposal today by President Boris N. Yeltsin to grant special status to Russians living inside their borders.
The Russian President put forward the proposal at a meeting in Turkmenistan of the leaders of the 12 countries that make up the Commonwealth, which comprises all the former Soviet republics except the three Baltic countries.


Shoppers Scurry Before the Celebrations of Kwanzaa and Christmas


Valuable Jewelry Items May Not Be Covered
IT'S the gift of a lifetime -- an emerald necklace, a diamond ring or a prestige gold watch.
But this beautiful piece of jewelry could be as enticing to thieves as to the recipient.
Witness the recent spate of robberies by well-dressed jewel thieves who chose their victims while dining in luxury on Manhattan's East Side.


Multifunds: Diversified To a Fare-Thee-Well
IT sure sounds like a good idea.
Why not do with mutual funds the same thing mutual funds do with stocks?
What you get is a multifund, a mutual fund that invests in other funds instead of individual securities or bonds.
There are now 21 such funds, the oldest begun in the mid-1980's.
They range from API Special Markets, a tiny natural resources fund, to Vanguard Star, a multibillion-dollar balanced offering.


Muslim Chaplain Sees Historic Role in Army
He was born a Baptist, but as a young man he embraced Islam and took the name Abdul-Rasheed Muhammad.
Now, he has also taken the rank of Army captain, becoming the first Muslim chaplain in the armed forces and a symbol of growing religious diversity.
Since his swearing-in on Dec. 3 at a ceremony at the Pentagon attended by family, friends and reporters, Captain Muhammad has been back home in Buffalo, finishing his work as a prison chaplain and preparing to report for duty on Jan. 10 at the Army Chaplains School in Fort Monmouth, N.J.


Portland Journal; For Consumer Therapy, Phone Catalogue Sales
At L. L. Bean's catalogue sales, the high church of flannel shirts and rubber-bottomed boots, Christmas rush was one continuous phone conversation.
There is no such thing as voice mail, and no customer is ever put on hold -- at least not for long.
Bill Price spent 40 minutes the other day mulling over boot sizes, ski lengths and snow conditions with a woman from upstate New York who was buying ski equipment for her three children.


Killing of 2 Children Unnerves Even a Tough Brooklyn Project
In Bedford-Stuyvesant part of the basic training for police officers is coping with one bloody crime scene or another.
Weekly, even daily, it is their chore and the community's to absorb yet another piece of violence.
But on Thursday night the Brooklyn neighborhood had to confront a crime that was ghastly by any measure.
The victims were a 4-year-old boy and a 6-year-old girl who were found strangled with electric cords in an apartment in the Sumner Houses.
The girl's body was hanging on a closet door, the cord strapped to a clothes hook, investigators said.
The boy's body was on a bed, strangled by a cord.
A woman was found with several stab wounds, but still alive.


Egypt Torn by Missing Libyan Exile
Just before leaving Paris for Cairo this month, Mansour Kikhia told his wife that he was a little worried about a recent vow by the Libyan leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, to settle scores with Libyan opposition members abroad.
"He is usually very fatalistic, meeting with people and going to places without taking particular precautions," said Bahaa al-Omary, the wife of Mr.
Kikhia, a 63-year-old former Libyan Foreign Minister.


If Moore Cannot Play, It May Be Up to Mathis
Terance Mathis, step forward.
The Jets' reserve wide receiver, and sometimes kick returner, will have to do just that on Sunday when the team takes on the Buffalo Bills at Orchard Park, N.Y., in a win-or-almost-expire contest.
And this former Georgia resident, now living in Albuquerque, N.M., had best be ready for the cold and snow that is being forecast.


A Falcon's Tale; Getting Trapped in a Web: A Page From the Dark Side of Pro Football
The rookie, Clay Blackwell, a No. 1 draft pick, is seated in the office of the team owner, Humphrey Lyles, who has an insatiable goal to win a Super Bowl.
"Mr. Lyles," Clay says, hesitating a moment and shifting in the leather chair, "I admit I don't know all there is to know about this drug, but I do know that it is a steroid, and I know they aren't good for you."


Medical Costs Slower to Rise In New York
Changes in the way doctors and hospitals are paid -- how much and by whom -- have begun to curb the steady rise of health care costs in the New York region.
Costs are still going up faster than overall inflation, but the annual rate of increase is the lowest in 21 years.
Economists said this trend was especially noteworthy in view of the New York region's long-standing identification with high-cost health care.
In fact, in recent months, medical-care inflation in the rest of the country has outpaced increases here.


Twisting Slowly, Slowly in the Papers
Greg Anthony says he has stopped reading the sports pages.
That is one way to tune out speculation that the Knicks are about to trade the point guard.
"I don't read the papers or address it in any way," Anthony said.
"I used to get concerned, and it affected me. When I leave now, I think about what I have to do to get better, watch film, and spend time with my family. That's it."


First Lady's Photos Send Girls Wrong Message
To the Editor:
Re "Hillary Rodham Clinton Strikes a New Pose and Multiplies Her Images" (The Week in Review, Dec. 12): When Hillary Rodham Clinton achieved national prominence, she held up a new mirror for American girls and young women to look into.
She seemed to say: Look at what you are and all you can accomplish, not at what you look like.
She offered a mirror of hope and promise for American girls struggling to transcend the crippling identity of woman as sex object.
Their struggle screams at us in the alarming spiral of teen-age pregnancies and in the disturbing number of cases of suicide and anorexia.
We see a quieter but still desperate lack of self-esteem in the proliferation of fake nails, fake breasts and suctioned thighs -- sad markers of young women's obsession with how they look.


Cyberspace Is Looking a Lot Like Christmas
They came by the thousands, from as far away as Japan and Europe, to admire an admittedly tacky Christmas tree at a small software company in Silicon Valley.
But because this is Christmas in cyberspace, the visitors teleported to the tree without leaving home, using personal computers and modems to check the status of ornaments on the branches.
Were the musical bells playing?
And what of the "Tacky Bubble Lights"?
The curious arrived, swiftly and silently, via the Internet digital highway, a vast web of computer networks that encircles the planet like an endless, chaotic ribbon around a Christmas package.


Sports of The Times; Will Coaches Set Captives Free?
FOR all of the major college sports events of 1993, the most significant milestone has taken place on the sidelines and is still unfolding.
This is the year that college basketball coaches assumed an unprecedented militancy on issues involving the reduction of coaching staffs, student-athlete rights and coach-athlete relationships.
Increasing numbers of coaches began to take issue with academic requirements they feel adversely affect athletes from disadvantaged neighborhoods.


The Bottom Line
Delia has an incredibly active social life.
And" -- weighted pause -- "she doesn't even go out with married men." Knowing laughter.
We had gathered for the monthly meeting of my women's group, a spinoff of the old consciousness-raising groups but harboring no agenda beyond friendship, solidarity and gorging on Chinese takeout.
We were laughing at a shared -- and largely unvoiced -- presumption: that single women of middle years who enjoy an active romance frequently enjoy it with someone else's husband.


20/20 Foresight Is Its Own Reward
NINETEEN NINETY-THREE will long be remembered as the year we finally got rid of all the people without a vision thing, and replaced them with a fresh crop of forward thinkers.
Fresh President; fresh Congress; fresh cast of poohbahs and icons, all brimming with fresh visions of the future.
Don't stop thinking about tomorrow, don't stop, it'll soon be here, dah-dah-dah-dah and so on.
How recent it all seems.
And now tomorrow is here, and by and large, the events of 1993 have vindicated that foresight.
With one or two exceptions, but, then, who's counting?


Zoning Bill Moves Toward Council
The City Planning Commission last week unanimously approved two proposals that would limit the heights of new buildings on the Upper East Side and encourage less massive buildings.
The proposals are scheduled for a public hearing on Jan. 24 before the City Council's subcommittee on zoning and franchises.
The City Council, which has final approval, is expected to vote in February.
A tough fight is expected.


Balkan Conflicts Are Uncoupling Serbo-Croatian
Now that the old Yugoslavia has been shattered by war, its people are at one another's throats over the language that most of them speak.
Despite its two alphabets and many dialects, Serbo-Croatian -- the language of the Serbs, Croats and Muslims -- is a single tongue whose regional varieties have more in common than do British and American English, most linguists say.


K. K. Hughes, A. J. Redmond Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Hughes Jr. of Skillman, N.J., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Kathryn Kilduff Hughes, and Aiden Joseph Redmond Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Redmond of East Islip, L.I.
Miss Hughes, 26, graduated from the College of Wooster.
She was until recently a traffic manager with Hal Riney &amp; Partners, the advertising agency in San Francisco.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Dance/1993; The Boston Ballet Triumphed With a Sleeper, And the Hula, for Once, Seemed Sacred
The Great Event -- No one doubts that George Balanchine was a great choreographer.
The New York City Ballet's "Balanchine Celebration" also proved him to be an infinitely varied one: classicism's chameleon.
The Big Surprise -- Always an attractive company, the Boston Ballet gained astonishing authority in its new "Sleeping Beauty," dancing with truly imperial grandeur.


A Toy Indicator May Indicate A Bearish 1994
IT was the Christmas of hope on Wall Street.
Ever since 1990, the financial community has entered the holiday season with profound doubts about the ability, or the willingness, of Americans to spend enough to make Christmas merry for retailers.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Film/1993; Good Men, Good Women And a Presence of 'Malice'
The Screenplay It Took a Man -- No, Two Men -- to Write -- "Malice," in which a woman conspires to have her ovary mangled and then removed by her surgeon, who is also her lover, for the sake of an insurance scam.
Ouch.
Is Happily-Ever-After Passe? -- Films like "Sommersby," "The Age of Innocence," "The Piano," "Like Water for Chocolate" and "The Remains of the Day" take exceptional pains to avoid the cliche of a final clinch.


Renee Joan Raab, M. W. Whitcombe
Dr.
Edward and Rosanne Raab of New York have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Renee Joan Raab and Michael William Whitcombe, a son of David and Josephine Whitcombe of Manhattan Beach, Calif.
Ms.
Raab, 31, graduated from Northwestern University.
She is a broadcast producer for Wieden &amp; Kennedy Advertising, an agency in Portland, Ore.
Her father is the director of pediatric ophthalmology at the Mount Sinai Medical Center, in New York.
Her mother is a consultant on 20th-century American crafts in New York.


UNDER THEIR SKIN
The photos by Eugene Richards are superb.
The photos do hurt, but the truth hurts more.
JANE WIDENER FORSYTH Sanibel, Fla.


Fatal Bytes


The Nation; All Presidents Call Congress. Calling Troopers Is Different.
THIS fall, as Bill Clinton stayed up late into the night telephoning members of Congress to twist their arms in support of his health care plan and the North American Free Trade Agreement, he also had other things on his mind.
It turns out that some of the calls that were overworking the White House switchboard operators were going not to Capitol Hill but to Arkansas state troopers.
Mr.
Clinton wanted to discuss reports that two of their colleagues were about to go public with potentially embarrassing charges about his marital fidelity.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Professional hockey can be hazardous to your dental health.
Which helps explain how the New York Rangers came to be associated with Drs.
Don Salomon and Irwin Miller (the Driller).
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 9 A Fantastic Food Festival in Flushing Meadows; a census of the birds at Wave Hill in Riverdale; creation myths for children in Crown Heights.
GOOD EATING 10 Lutece, La Cote Basque, Le Cirque and more: For celebrations, seasonal or not, haute cuisine on the East Side.
MOVIE CLOCK 12 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
SOAPBOX 13 Jan. 2 is inauguration day.
But can a mayor make a difference?
Eight views.
Plus, letters and "Eye of the Beholder."


Keeping the Romance of the Fireplace Burning
IT may look like ordinary firewood, complete with splinters and an occasional hitchhiking creepy-crawlie, but if it's sold in Manhattan its looks can deceive, and chances are it's not going to keep anyone warm.
"Social wood," one vendor calls it.
Says another: "We're selling ambiance."
A log can sit unlighted for months, or even forever, such is the ornamental nature of the hearth in the caves of Manhattan.
Here, a fireplace is as vestigial as a coal bin or hitching post (most urban fireplaces actually cool the rooms in which they burn, by sucking warm air up the chimney).


Corrections
A report in the Night column last Sunday about Brooke Astor misidentified the beneficiaries of a donation by the Hearst family announced at a dinner at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The family donated $100,000 in Mrs.
Astor's honor to several charities, but not to the museum.


The State Of Academe
To the Editor:
Margalit Fox's article about the mail-order term-paper industry ("Shopping for Ideas," Dec. 12) indicates that our colleges and universities are in even worse shape than I thought.


2 More Luxury Hotels On New York Scene
Visitors seeking luxury accommodations in New York can add two names to their list of options: the Sherry-Netherland hotel, which reopened last month after a two-year renovation, and the Inn at Irving Place, scheduled to open in February.
The 65-room Sherry-Netherland, whose rooms, hallways and lobby underwent a meticulous renovation and restoration at a cost of $18 million, was built in 1927 by Louis Sherry of ice cream fame.


Erica Leventhal, Gary Wohlstetter
Robert and Phyllis Leventhal of Brooklyn have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Dr.
Erica Joy Leventhal, and Gary Wohlstetter, a son of Bernard and Rhoda Wohlstetter of Huguenot, S.I.
Dr.
Leventhal, 28, is a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
She graduated summa cum laude from Vassar College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her medical degree from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father retired as an assistant principal of Franklin Delano Roosevelt High School in Brooklyn.
Her mother is a laboratory specialist at Abraham Lincoln High School in Brooklyn.


What Was Eating Jim Beard?
JAMES BEARD A Biography.
By Robert Clark. 357 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $27.50.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Art &amp; Photography/1993; An Era Ended, a Ghost Haunted the Guggenheim
Mission Accomplished -- Cornell Capa, the wild-haired Hungarian who founded the International Center of Photography 19 years ago and built it into a major venue for exhibitions and teaching, announced plans to retire as director next June.
Rumors are flying about who might have the courage to follow him.
What's in a Name -- Despite widespread muttering about the deal by which the Robert Mapplethorpe Foundation gave the Guggenheim Museum $5 million worth of cash and works by the late photographer, the museum named its new photography gallery for him.
The first show?
A surprisingly affecting group of self-portraits by -- surprise --  Mapplethorpe.


Habitats/Penthouse Salon; Au Revoir, les Soirees
BETWEEN skindiving trips to Chile's mountain lakes and potsherd-hunting in Mexico, the Brush family always returned to the penthouse at 655 Park Avenue.
From all accounts, they held a sort of kaleidoscopic open house there, a never-ending whirl of gleeful mischief and intelligent conversation.
Directors of the Explorers Club, of which both Dr.
Charles Brush and Dr.
Ellen Sparry Brush are members, arrived each year for Sunday brunch before the club's annual meeting.
Representatives of the Society of Women Geographers dropped in to be entertained, as did guests from the Wine and Food Society.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Video &amp; Audio/1993; Coming Soon Through Your Bedroom Wall: The Information Highway
Home Alone -- According to a year-end tally, videocassettes contributed more to film company coffers in 1993 than theatrical showings did.
Night of a Thousand Eyes -- President Clinton announced plans for a fiber optic information highway able to deliver, among other things, 500 video channels to American homes -- enough to shrivel even hardened couch potatoes.


Exchange of Guns for Toys Is Hailed as Surprise Success
Fifteen milk crates packed with tagged and bagged handguns were stacked near a closet yesterday at the 34th Precinct station house in Washington Heights.
The closet was crammed with rifles.
And soon after the Toys 'R' Us outlet in Herald Square opens this morning, a small girl will receive the doll house she wanted -- if her father keeps the promise that he made shortly after turning in his 9-millimeter semiautomatic handgun.


Visa Plans to Test Prepaid Cash Cards
Convinced that travelers are ready for a prepaid cash card to be used at automatic teller machines worldwide, Visa plans to begin test marketing the concept in a few months and to have it fully available in North America in 1995.
The company expects that as many as two million such cards will be sold during its first year of full distribution and will suit people wishing to travel within a budget.
Currently, credit card holders can use their cards to withdraw cash; such a withdrawal is charged to accounts as a cash advance.


Newcomers Near Fulton Mall


Corrections
A picture caption in The Times Magazine last Sunday, with an article about Chinese avant-garde artists, misidentified the painter shown on page 42.
He was Geng Jianyi, not Zhang Peili.


Women of Valor
To the Editor:
The review of "A Price Below Rubies: Jewish Women as Rebels and Radicals" (Nov. 14), by Naomi Shepherd, does not mention the source of the book's title, which has specific meaning for Jewish men and women.
The traditional Sabbath prayer "A Woman of Valor" is said by the head of the household, usually referring to his wife, and includes the words: "A woman of valor who can find? For her price is far above rubies." Perhaps the inference is that the women who were "rebels and radicals" had lowered value in the traditional sense.
I also noticed that this same issue of the Book Review has a review by Ellen Chesler, herself the author of "Woman of Valor: Margaret Sanger and the Birth Control Movement in America." Women of valor can be found in all times and political contexts.
SUSAN POSNER CARTER  Berkeley, Calif.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Television/1993; Women Gained Fast, But PBS Held Its Lead, And the Old-Timers Won in a Walk
Honeymoons -- Hillary Rodham Clinton, Janet Reno and Ruth Bader Ginsburg were treated with gallant deference by much of television news; it was sort of reverse sexism.
Let's hope that as such estimable women become more familiar presences on the screen, they will invite the journalistic skepticism other public figures must endure.
Worm Turns -- Ross Perot, whom television carried to prominence, took a prime-time beating from Vice President Al Gore in their debate over Nafta.
The surprise was not that Mr.
Perot showed his nasty streak but that Mr.
Gore seemed almost animated.


Agents Follow Food Stamps And Fences
Tightly swathed in a leather jacket, Angel Plaza walked swiftly to the rear of the mini-market in the Fort Greene section of Brooklyn.
Inside his shirt was a tiny microphone and in a nearby van, two associates recorded the hushed conversation Mr.
Plaza secretly taped with the store owner.
A Federal agent posing as a member of a burglary ring, Mr.
Plaza sold the merchant $3,000 in food stamps for $1,800 -- 60 cents on the dollar.
He and the other agents, investigators for the United States Department of Agriculture, then drove to the Howard Beach section of Queens where Mr.
Plaza passed along $1,000 worth of stamps for $600 to the owner of another market.
Before he left, the storekeeper was recorded saying he could handle $25,000 in discounted stamps if Mr.
Plaza could supply them.


Giuliani Moves on 'Privatization' Pledge
Even before he becomes Mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani has started to lay the groundwork for turning over some New York City agencies and their functions to private companies, indicating that he will move quickly on his pledges to improve services and shrink government through "privatization."
Mr.
Giuliani and his aides announced last week that they had already begun drafting a proposal to shift control of as many as three of the city's 11 municipal hospitals -- probably those most ailing -- to private, nonprofit corporations.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Theater/1993; The Nights Were Made for Epics And Three (Count 'Em) Arrived, All Bearing Pulitzers
Comebacks of the Year -- The New York Shakespeare Festival, "She Loves Me," Pete Townshend, Roy Cohn.
Least Seen Great Performances -- Natasha Richardson and Liam Neeson in "Anna Christie," Nigel Hawthorne in "The Madness of George III," Donal McCann in "Wonderful Tennessee," Debra Monk in "Redwood Curtain."


Credit Where Credit Is Due
To the Editor:
In her essay "Meet Me in St. Louis, and Paris, London, Chicago . . ."  [ Dec. 12 ] , Vicki Goldberg reviewed at some length the current photography exhibition at the Gallery of the New York School of Interior Design, "The Great Age of Fairs." She failed to mention, though, that the show was curated by me, with the assistance of Sally Forbes, assistant director of the gallery.
DAVID GARRARD LOWE  New York


Snobbery in Henry James
To the Editor:
William F. Buckley Jr., reviewing the two volumes of "Henry James: Collected Travel Writings" (Dec. 12), twice asserts that James was not a snob.
This is a bewildering assessment in the midst of citations that confirm the reader's previous encounters with James's snobbish views.
This assessment prevents the reviewer from asking himself how James's prejudices, so jarring to modern sensibilities, affect our interest in observations that although replete with evocative phrases and images are now almost a century old.
I will never tire of James as long as his perceptiveness appears to me to outbalance his narrowness, his blindness to class-based judgments and his condescensions.


Lowering Energy Expenses
CLOSE to the heart of virtually any homeowner is a New Year wish that next year's energy bills will be lower than in the past year.
One way to achieve this goal is to move away from "the grid" -- a trendy way of saying that as much as possible is being done to free the home from total reliance on conventional energy sources.
The home may still be hooked up to those sources, but they're being drawn upon less and less.


Kimberly Kappler, Joseph Fine 3d
Dr. and Mrs.
Gustav E. Kappler 3d of Amsterdam, N.Y., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter, Kimberly Ann Kappler, and Joseph MacPherson Fine 3d, the son of Patricia B. Fine and Mr.
Fine Jr., both of Clifton Park, N.Y.
Miss Kappler, 28, is a vice president at Business Development Associates, conference organizers in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.


E. M. Cromwell, T. G. Speers 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
P.
McEvoy Cromwell of Baltimore have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Elizabeth Morris Cromwell, to the Rev.
Thomas Guthrie Speers 3d, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
T.
Guthrie Speers Jr. of Center Sandwich, N.H.


Berlin Opens U2, Joining East and West
The reunification of Berlin, a process that is still far from complete, has come a step closer with the reopening of a subway line connecting the eastern neighborhood of Pankow with the section of western Berlin near the Olympic stadium.
The line runs under Alexanderplatz, the center of what was once East Berlin, and on beneath what was once the death strip at Potsdamer Platz, near the site of Hitler's former underground bunker, where a huge new construction project is underway.
It also stops at Zoo Station, formerly the main rail center in West Berlin and still a hub for long-distance trains.
Although no new stations were built, several that had been unused since the line was shut 32 years ago have been refurbished.
Perhaps the most attractive is Potsdamer Platz, which has been restored much as it was in its heyday, complete with white ceramic tiles, green pillars and red benches.


A Multicultural Mosaic and Postcards From the Urban Edge
IT would be a jaded reviewer who could resist juxtaposing shows titled "Women of the Americas" and "Urban Masculinity." To make the contrast even more tempting, the first is at the Arts Alliance, in the relatively rural setting of Haverstraw in Rockland County, the second at Longwood Arts Gallery in the Bronx.
Both are alternative spaces, with the Alliance the more alternative of the two in that it has not yet developed a character.
The art center in Haverstraw is housed in what was previously the American Legion Hall and, before that, the Lady Warren Firehouse and in its 150-year career seems to have undergone few structural changes.
The space is generous but the brown and white decor leaves something to be desired.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  REPORT CITES NORTH KOREA BOMB  A classified C.I.A. report says that North Korea has made at least one nuclear bomb.
If the report is confirmed, many American officials fear, the news could cause an arms race in the area.  1


Source Material
To the Editor:
When the producer Robert Whitehead states that all great musicals come from existing play scripts, is he forgetting "Show Boat," "South Pacific," "The King and I," "Brigadoon," "Guys and Dolls," "A Chorus Line" and "Gypsy"?
STUART HOWARD  New York


Seizing the Moment for a Shorter-Term Mortgage
JOHN McCREADY says that he was born and brought up in the South Bronx and that "because of that fantastic education, you always know when you're being taken and when you're not."
So when mortgage rates began to plummet, he and his wife, Rita, who own a red and white aluminum-sided house in New Rochelle, N.Y., started reading the financial pages every day, watching the mortgage rates and examining the deals being offered by competing banks.


Mountaineer Stews Over Bowl Slight
To the Sports Editor:
As a native West Virginian and an avid Mountaineer football fan, I am incensed at the preliminary outcome of the bowl coalition voting.
It would seem that politics and big business are running rampant in collegiate football.
A national championship game should be played between the two teams with the best records.
This is clearly not the case with Nebraska's pairing with Florida State in the Orange Bowl.


The Year's Champions
Archery  World Champions  Men's Target -- Kyung Mo Park, South Korea.


Drive to Keep Repeat Felons In Prison Gains in California
When Mike Reynolds vowed a year and a half ago to find a way to keep repeat offenders locked up for life, it seemed just a howl of pain by a grieving father whose teen-age daughter had been shot in the head at point-blank range by a man with a long criminal record.
But Mr.
Reynolds's personal crusade to tighten sentencing for career criminals has become a political juggernaut here in California, the scene in recent weeks of several high-profile crimes, including the abduction and slaying of 12-year-old Polly Klaas at the hands of a twice-convicted kidnapper.


Beat the Cap Turns Into an Expensive New Game for Owners
The National Football League will not have its first salary cap until next season, and already the club owners have developed a love-hate relationship with it.
They love it because it restricts the amount of money they have to pay their players.
They hate it because they realize it will keep them from spending extra dollars if they so choose.
But they have already learned how to manipulate it.
Money.
Money.
Money.
Witness last week's extravagant spending on new and extended contracts.
Start with quarterback Troy Aikman's eight-year, $50 million deal with the Dallas Cowboys, the richest in pro football history.
Add Barry Sanders's four-year, $17.2 million agreement with the Detroit Lions, making him the highest-paid running back ever.
Throw in pacts for four offensive tackles that will pay them from $2.07 million to $2.467 million a year.


A Knotty 'Orfeo' Untangled With Style
FEW OPERAS PRESENT quite such a tangled mass of problems as the earliest one that is still performed with any frequency.
"L'Orfeo," Monteverdi's retelling of the myth of Orpheus and Eurydice, has come down to us in parts that are notorious for their vagueness.
It is not simply a matter of style: the very composition of the orchestra is often an open question.
On some occasions the composer specifies his instruments, but more often he is enigmatic or silent on the issue.
While 20 different versions of "Rigoletto" may have individual musical personalities, they will all have the same notes; but 20 performances of "L'Orfeo" will probably sound quite different, at times having little more in common than the melody.
The opera has become for early-music conductors what the role of Lear is to Shakespearean actors: a challenge to measure up to, and an opportunity to make a major statement.


Interface: People and Technology; Are Virtual Groupies Included?
AWARE of the outcry over sex and violence in interactive video games, some software developers hope to channel male adolescent fantasy toward nobler pursuits.
Like being a rock star.
Virtual Music, a computer game still under development by the start-up company Ahead Inc. of Newton, Mass., teaches players the "virtual guitar" by having them play with a group of video-recorded studio musicians.
Although greater levels of musicianship are supposed to be designed into future versions of the system, the current one allows the player to control only the guitar's rhythm and dynamics by strumming and picking.
Chords and melody are already programmed in.


Wall Street; Hard Lessons of Paramount's Saga
THE protracted drama is winding down.
The lawyers and investment bankers are writing up their bills.
And though you may be saying good riddance to the players in the fight for control of Paramount Communications Inc. now that it has signed a merger agreement with QVC Network Inc., there's always something worthwhile to remember about Wall Street's seamy hostile takeover battles.
The top 10 lessons from the siege of Paramount:


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Art &amp; Photography/1993; Politics, Testosterone and Plastic Surgery
Feeding Frenzy -- Focusing on an uneven range of politically inclined art, the usually nebulous Whitney Biennial took a courageous stand, only to be shot down by most critics.
You Haven't Come a Long Way, Baby -- A picture of the Pace Gallery's stable of artists on the cover of The New York Times Magazine was a high-testosterone reminder that women artists are as scarce as ever in certain of the art world's most powerful places.


The World; Chile's Engine Revs Up With Free Trade's Fuel
UNTIL recently this quaint farming community beside the Andean foothills was the picture of prosperity.
Vast apple orchards lined its roads and teams of workers pruned, sprayed and irrigated the trees.
Curico was a product of the economic miracle that had made Chile the Latin American tiger, a free-market, export-based economy often symbolized by its sales of fresh fruit to Europe and the United States during the Northern Hemisphere's winter.
But there is a disturbing new look to many orchards this year -- tall weeds among the trees, fences in ill-repair, irrigation ditches dry -- signs that apple production, like much of Chile's export sector, has hit hard times.


A Rest Stop Gets the Thumb; Fearful Area Residents Oppose Thruway's Plaza Proposal
The winding, wooded roads of this tiny hamlet southeast of Albany are dotted these days by some 300 signs hammered into front lawns to protest a proposed development on the edge of town.
Such an angry show of emotion might not be so surprising if the target were a nuclear power plant or a toxic waste site or even an airport.


An End to Woolworth's Era
There are no Christmas lights or ribbons adorning the F. W. Woolworth on 204th Street this year.
The racks and shelves, once overflowing with sweaters, scarves, gloves and other holiday staples haven't been restocked in weeks.
And many shoppers, who for decades counted on the store for everything from threads and needles to mops and brooms, are walking away empty-handed.
"Bah! Humbug!" said Florence Rudich, an employee at the store.
"The store looks so sad. We're almost down to just the bare walls. It's very depressing."


Norman Vincent Peale, Preacher of Gospel Optimism, Dies at 95
The Rev.
Dr.
Norman Vincent Peale, one of the most influential religious figures of his time, died on Friday afternoon at his estate in Pawling, N.Y.
He had suffered a stroke earlier this month.
He was 95.
His wife of 63 years, Ruth, was at his bedside when he died.


Miss Walter, Mr. Campolattaro
Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald G. Walter of Shrewsbury, N.J., have announced April wedding plans for their daughter Wendy Nancy Walter and Dr.
Brian Nicholas Campolattaro, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John P. Campolattaro of Fairfield, N.J.
Miss Walter, 28, is a registered nurse and the manager of the corporate health unit at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.


At Newsstands, Black Is Plentiful
AT a boisterous prepublication open house recently, Sheryl E. Huggins, the publisher of Shade, weaved through a crowd of black artists, writers, photographers and others, music from A Tribe Called Quest booming from the stereo.
There in one room at the magazine's Manhattan office, wearing everything from business suits to dreadlocks, was a microcosm of the diverse readership Ms.
Huggins hopes to attract when Shade makes its debut in March -- a microcosm, too, of a black diversity that has fostered a flurry of new magazines.


Lucy Hager and Lewis Hamilton
Lucy Battel Hager and Dr.
Lewis Leckey Hamilton were married on Tuesday in Cooperstown, N.Y.
The Rev.
Douglas C. Smith performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Hamilton is the daughter of Mrs.
George C. Brainard of Buffalo, and the late Mr.
Brainard.
She graduated from Bennett Junior College.
She was the widow of the late Louis Busch Hager, a theatrical producer in New York.
An earlier marriage ended in divorce.


Compensation and Merit
To the Editor:
In "It's Time to Trim Hefty Paychecks" (Viewpoints, Dec. 5), Derek Bok wrongly seeks a solution in the values of the past to correct the inequities and excessiveness of compensation today.


Finding Niches and Other Places to Stow Odds and Ends
CLUTTER is an inevitable byproduct of home repair, as anyone who has hung a picture or oiled a hinge can attest.
Where to keep the extra picture wire?
The can of oil?
Manufacturers of storage products seem to know that, and abound with gadgets like boxes, bins, hooks, trays, magnetic strips and jars on revolving racks that are a kind of clutter by themselves.


POSTINGS: For Women and Minorities; Low-Cost Loan Pilot
A pilot program to provide low-cost loans to housing subcontracting companies owned by women or members of minority groups has been established by the New York City Housing Partnership.
The program is financed by a revolving line of credit committed by Citibank to the Housing Partnership, the nonprofit housing arm of the New York City Partnership, a civic and business group.
"This is a demonstration program that we hope will be the basis of increased private lending and risk-sharing by government," said Fred Wilpon, the Housing Partnership's chairman.


'Is You Coming? Or Is You Ain't?'
Make no mistake, the Buffalo Bills are a well-read, knowledgeable bunch.
It seems like half the Bills have their own local radio gigs, and few National Football League teams have as many players who are as loquacious and quick-witted.
All of this comes in handy when you have lost a league-record three straight Super Bowls and when you continue to be the brunt of so many nasty jokes.
And yet earlier this month, after Buffalo had lost two straight games to Kansas City and the Raiders, there were signs that the Bills might be unraveling.


Hollywood's Love Affair With Psychiatry
Since the 1920's, Hollywood has been fascinated -- off and on screen -- by psychiatry.
In this excerpt from their new book "Hollywood on the Couch: A Candid Look at the Overheated Love Affair Between Psychiatrists and Movie Makers," published by William Morrow, Stephen Farber and Marc Green examine the sometimes bizarre relationship between the motion picture community and psychiatrists.
MOST OF THE EARLY Hollywood moguls sought to aggrandize themselves and the new movie medium by snaring prestigious writers and intellectuals as scenarists.
Samuel Goldwyn had already gone to England in an effort to hire H. G. Wells (who turned him down) and George Bernard Shaw (who invited him for tea but also said no).
Undaunted by these rejections, the insatiable culture vulture aimed his talons toward Vienna.


Warm, Dry, Reasonably Priced Places for a Winter Workout
IT may be awful outside, but New York has plenty of reasonably inexpensive indoor places where you can swim, work out or play tennis in blissful, if temporary, ignorance of all that.
Here is a sampling.
CITY CENTERS ASHER LEVY RECREATIONAL CENTER , F.D.R.
Drive at 23d Street. (212) 447-2020.


Trying to Hold the Line On Group Boarding Homes
A modest, tidy house on a quiet street in Flushing has become the focus of a continuing fight waged by neighborhood residents against what they describe as a proliferation of boarding houses for juvenile delinquents, homeless shelters and other social-service centers.
The state Office of Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities has proposed buying the house at 45-66 169th Street and converting it into a group home for disabled adults.
But some residents and community leaders are concerned that such centers will create traffic congestion in the neighborhood and mar its residential character.


Hollywood at a Fever Pitch
1.
Fushes and Pangs.
On its own, the movie business comes up with a few of the dreams it sells.
It depends on talent for raw material, and talent must be wooed.
The real Hollywood seductions are'nt the ones we see on the screen but the dramas in restaurants, settings with their own kind of stagy, tricked-up opulence where talent and studio come together.
That's why Australian director Jocelyn Moorehouse is sitting in the ivy on a Sunday in late September.
The Ivy id one of Hollywood's more tasteful places.
There's painted country furniture against white plastered walls.
Indian baskets, majolica plates.
Moorehouse is lovely.
She has fine, pale skin and dark hair.
Her arms, bared in a green blouse, have a hint of motherly roundness.
Last year, she made "Proof," a rather experimental film about a blind photographer.
Now she's beginning to work in the States.
"What are your favorite American films?" says Scott Rudin, the producer across from her.


Compensation and Merit
To the Editor:
Derek Bok's essay makes several false comparisons between the employment economics of the mid-1950's and now, as well as between the patterns of the highly and the moderately skilled at any time.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Television/1993; For the Best Buzz, Leave It to Beavis, David And the N.Y.P.D.
Biggest Buzzes -- David Letterman, richer, nattier and less goofy; "Beavis and Butt-head," the decline of Western civilization with a snicker, heh heh heh.
Best New Series, "Viewer Discretion" Category -- "N.Y.P.D. Blue," its powerhouse cast led by David Caruso and Dennis Franz, its episodes spiced with topless dancers.


Repeat After Reeves: It's a Big Game
Dan Reeves has tried to convince his players that this week's game is World War III.
The Giants play the Phoenix Cardinals today in a contest that, in effect, means little in terms of the Giants' attempt to get home-field advantage for the playoffs.
That would seem to be big trouble for the coach in terms of motivation.
But if Reeves needed any help focusing the team on Phoenix, all he had to do was turn on the game film from last year.
When the two teams met in 1992 in Week 14, it was all Cardinals, 19-0.
The loss just about sealed former Coach Ray Handley's fate.


In Rome, Cuisines From Far Afield
ROME loves its own food and has never encouraged its cooks to try much of anything else.
Even the hot young chefs are at their most thrilling when they "interpret" (as they call it) the traditional dishes of the surrounding Lazio region.
Foreign restaurants, though no longer countable only on the fingers, are still largely ignored by both the public and, it is my impression, other restaurateurs.
One way to satisfy the yen for something a little different is to go to a restaurant serving the cuisine of another region of Italy.
Dal Bolognese
Bologna is to Italian food more or less what Stratford-upon-Avon is to English literature.
The Emilia-Romagna region, of which Bologna is the capital, is the home of Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese and prosciutto di Parma, spinach pasta, tortellini, fabulous sausages and meat sauces that are made of meat, not tomato.
The challenge for a restaurant is basically just not to make any mistakes or to let the classic turn stale.
It was the lasagne verdi at Dal Bolognese that made me fall in love with Italian food some 20 years ago. (At least it was what led me to buy the first book by Marcella Hazan, a native of Emilia-Romagna, after which there was no going back.) When I returned last month, lasagne verdi was still on the menu and still inspiring.
The pasta was lightly flecked with spinach, the bechamel unobtrusive, and together they provided a squishy cushion for the tender little chunks of meat (not ground meat) suspended in a sauce that showed no visible tomato.
The Parmesan cheese was grated, as it should be, directly onto the plate.
But my companion's tagliatelle al ragu -- plain egg noodles with the same meat sauce and plenty of Parmesan -- was, in its bold simplicity, even better than the lasagne.
The decor of Dal Bolognese is classic and clubby, and the address, on historic, high-rent Piazza del Popolo, tells you right off to expect customers as rich as the food.
On a recent Sunday at lunch -- the most hectic meal of the week in Italy -- the place was full of show people and cashmere-and-pearls perfect families, clearly regulars.
In such circumstances, in Rome, faces not known from either the neighborhood or the screen are often ignored.
But the service was professional beyond the call of duty.
No sooner had my snobbish Italian companion raised one eyebrow to make a crack about how Americans would enjoy the sparkling Lambrusco, than our waiter was at his elbow offering to change the wine if he didn't like it.
We kept the Lambrusco, a light, regional red, to accompany his gran bollito misto, the restaurant's -- and the region's -- piece de resistance, and what practically everybody there was eating.
This assortment of boiled meats is served from a special cart (carrello) that keeps them warm in their various broths.
The meats are presented with, as condiments, tubs of green sauce and "mostarda," a fascinating fruit preserve typical, in many variations, of the northern regions of Italy.
The meats include (in the proportions the diner requests) beef, tongue, fowl, cotechino sausage, and, by rights, veal head, but when my companion asked for the latter, all that was left was a bit of ear.
My polpettone alla bolognese, two slices of a light meatloaf baked around a hard-boiled egg and served with mashed potatoes (pure in Italian) was less of a production but quite nice.
The menu includes some cold dishes and simple grilled meats, so that you can get away with eating less than 3,000 calories, but there's no point in ordering anything other than regional specialties.
For antipasto, the best choice is a plate of unadorned culatello di Zibello, a delicate prosciutto-like specialty of Parma considered the aristocrat of Italian cold cuts and uncommon in Rome.
The homemade desserts, after an encounter with the carrello, seemed less appealing than something smooth and slippery, like creme caramel or sorbetto.
Il Drappo
Admittedly the idea of a chi-chi Sardinian restaurant gives pause.
The region is one of Italy's poorest and most rugged, and away from the coast, its cuisine is that of the shepherds of the mountainous hinterland, which runs to grilled sheep innards -- definitely not on the menu at Il Drappo.
But the owner-chefs, Paolo and Valentina Tonu, are Sardinian brother and sister and the menu is built around island ingredients and themes, with delicious results.
And the particularly interesting breadbasket contains the typically Sardinian flat, brittle bread known as carta da musica (music paper).
The system at Il Drappo is the fixed-price meal, beginning with an antipasto of diced tomatoes on crunchy thin bread (you have to use both fork and fingers) plus tiny pizzas and some other tidbit, which on our recent visit was fritters with salady stuff inside.
The wine is the house Sardinian red or white.
The first courses change frequently but always offer at least one soup (lentil at our recent dinner) and an ample choice of pastas, usually with seafood or vegetarian sauces.
We tried fettuccine with cozze (mussels) and vongole (clams) in a light, but very piquant, tomato sauce; spaghetti with chicory and bottarga (dried mullet roe), and spaghetti in a sauce of nero di seppia (cuttlefish ink).
All were wonderful, but the spaghetti with bottarga -- a specialty of Sardinia -- was sublime.
The main course offerings always include both meat and fish, usually in labor-intensive preparations, a welcome change in Rome.
Our roast baby pork (maialino), however, was quite simple and classically Sardinian; the peppers stuffed with artichokes were less orthodox and more typically Drappo.
On another occasion, we enjoyed the grilled, stuffed squid, though the meatballs were a bit boring (both were offered on our most recent visit).
Dessert is seadas, dough filled with white cheese, then fried and topped with bitter honey.
It's typically Sardinian, and very good.
A chilled glass of Sardinian grappa or the much tamer bilberry liqueur called "mirto" finishes the meal.
Some people find the decor -- billowing draperies on the ceiling, Sardinian cork in the place of wood paneling -- too precious, but the waiter, Mario Bergantilli, manages to convey the true spirit of the place: the only thing you should take seriously is cleaning your plate.
Tavola d'Oro
The only full-fledged Sicilian restaurant in Rome (though a handful of others serve Sicilian dishes) is a hole in the wall that becomes unbearably smoky and unmanageable when crowded, which is usually.
But a friend and I were there when it opened at 7:30 one recent evening, and enjoyed reasonable service, including the attention of the proprietor, Elisabetta Esposito.
In any case, one doesn't go there for the ambiance; one goes in spite of it, for the food.
Caponata, that wonderful Sicilian concoction based on eggplant, tomato, onion, and celery, is easier to find in New York than in Rome, so our antipasto Siciliano -- caponata, marinated zucchini, black and green olives, and roasted sweet peppers -- was sheer bliss.
The pasta offerings include the archetypal Sicilian preparation -- called alla Norma, after Bellini's opera -- with a tomato and eggplant sauce over little shells and ricotta salata grated on top; bucatini with sardines (also de rigueur); and short pasta, like penne, with broccoli (actually the pale-green cross between the cauliflower and broccoli appearing in American markets as "broccoflower") and caciocavallo cheese.
The most interesting main dishes are involtini (roll-ups) of eggplant stuffed with ground meat and the typical bistecca alla palermitana, a breaded veal cutlet baked, not fried, and large enough to share.
The crespelle -- great hulking fritters, one filled with ricotta and the other with anchovies -- were too heavy.
Anyone who is able to continue can finish with a ricotta-filled cannolo -- the Sicilian dessert par excellence.
Al Brigante Crocco
About 10 minutes' taxi ride from the center of town is a restaurant representing Italy's most depressed region, Basilicata, or Lucania (an archaic name), which is in the middle of the south, between Puglia on the east and Campania and Calabria on the west.
The region has almost no seacoast, and the dominant flavors of Basilicata are animal, dairy and vegetable.
This restaurant, whimsically named for a 19th-century brigand, is a cozy little spot that makes some effort to evoke its origins in its decor, which includes pottery dishes and hanging antique pistols.
The menu is strongest in the early courses.
The antipasto consists of a plate of salamis and a plate of marinated eggplant, olives, mushrooms and the exotic lampascione, which looks like a small onion but has a bitter taste all its own.
There was a good mushroom and potato soup on recent visit, but the homemade pastas, orecchiette ("little ears") and strascinati (flat disks of pasta about the size of a 50-cent piece), are the whole point of going to a Lucanian restaurant.
We found the orecchiette con cime di rape (broccoletti in Rome, broccoli rape in New York) a bit thin and flat (but then I found it insipid homemade in Basilicata too), especially in comparison with Tavola d'Oro's richer version.
But there was nothing insipid about the superb strascinati with a strong tomato sauce, eggplant, and pecorino cheese.
The rabbit with olives and the meatballs were uninteresting; neither satisfied the urge for the exotic that had taken us to the restaurant in the first place.
We might have done better with the baked baccala (salt cod), the only fish on the menu.
The carafe wine, an Aglianico (the inevitable red of Basilicata), was terrible.
We eventually asked for a bottle (also Aglianico), which was decent, but we were charged for both.
The restaurant seats 45, which was about 35 more than it could handle on a Saturday night.
FOOD OF 4 REGIONS
Prices are for a meal for two with a bottle of decent but not extravagant wine.
Telephone code for Rome is 06 in Italy, dial 39-6 from outside.
All restaurants are in Rome.
Prices calculated at 1,691 lire to the dollar.
Dal Bolognese, 1/2 Piazza del Popolo; 3611426.
Meal for two with wine, about $71.
Lunch and dinner are served Tuesday through Sunday.
Il Drappo, 9 Vicolo del Malpasso, off Giulia; 6877365.
Dinner is served Tuesday to Sunday.
If requested a day ahead, lunch can be served.
The prix fixe of $35 a person includes everything.
Tavola d'Oro, 37 Via Marianna Dionigi, near the Piazza Cavour; 3212601.
Lunch and dinner are served Monday to Saturday.
Meal for two with wine costs $47.
Al Brigante Crocco, 19/22 Piazza San Pancrazio; 5881763.
Dinner served every day but Tuesday; lunch Sunday only.
Meal for two with wine is about $41.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Dec. 12 about the resumption of tours of the United Nations referred incorrectly to the schedule for January and February.
Tours will be offered Monday to Friday from 10 A.M. to 4:15 P.M.; they are not suspended.
In March, the tours will resume seven days a week during the same hours.


A Celebration in Harlem
The New York City Partnership dinner, Apollo Theater, Dec. 13.


Conversations: Milovan Djilas; He Sees Ideologies Come and Go But the Balkans Remain the Same
THE living room is dominated by a huge painting of Faust, brooding at his desk as he ponders in Goethe's drama whether to be a man of action or remain a contemplative scholar.
The image is appropriate to the tempestuous life of its owner, Milovan Djilas, the rebellious Montenegrin who made a Faustian bargain with the Devil of Leninist ideology, trading a budding career as a writer for one as a Communist campaigner in 1930's Yugoslavia, emerging as a leader of Tito's wartime partisans, then, after victory, assailing the new tyranny he had helped create.


Delicious Warmth, 10 Ways
AS the thermometer continues its swan dive, the search intensifies for foods that warm body and soul.
Here are some favorite versions of nine dishes -- and one serious drink -- that provide enough B.T.U.'s to help you slide through winter effortlessly.
LAMB SHANK  Alison on Dominick Street, 38 Dominick Street, between Varick and Hudson Streets, Manhattan, (212) 727-1188


Christmas Services Draw a Crowd in Brooklyn


Corrections
A picture caption on the Soapbox page last Sunday with an article about Alexander Hamilton's Harlem home, Hamilton Grange, misidentified the site shown in a vintage photograph.
It was the building's original site -- not the present one, to which it was moved in 1889.


Jenifer Schweitzer, James Kronenberg
Sandra W. Meyer Schweitzer of Manhattan and Peter A. Schweitzer of Grosse Pointe, Mich., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jenifer Anne Schweitzer to James L. Kronenberg, a son of Margaret and Richard Kronenberg of Miami.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Schweitzer and her fiance, both 24, are third-year law students at New York University.
She graduated from Haverford College.
Her mother is a senior partner in Clark &amp; Weinstock, management consultants in New York.
Her father, who is based in Detroit, is the president and chief operating officer of J. Walter Thompson, the advertising agency.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GREENWICH VILLAGE  $350,000
155 Perry Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,179-sq.-ft. loft-condo; dining area, fireplace, south exposure, health club; common charge $337, taxes $7,464, listed at $365,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)


The Year's Many Trials and Triumphs
IT has been a difficult year for the arts, which always seem to be the first to be hurt and the last to recover from cutbacks in government and corporate grants.
In Connecticut, the Ives Summer Festival has all but abandoned classical music in favor of more popular attractions, and last month the Norwalk Symphony announced the cancellation of half its concerts remaining this season.


Commuter Train Gunman Haunts the Thoughts of Many; The Mood at Adelphi
To the Editor:
I am disappointed and angry over your Dec. 10 news report about the reaction at Adelphi University to the commuter train gunman, Colin Ferguson, a one-time Adelphi student.


Logging Policy Splits Membership of Sierra Club
In heavily forested northeastern Washington, cutting timber on small private tracts is considered no more unusual than mowing the lawn in New Rochelle.
That is, unless the person doing the logging is the Sierra Club's chief forest lobbyist in the Pacific Northwest.
In the summer, a logging crew cut down fir and pine on 10 acres north of Cusick, Wash., owned by that official, William Arthur, director of the Sierra Club's office in Seattle.


HAVING TO SAY YOU'RE SORRY
It's true that packages and containers often seem designed to resist their being opened by the consumer ("Get a Grip on It").
However, success does sometimes come to those who unscrew a cap in the right direction.
The gentleman using a pipe wrench on a bottle of Tylenol in the illustration, is pulling in the direction required to close a screw top, not open it.
GIULIO MAESTRO Old Lyme, Conn.


Caring for Plants After the Bloom Is Off
PLANTS are wonderful, lasting gifts.
But how to take care of them after the holiday hoopla fades?
First, a few generalities.
Keep the plants out of drafts.
Sometimes when a door or a window is opened the plant is in a position to take the brunt of the breeze, and in no time it starts to show yellow leaves and drop blossoms.
Particularly sensitive are poinsettias.
Rule No. 1 then, is to keep the plants out of drafts.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Arts and Leisure/Section 2
Times critics cast a last lingering look at 1993.  Book Review/Section 7
Hilton Kramer reviews "Mark Rothko: A Biography," by James E. B. Breslin.


Pointillism for the Masses
Roy Lichtenstein paints like a happy child with one endlessly fascinating toy -- a stencil that produces Benday dots.
He discovered his toy in the early 1960's, around the time Leo Castelli gave him his first one-man show, and after that he was scarcely to be caught painting without it.
Indeed, even though Diane Waldman, the author of ROY LICHTENSTEIN (Guggenheim Museum/Rizzoli, $59.95) -- the hefty, bright catalogue for the artist's retrospective at the Guggenheim Museum through Jan. 16 -- quotes him as saying, "I want my painting to look as if it has been programmed. I want to hide the record of my hand," he obviously has had no such luck.
The Benday dots are the record of his own hand, and it is one of the most recognizable hands around.
Conveniently for Ms.
Waldman, the Guggenheim's deputy director, who is sometimes a bit too ponderous about her subject, Mr.
Lichtenstein's untroubled and uncomplicated life's work fits neatly into thematic chapters: his caricatures of comic strips, of advertisements, landscapes, brush strokes, mirrors, entablatures, still lifes, various Expressionist, Surrealist and Futurist paintings, and interiors of suburban houses.
We see the artist latching onto a theme, playing it out and then easing into the next theme, often looking casually backward to incorporate elements of his past paintings into the new ones.
The amazing thing is that regardless of Mr.
Lichtenstein's subject he has been able to hold the same ironic pose for 30 years without flinching.
His consistent style serves somewhat the same role as a person with an unchangeably wry expression.
Just as the wry look seems to take on different meanings depending on what it confronts, so Mr.
Lichtenstein's Benday dots and flat primary colors read like a running commentary, pointing out the proper objects for parody at each moment and suggesting that at some point virtually everything is fair game.
SARAH BOXER


Low-Key Style Of the B &amp; B
FOR many travelers, a Hawaiian vacation means a beachfront resort with all the amenities.
There is another Hawaii, however -- a more adventurous, less expensive alternative -- that my wife and I discovered while staying in bed-and-breakfast establishments on a recent trip.
There are more than 500 bed and breakfasts, loosely defined, according to the Hawaii Visitors Bureau, on all six of the major islands.
They take a variety of forms: not one of the three we stayed in was the classic bedroom in a private home with a host in attendance.
Some are private cottages tucked away behind a main house; others are more like inns.
But rates for even the most sumptuous are lower than the price of a room at a first-class resort.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
A SOCIAL ON THE GREEN
New Milford does not call its second annual New Year's Eve celebration on Friday night a First Night -- the custom of nonalcoholic public entertainment that began in Boston in 1975 and costs only the price of a single admission button.


Taos
To many, the only reason to visit Taos, N.M., in winter is to go downhill skiing -- which, given the steep chutes, desert dry powder and breathtaking views of Taos Ski Valley, makes perfect sense.
But there is much more to do in and around this town of 4,500.
On a high mesa at the base of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, the southernmost range of the Rockies, Taos enjoys the best of several Southwestern worlds.
To the east rise snow-capped mountains, their broad shoulders dotted with fir trees.
To the west lies a vast desert plain through which the Rio Grande cuts a swath so deep and narrow that it is imperceptible except up close.
On a clear day, the sky is a gauzy blue, the soft light seems to fill every corner and the wide horizon is broken only by mountains and distant buttes.


Caring for Plants After the Bloom Is Off
PLANTS are wonderful, lasting gifts.
But how to take care of them after the holiday hoopla fades?
First, a few generalities.
Keep the plants out of drafts.
Sometimes when a door or a window is opened the plant is in a position to take the brunt of the breeze, and in no time it starts to show yellow leaves and drop blossoms.
Particularly sensitive are poinsettias.
Rule No. 1 then, is to keep the plants out of drafts.


Getting the Word Out Amid the Hotbed of News
IT had been one difficult day for Jennifer McLogan, the new Long Island correspondent for WCBS-TV News.
"It was Pearl Harbor day," Ms.
McLogan recalled.
"So we went up in antique planes with Long Islanders who fly over the Statue of Liberty and drop roses. We were almost to the statue when the pilot says, 'I have some bad news for you.'


Time for U.S. to Relent on Haiti and El Salvador
To the Editor:
"My worst fears are realized," William Walker cabled from the United States Embassy in El Salvador in 1990.
Thanks to documents released on United States activities in El Salvador we know that the Ambassador reported to Washington that United States military advisers had for some time been training the Salvadoran civilian financiers of the death squads -- in his words, "gun-toting Soldier of Fortune-magazine-subscribing, rich young extremists" -- at United States expense.
As you report (front page, Dec. 14), Mr.
Walker stopped the training, over our military's objections.
After the sordid disclosures of a dozen years of United States policy in El Salvador, his indignant tone rings slightly off-key.
Indeed, embarrassed Pentagon officials wondered aloud if Mr.
Walker had not read their memos informing him that United States advisers were providing weapons and training to those they agreed were "pretty much" as the Ambassador described them.
Who, let alone the United States Ambassador, could be surprised that our tax dollars supported private war games with Salvadorans known to bankroll death squad activities?
Or amazed that, as you report, the United States military defended its wealthy students because they merely paid others to kill, and resisted Mr.
Walker's attempt to halt the training, so as not to insult the military sponsor of the trainees, himself among the worst human rights offenders?
Outrageous? Certainly. Astonishing? Not really.
The Reagan Administration conceived of, financed and trained the Salvadoran army's "elite" Atlacatl Battalion, which made El Mozote a household name in human rights circles by massacring an entire town of 700 civilians in 1981.
The Bush Administration was still training the Atlacatl on Nov. 13, 1989, three days before its commandos marched into the Jesuit university residence to murder six priests and two women.
In the Jesuit case, and other instances when embarrassed by Salvadoran clients, United States officials, including Mr.
Walker, offered denials, followed by limited admissions in the face of mounting proof and, ultimately, questionable accounts of what they knew and when they knew it.
Successive administrations provide the American public with new examples of official credulity tinged with cynicism.
Most recently, Clinton Administration officials intoned their respect for the professionalism of Haiti's military leaders, despite rampant officially sponsored terror, only to express shock and outrage when military henchmen scared off United States ships carrying military trainers and then shot the Justice Minister, Guy Malary, to death on the streets of Port-au-Prince.
As a Nov. 14 front-page article disclosed, United States officials have reasons to know better.
Senior members of a military intelligence and counternarcotics unit, formed and paid by the Central Intelligence Agency, ran drugs, engaged in political terror and threatened to kill the local Drug Enforcement Agency chief.
For many Haitians, including the martyred Justice Minister and likely the exiled President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the damage is irreversible.
New death squad killings in El Salvador offer the United States an opportunity to restore some squandered credibility on human rights by pushing for investigations and prosecutions, regardless of where the evidence leads.
In Haiti, United States diplomats must insure that the military's aggression is not rewarded, as some fear, with a blanket amnesty, an infusion of foreign funds and a pliant civilian government in exchange for a face-saving exit for United States policy.
As Haiti and El Salvador slide into news media eclipse, only public attention will police our leaders.
In a sense, those United States trainers of death squad patrons have done their country a service.
They have reminded all of us beyond any lingering doubt that our Government cannot be trusted to police itself.
ROBERT O. WEINER Coordinator, Americas Program Lawyers Committee for Human Rights New York, Dec. 15, 1993


Starting Life With Bad Ingredients
STAY ME, OH COMFORT ME Journals and Stories, 1933-1941.
By M. F. K. Fisher. 349 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $23.


RECORD BRIEFS
Janacek: 'Mladi,' Violin Sonata, 'Pohadka,' Presto, Concertino  Erno Sebestyen, violinist; Martin Ostertag, cellist; Members of the Ensemble Villa Musica.
MD + G L 3439; CD.


Officer Revisits His Old, New Neighborhood
Vincent Mansfield, who grew up in Flushing more than two decades ago, just landed a job in his old neighborhood.
But things have changed since his youth, when the Gertz department store was Main Street's retail giant and the RKO Keith's movie theater packed in matinee crowds.
Many of the mom-and-pop stores are gone, replaced with gleaming Asian banks and restaurants.
And scores of temples, mosques and churches, many of them serving new immigrants, have opened.


IN SHORT: FICTION
WESTERN BORDER CROSSINGS  By David L. Fleming.
Texas Christian University, cloth, $24.50; paper, $14.95.


At Work; Confronting the Ghosts on the Job
NINA M. recalls sitting at her desk, perambulating mentally over her stormy relationship with her boss.
Each encounter seemed to leave Ms.
M., a senior editor in her late 30's at a publication based in the West, feeling like she was clutching the bob of a pendulum, arcing wildly from depression to rage.
"I remember sitting and staring at an editorial schedule. It didn't represent deadlines, it represented days I could expect to have some bad encounter with my boss." She began, in her words, "hiding out" as much as possible, going down a flight of stairs, for example, to avoid the possibility of running into her boss in the women's bathroom on her own floor.


Commuter Train Gunman Haunts the Thoughts of Many; Deranged and at Large
To the Editor:
"Mass Murder on the 5:33" (editorial, Dec. 10) skips over the problem of "emotionally disturbed gunmen" and "mental instability" to go on for six paragraphs about gun control.


Duck Breasts Fit Well on Festive New Year's Menu
NEW YEAR'S EVE looms.
A lovely intimate dinner, perhaps?
A big open house?
And what about New Year's Day?
Brunch?
An informal gathering with television tuned to bowl games?
There is still time to consider all this and, whether such plans have already been made, to think about what to serve.
Food for these occasions should be festive, flavorful and easy to prepare and serve.
Dishes that can be assembled in advance and wait for the guests to arrive or that can stand the test of time on a buffet table are best.


New York Home of Toni Morrison Burns
The Rockland County home of the author Toni Morrison burned to the ground yesterday morning in a fire of unknown origin, the authorities said.
Ms.
Morrison's son, who was home at the time but uninjured in the blaze, called the Nyack, N.Y., fire department at 9:17 A.M. to report the fire at his family's home in nearby Grand View, said Jay Phillips, the Nyack battalion chief.
The fire -- which, two minutes later, was seen shooting through the roof of the three-story Victorian home on the Hudson River -- was brought under control by 11:30 A.M., he said.


A Man's Home is His Collection
LIVING WITH CONTEMPORARY CRAFTS furniture could be a challenge, the furnishing equivalent of having Robin Williams as a permanent fixture in your living room.
But to Peter T. Joseph, who has been collecting such pieces for 13 years, being surrounded by inanimate type-A personalities is the very essence of livability.
But, please, don't call them crafts; this is art furniture.
Once, well-tempered objects were intended for everybody's everyday use (think Gustav Stickley, Mission furniture and the Shakers).
By the 80's, they were moving into museums and the homes of a growing clique of private collectors.
Joseph, a merchant banker, is one of the most ardent -- so ardent, in fact, that three years ago his avocation became a vocation when he opened a gallery in Manhattan.


Hurley Finds Himself 'Worried' by His Knee
BOBBY HURLEY is out of the hospital, but is concerned about his recovery from the Dec. 12 accident in which his Toyota 4Runner collided with a car.
"It's pretty frightening to me, because I've really never been injured in my career, so there's a lot of unexpectedness ahead of me," Hurley said yesterday from Sacramento when interviewed by NBC at halftime of the San Francisco-Houston football game.


INTELLIGENCE STUDY SAYS NORTH KOREA HAS NUCLEAR BOMB
The Central Intelligence Agency has told President Clinton that North Korea probably has developed one or two nuclear bombs, according to Administration officials.
The classified assessment -- supported by virtually all intelligence agencies but disputed by the State Department's analysts -- deepens the Administration's dilemma as it tries to fulfill Mr.
Clinton's pledge that "North Korea cannot be allowed to develop a nuclear bomb."


Too Little To Cheer, Too Much To Mourn
Sports is sometimes dismissed as immune to the real world.
But in 1993, the most traumatic sports year in memory, stark reality intruded more than ever on what is supposed to be fun and games but seldom was.
Tragedy too often shrouded triumph. Sports too often mourned.


The Good Guys, The Bad Guys And the Irish Guys
THERE IS AN OPENING moment in "In the Name of the Father," the ambitious new movie about Northern Ireland's modern revolutionary blood bath, when armored carriers of British troops swing around a corner toward the minority ghetto of Roman Catholic republicans in Belfast and confront the unarmed citizenry in a melee of torching, swearing, rock-throwing and tear-gassing.
The cacophonous scene's butting of the sheer forces of military occupation and popular resistance is laced with such an uncanny mix of lethal danger and desperate childlike fun in the streets that the bittersweet heart of the modern Irish troubles is instantly laid bare to be experienced like a Bruegel painting.
The opening verisimilitude is of a high and convincing order for anyone who has ever directly witnessed the sectarian death, sadness and fatalism that has stalked that land for the past two decades.
Even more dramatically risky, however, in this movie brew of complicated cross-truth and boiling human emotion, is one of the film's larger goals: to depict the now widely acknowledged shortcomings of British justice in having falsely convicted, then most reluctantly freed some of the citizens swept up under the notorious emergency provisions of the Prevention of Terrorism Act -- citizens who proved to be unarguably innocent.


THE MIST OFF PERFUME RIVER
It is hard to read about "true glamour" and romance, the misty emerald river and "lazy deltas," without wondering when we will stop using Vietnam as ground on which to project our fantasies (Style: "The Mist Off Perfume River," Nov. 21).
There is something decidedly disturbing about conjuring otherworldliness in the name of high fashion and high capitalism against the nostalgic backdrop of a feminized, pacified and romanticized space.
TOBY ALICE VOLKMAN Director, Southeast Asia Program, Social Science Research Council New York, N.Y.


Victoria Eng and Timothy Chin
VICTORIA ENG and Timothy Chin both grew up in New York and have fast-paced, high-tech jobs: Mr.
Chin is an assistant futures trader for Citibank and Ms.
Eng is an actuary systems specialist at the Teachers Insurance Annuity Association.
But their wedding was full of echoes from ancient China.
Like many Chinese-American couples, they chose the year of their wedding according to the Chinese lunar calendar.
It showed that 1993 would be a year filled with light to guide people in new ventures.


HOW TINA BROWN MOVES MAGAZINES
Those who criticize Brown for parading celebrity journalism as literary sophistication miss the point.
As Brown's magazine proves, popular culture and high culture are not enemies.
Robert Gottlieb is the proud owner of what Kolbert calls a "world-class collection of plastic purses." So then why is it such a stretch to imagine that Roseanne Arnold might catch the fancy of Daniel Patrick Moynihan?
NADYA BIRNHOLZ New York, N.Y.


Jean Ann Ball, Dean Scheinert
June wedding plans have been announced by John H. Ball for his daughter Jean Ann Ball and Dean M. Scheinert, the son of Helene Scheinert of Forest Hills, Queens, and Arnold Scheinert of Weston, Conn.
Ms.
Ball is also the daughter of the late Alice W. Ball.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and is studying for a master's degree at the Hunter College School of Social Work.


Dealing With Life's Final Years
WHEN Dr.
Roger S. Madris first began his practice in internal medicine here, only 20 percent of his patients were over 65.
Nine years later, the numbers are closer to 70 percent, and Dr.
Madris recently added board accreditation in geriatrics to his list of credentials.
Like other doctors who care for the elderly, Dr.
Madris has seen his geriatric practice grow and has witnessed what some are calling a revolution in the way the elderly and their families have begun to deal with the final years of life.


Sowing a Future With Green in It
It may have been the first day of winter, but for hundreds of local students, Tuesday brought the first sign of spring.
Students at seven schools with gardens created through the help of a nonprofit group, Greening of Harlem, received holiday gifts of trowels and magnifying lenses, and gardening books for the teachers.


No Headline
"Why shouldn't Hindus celebrate Christmas? Everyone else in America does." -- VIJAY KOHLI, who owns an Indian clothing store in Queens.  [ 36:1. ]


Miscalculation
To the Editor:
Here's one more "My Fair Lady" memory: My grandfather, Julius "Blutch" Stone, a veteran of the theater world and treasurer of the Mark Hellinger Theater, had invited my parents to a preview performance of the new musical.
They had braved a snowstorm to be there and were thrilled by the first act, but when they saw Blutch in the lobby at intermission, he was shaking his head in disgust.
Asked what was wrong, he said, "Not a hit song in it."


BEST SELLERS: December 26, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
8
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
2
2
72
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
3
11
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
4
4
18
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
5
5
3
THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.
6
8
41
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
7
6
2
THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A collection of stories about American men and the strains of contemporary life.
8
8
37
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
9
7
13
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
10
11
7
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined to kill him and take his place.
11
12
10
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in Victorian England's high society.
12
10
4
THE TRUCE AT BAKURA, by Kathy Tyers. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The "Star Wars" Rebel Alliance responds to a call for help from a threatened outpost.
13
15
5
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Talese/Doubleday, $23.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly reappears in their lives.
14
15
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and woman and for the woman's first lover.
15
11
SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics and murder.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
6
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
2
2
10
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
3
3
16
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
4
4
18
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
5
5
12
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
6
6
4
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
7
7
33
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
8
9
12
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Thoughts on 43 years of marriage.
9
8
3
LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The country singer's memoirs.
10
10
4
THE BEST CAT EVER, by Cleveland Amory. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A third volume about the trials and tribulations of the feline Polar Bear and his owner.
11
15
12
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
12
11
10
STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski. (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played Capt.
James Tiberius Kirk.
13
1
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, American folklore and other sources.
14
12
72
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
15
14
7
THE DOWNING STREET YEARS, by Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins, $30.) The former British Prime Minister recalls her 11 1/2 years in power.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
22
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
2
1
6
AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes from the golf instructor.
3
55
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf.
4
4
11
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 11, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind BILLY, by Albert French. (Viking, $19.) A racial incident turns into hair-raising tragedy in a classical mode when a black boy kills a white girl in this novel of rural Mississippi in 1937.
THE COLUMBIA HISTORY OF AMERICAN POETRY, edited by Jay Parini. (Columbia University, $59.95.) Essays by 31 scholars, many of them quirky, opinionated and authoritative; revaluations and reverberations abound.
THE COMPLETE LYRICS OF IRA GERSHWIN, edited by Robert Kimball. (Knopf, $45.) More than 700 lyrics displaying the fresh and inventive rhymes, supple phrasing, intelligence and wit that made Gershwin a lyricist nobody can read for one minute without humming.
THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER, edited by Mark Tucker. (Oxford University, $30.) A fascinating anthology of 70 years' worth of writing about (and occasionally by) Ellington, who clearly inspired powerful emotions in even the most sober minds.
GARBAGE, by A.R.
Ammons. (Norton, $17.95.) A long poem of rueful grandeur and splendid oddity in which what's left over is transmuted; winner of this year's National Book Award.
HENRY JAMES: COLLECTED TRAVEL WRITINGS, edited by Richard Howard. (Library of America, 2 vols., $35 each.) Close to 1,700 pages, in the (as it were) aggregate, densely but never coarsely packed with the observations abroad (for abroad he usually was) of one upon whom nothing (as his own aspiration, immodest but justified by the sequel, had put it) was lost.
IN EUROPE'S NAME: Germany and the Divided Continent, by Timothy Garton Ash. (Random House, $27.50.) This sober major study in recent international history examines West Germany's conciliatory Ostpolitik: did it help or hinder the collapse of Communism?
A hard question, approached with respect for its ambiguity.
SARAJEVO: A War Journal, by Zlatko Dizdarevic. (Fromm, $19.95.) A lament for Bosnia and for civilization, by a newspaper editor who celebrates the endurance and heroism of ordinary people caught in an insane conflict.
SISTERS OF FORTUNE, by Nancy Coffey Heffernan and Ann Page Stecker. (University Press of New England, cloth, $40; paper, $15.95.) The letters of three New Hampshire girls over 11 years to their father, who left them for the gold of California in 1850, testify to the status of women and the dominance of hope over experience.
SPLENDOURS AND MISERIES: A Life of Sacheverell Sitwell, by Sarah Bradford. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) Ms.
Bradford, an expert biographer, illuminates the Sitwell era and the remarkable success of Osbert, Edith and Sachie at being taken at their own valuation.
W.E.B.
DU BOIS: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919, by David Levering Lewis. (John Macrae/Holt, $35.) The first half of the epical life (it lasted till 1963) of the man who by World War I had become the most outspoken, eloquent and influential black American.


California Dairy Tries One Caricature Too Many
In ads on billboards along Northern California roads, Clo the Cow, the mascot for a local dairy, has been portrayed for 30 years as a lovable egotist who compares herself with the greats.
As Vincent Van Clo, she drew her self portrait, sans ear.
As Moona Lisa, the usually coquettish cow barely cracked a smile.
In "Supreme Quart," she donned black robes.


Likening Assessment To a Callable Bond
I have some comments about Dr.
Robert Goon's calculations concerning assessments ("A Different Way to View Assessments," Letters to the Westchester Editor, Dec. 12).
To start backward from his final conclusion, if reassessments forced the "value" of House A from $300,000 to $143,228, then the owner of House A should have no trouble restoring his taxes to the original $2,575.
This based upon the assumption that the goal of the State Equalization Board is to have a uniform rate of taxation, based upon market value.
I make the following further observations:


Even More Good Stuff
To the Editor:
Readers of Vicki Goldberg's essay on world's fairs, with its magnificent photograph of the Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 1893, may enjoy seeing a hundred more of these varied and fascinating platinum prints by Charles Dudley Arnold, the official exposition photographer.
They are on view through Jan. 22 in the Wallach Gallery of Columbia University.
FRED KNUBEL  New York


Santa Before Nast
To the Editor:
I read with great interest X. J. Kennedy's fine tribute to the timeless verses of Clement Clark Moore ("The Man Who Hitched the Reindeer to Santa Claus's Sleigh," Dec. 5).
It is a needed corrective in the present climate of formless and dissonant writings in what Edmund Wilson once termed, felicitously, "shredded prose."


In Spiritual Places. Mundane Problems
THERE are many ways to think of the 149-year-old First Unitarian Church in Brooklyn Heights.
Architectural treasure.
Spiritual hub.
Neighborhood cynosure.
Historical repository.
Two years ago, however, the trustee for buildings and grounds added a chilling new description:
Crumbling sandcastle.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: BROOKLYN UPDATE
* MANHATTAN BEACH
A State Supreme Court judge has ruled that the 120-year-old esplanade in Manhattan Beach is private property and that a man may build a fence across the walkway behind his home.
The Manhattan Beach Community Group had complained that a 6-foot cyclone fence built by Jack Laboz of 293 Amherst Street interrupted the seven-block walkway connecting Manhattan Beach and Brighton Beach.
But on Dec. 15, Justice Leonard E. Yoswein dismissed contentions that the esplanade is a public easement.
The group, made up of 800 residents, plans to appeal.
* FORT GREENE
The future of the South Oxford Tennis Club, the city's only black-owned tennis club, remains uncertain after construction began this month on Atlantic Center, a major revitalization effort in Fort Greene.
The city, which owns the club's land, told its owner, Richard Northern, in August that the club would have to close in November to make room for moderate- to middle-income housing in the Atlantic Center, a commercial and residential complex.
But Mr.
Northern, the founder of the club at 187 South Oxford Street, has refused to close the building and has pressured city officials to include it in the redevelopment plan.
The developer, the Forest City Ratner Companies, now says it is unsure whether the club, in a three-story neo-Georgian structure on the fringe of the Fort Greene Historic District, will have to close.
On Dec. 14, construction began on a Bradlees department store near Flatbush and Atlantic Avenues and Hanson Place.
The store is to occupy about 120,000 square feet on two stories and serve as Atlantic Center's anchor tenant in 210,000 square feet of commercial space.
* PROSPECT PARK
A police task force patrolling the cultural institutions around Prospect Park has been increased to 21 officers from 14 to create a feeling of safety for visitors.
The task force patrols Prospect Park, the Prospect Park Wildlife Center, the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, the Brooklyn Public Library and the Brooklyn Museum, which attract a total of more than two million visitors a year.
The creation of the task force in 1991-92 and the recent increase in staff was recommended by Borough President Howard Golden's Crown Heights Coalition, which was worried that visitors would be frightened away after the 1991 racial disturbances.
No increase in crime has been reported, the police say.
The added security is unrelated to the increased police presence ordered in Prospect Park after the murder of a drama teacher, Allyn Winslow, last spring, the police said.


A Colossus for Columbus


De Vries's Letters
To the Editor:
Paul Thereoux's moving tribute to the late Peter De Vries (Dec. 5) features several excerpts from the comic novelist's letters to Mr.
Theroux.
I'd love to see De Vries's correspondence compiled and published in book form, for it's plain that De Vries (like S. J. Perelman) saw no reason in the world why a letter to a friend should not be written in accordance with the same high standards as anything intended for public consumption.
And both writers' standards were high indeed.
Perelman's letters (compiled in 1987 as "Don't Tread on Me") were embarrassingly good -- he couldn't write disposable prose if he had to -- and I have no doubt that De Vries's letters would be, in their own way, just as durably funny.
DAVID ENGLISH  Somerville, Mass.


DEC. 19-24: One Step Closer; United Airlines Poised To Become the Largest Employee-Owned Company
Coffee, tea, or a stock quote for United Airlines?
Employees at the nation's largest carrier may soon be happy to provide all three if they succeed in buying a controlling stake in their company.
They moved one step closer to that goal last week, when United's board of directors accepted their proposal to trade $5 billion worth of wage and work-rule concessions over more than five years for 53 percent of the company.
If shareholders and the unions' rank and file sign off on the idea, United would become the country's largest employee-owned company.


Hold the Novocain
IT was between periods at a New York Rangers-Washington Capitals hockey game a few seasons ago.
In the visitor's locker room at Madison Square Garden, a man who goes by the name Bam Bam sat on a trainer's table with his mouth open and his face in a grimace of pain.
He had been hit in the face by an intentionally errant hockey stick that happened to belong to a player from New York.
One tooth was broken off at the gum line, the nerve exposed.
Another was bent at such an angle that Bam Bam -- better known as Scott Stevens, now with the New Jersey Devils -- could not close his mouth.
This was not a major crisis for Bam Bam, who had played the remainder of the previous period with his jaw hanging open and the taste of blood in his mouth.
He wasn't worried about it, he just wanted back on the ice.
Dr.
Don Salomon wasn't quite so calm.
Dr.
Salomon is the younger of the Rangers' two team dentists (his mentor and partner, Dr. Irwin Miller, otherwise known by the players as "Miller the Driller," has been with the National Hockey League team since the 1978-79 season), and it was his job to fix Mr.
Stevens's teeth so that he could finish the game.


A Cigar Smoker's Guide
Cigar smoking may be officially banned at the White House.
But Washington has at least 17 restaurants, including Aux Beaux Champs and I Ricchi, where cigar enthusiasts like the Commander in Chief can puff away with impunity.
Those, and some 350 other dining spots in North America, are listed in "The Cigar Smoker's Guide to Restaurants," a 79-page booklet produced, not entirely without self-interest, by Davidoff of Geneva, the cigar purveyors.


MAIL-ORDER AMERICA
Why does L. L. Bean earn a sex appeal rating of zero, especially since "eroticism is always subordinate to a higher goal: romance" ("Mail-Order America," by Holly Brubach, Nov. 21)?
People I know seek lovers who have -- and possibly resemble -- good-natured field dogs, with baggy beds of cedar chips.
We're turned on by cordiality (not angst), relaxed tummies, warm feet, flannel robes and candor.
TOBY STEWART Berkeley, Calif.


Streetscapes/7 Gracie Square; Behind a Buck Rogers Look, Art Deco Brickwork Emerges
IN the 1950's and 60's, Manhattan remained largely above the wave of aluminum siding that washed over older buildings in the suburbs.
What kind of idiot would put up 12 stories of fake clapboard?
But there is one case, a 1920's co-op at 7 Gracie Square, at 84th Street near the East River.
It, too, got the miracle cure in the 50's, a shiny cladding of bare aluminum covering much of its Art Deco design to solve water-penetration problems.


A Crumbling Ruin by Day . . .
It stands ghostly at the southern tip of Roosevelt Island, the neo-Gothic hulk of New York's 19th-century Smallpox Hospital.
Head to the East River after dark, and the illuminated ruins will glow through time and the night.
With reports from Norwood, Harlem, Flushing, Fort Greene and the Upper West Side.
PAGES 5-7


A Halfway Response on Whitewater
Bowing to political reality, President Clinton has now instructed his lawyers to give the Justice Department all papers concerning his and Mrs.
Clinton's partnership in a controversial Arkansas land deal.
These include files which had been presumptuously spirited from the office of the deputy White House counsel, Vincent Foster, following Mr.
Foster's suicide.
Mr.
Clinton's action falls well short of full and immediate public disclosure of the files.
But it spares him a potentially embarrassing fight with his own Attorney General, Janet Reno, whose investigators had threatened to subpoena the files.
The investigators are looking into the collapse of Madison Guaranty, an Arkansas savings and loan whose owner, James McDougal, was the Clintons' partner in the Whitewater Development Corporation, which also went bust in a speculative land venture.


Columbus Divides Ohio's Capital City
The winter wind is blowing hard and mean, the Ku Klux Klan wants a permit to demonstrate downtown and the city's beloved Ohio State Buckeyes are headed for one of those second-tier bowl games that no one really cares about.
So, maybe it is a good thing that the people of Columbus have something else to fuss over these days: should a 500-ton statue of Christopher Columbus that is 6 feet taller than the Statue of Liberty be put near the banks of the Scioto River, not far from the full-size replica of the Santa Maria and the other monuments already dedicated to the man and the myth?


Bits of This And That
Patchwork coats and jackets -- in colorful brocades, jeweled-toned velvets or earthy Harris tweeds -- are giving their city wearers a homespun, cozy look this winter.
The jackets and coats mix as many as a half-dozen patterns and fabrics, as in the brocade coat lined in fake fur (top left) that had a matching hat.
The styles range from a subtle mix of checks and windowpane plaids (left) to a vivid velvet coat (above).
Other mixes include Scottish tartans for a vest and matching beret or several Harris tweeds for a winter sports jacket.
Solid-color woolens (top right) take on a stained-glass effect when patched together.


Caroline Krass, Adam S. Levy
Stephen J. Krass of New York has announced May wedding plans for his daughter Caroline Anne Krass and Adam Scott Levy, a son of Victor and Rena Levy of Muttontown, L.I.
Ms.
Krass and her fiance, both 25, graduated from Cornell University.
She received a law degree from Georgetown University and is an associate at the New York law firm of Schulte Roth &amp; Zabel.
Mr.
Levy is a medical student at New York University.


What's Good for the Mafia Is Good for Russia
The sinister machinations of the Russian "mafia" was a hot topic in Moscow just before the parliamentary elections.
Exactly what the word "mafia" means in Russia is not clear, but those who use the word seem to have in mind the brash entrepreneurs, slick wheeler-dealers and aggressive businessmen who have emerged, seemingly out of nowhere, to take advantage of the hesitant movement toward a free enterprise economy.


In the Region/Westchester; Quests for Salability and Space Spur Renovations
THREE years ago, when Barry and Hilary Kaye bought a 1950's split level in Armonk, the couple knew that someday they would renovate the house to better reflect their personalities and individual style.
"We really bought the house because of the property it sits on," said Mr.
Kaye, whose house is on almost four acres that includes a small pond and a brook.
"The best thing about the house was the view outside the windows."


Holly Spofford And Kirk Bell
Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Nicholas Spofford of Bedford, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Helen Walker Spofford to Warren Kirk Bell, the son of Peggy Kirk Bell of Pinehurst, N.C., and the late Warren Bell.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Spofford, 30, is known as Holly.
She graduated from Yale University and is an executive assistant to Representative Harris W. Fawell, Republican of Illinois, in Washington.
Her father is a partner in Ingalls &amp; Snyder, a New York investment firm.
Her grandfather, the late Charles M. Spofford, was the chairman of the executive committee of the Metropolitan Opera and a vice chairman of Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts.


Wall Street; Michael Jordan Is Gone and So Is the Bullishness
MICHAEL Jordan may be missed by the Chicago Bulls, who are not nearly the dominant team without him that they were before his retirement.
But the biggest sense of loss may be at Nike, which was propelled to the dominant position in the market by the Air Jordan basketball shoe.
Last week, Nike reported disappointing earnings of just $52.3 million, or 69 cents a share, for the quarter ended Nov. 30, down from $76 million, or 69 cents a share, in the comparable period a year ago, when the Bulls were on their way to their third consecutive National Basketball Association crown.
Nike said foreign currency translation costs were part of the problem, but it also reported a 25 percent drop in sales of basketball shoes and related items, an area that Philip Knight, Nike's chairman, called the "backbone of the U.S. market" for the company.
He said it would start to rebound next year.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Film/1993; Dumb Lawyers and Sublimated Sex Were a Potent Mix
Best New Role Model -- Christina Ricci as the somber daughter, Wednesday, in "Addams Family Values." She's the perfect antidote to Barbie and comes with a chic all-black wardrobe.
Hottest New Sex Symbol -- Harvey Keitel with Maori tattoos in "The Piano."


Jennifer Oelbaum And Stuart Green
Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Oelbaum of Bedford, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Heidi Oelbaum, to Stuart Harris Green, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic P. Green of Livingston, N.J.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Oelbaum, 24, is an accountant at KPMG Peat Marwick, the accounting firm in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University and is studying for an M.B.A. at New York University.
Her father is the president of the Kane-Miller Corporation, an investment holding company in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Swimming With Nature


It's Confounded Change Calling Again, Honey!
IT is rare when a legal case has a direct impact on almost everybody in the United States, and it is even more unusual when it unleashes a torrent of change that is still under way 10 years later.
On New Years' Day, Americans will mark the 10th anniversary of just such a moment: the breakup of Ma Bell's monolithic telephone system.
At 12:01 A.M. on Jan. 1, 1984, the American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company fulfilled the terms of its antitrust settlement with the Justice Department and officially turned over its local telephone monopoly to seven new and independent "Baby Bell" companies.


Judge Blocks M31 Change
A proposal to alter the M31 bus route, the mass-transit lifeline of the far East Side, and extend it to the West Side was blocked last week by a restraining order in New York State Supreme Court.
Right now, the route starts at 92d Street and First Avenue and heads south on York Avenue to 61st Street, then west to Lexington.
It stops on 59th Street, where passengers may connect with the express, before ending at 57th Street.


When Caller Is Put on Hold, Company Fills Void
PERHAPS the only thing worse than wading through the layers of the voice-mail menu during a telephone call is listening to complete silence while waiting on hold for several minutes.
But for Louis Jammer 3d, owner of Captive Concepts International in Trenton, being put on hold when he calls a customer sounds very sweet.
That's because his company produces taped messages, personalized to fit each business, that fill the void.


The World; A World Unhinged Gropes for New Rules
AT a time when past certainties -- the constraints of totalitarianism and the comforts of faith -- either have been swept away or are under assault, Dostoyevskian thoughts about the fragility of the barrier between civilization and chaos come easily to mind.
In both Western Europe and North America, what might be called an age of unbelief has sharply challenged and eroded traditional religious, moral and ethical codes, and both economic and social change have put tremendous pressure on traditional family structures.
Together with problems like racism and poverty in inner cities, these changes have been accompanied by horrendous crime rates and rampant drug use.


Q and A
Staying at a Lighthouse
Q.
Can you tell me about historic lighthouses that offer overnight accommodations? -- Douglas M. MacKenzie, Tucson, Ariz.
A.
At a lighthouse, you can prepare your own food and live in a dormitory setting or be served two or three meals a day in an elegant atmosphere.
Hosteling International-American Youth Hostels runs three lighthouses where dormitory rooms, with two to six beds in a room, predominate.
Visitors provide their own food and rent linens at $1 a person per stay.
The 118-year-old Point Montara Lighthouse, Post Office Box 737, Montara, Calif. 94037, (415) 728-7177, is 25 miles south of San Francisco.
Its rates, which vary by season, are $9 to $11 a person for members and $12 to $14 for nonmembers.
Fifty miles south of San Francisco you will find the 110-foot tall Pigeon Point Lighthouse at Pigeon Point Road and California Highway 1, Pescadero, Calif. 94060; (415) 879-0633.
Rates: $9 a person for members, $11 for nonmembers.
On the shores of the St.
Lawrence Seaway stands the Tibbetts Point Lighthouse Hostel, R.R. 1, Box 330, Cape Vincent N.Y. 13618; (315) 654-3450.
Rates: $10 a person for members, $13 for nonmembers.
Closed Oct. 25 to May 14.
Beyond hostels, the possibilities include Point Arena Lighthouse, Post Office Box 11, Point Arena, Calif. 95468, (707) 882-2777, in Mendocino County, on the Pacific.
Linens and food must be taken along.
Rates: $80 a couple, $110 for three to six.
Big Bay Point Lighthouse, 3 Lighthouse Road, Big Bay, Mich. 49808; (906) 345-9957.
Thirty miles from Marquette, with a vista of Lake Superior and the Huron Mountains.
Breakfast is Continental plus cereal, pancakes or eggs.
No TV or telephone.
Rates: $80 and $120 a room in the winter, $95 to $165 in the summer.
In Narragansett Bay, a mile and a half from Newport, stands the Rose Island Lighthouse, where there is no electricity and the water comes from a cistern.
An augmented Continental breakfast is served.
Information: Post Office Box 1419, Newport, R.I. 02840; (401) 847-4242.
Rates last summer for a double: $120 for lighthouse members, $140 for nonmembers.
A launch to the island, $10 a person round trip last summer, is extra.
Selkirk Lighthouse, Post Office Box 228, Pulaski, N.Y. 13142, (315) 298-6688, near Syracuse, is set up for housekeeping.
When the salmon are running up the Salmon River from Lake Ontario, usually Aug. 15 to Oct. 15, the rate is $125 for four; rest of the year: $100.
The Keepers House on Isle au Haut, overlooks Penobscot Bay adjoining Acadia National Park, off the coast of Maine.
It has neither electricity nor telephone, but does serve three meals.
Open May 1 to Oct. 31, when the rates will be $250 a couple per night.
The 45-minute boat trip, $9 a person one way last year, is extra.
Information: Post Office Box 26, Isle au Haut, Me. 04645; (207) 367-2261.
East Brother Island Light Station, 117 Park Place, Point Richmond, Calif. 94801, (510) 233-2385, is in the straits separating San Francisco and San Pablo Bays and dates to 1873.
Guests are served a four-course dinner with wine and a full breakfast.
Open Thursday, Friday and Saturday.
Rates: $295 a couple per night, including boat trip.
From Paris to Lourdes
Q.
My husband and I are considering going to Lourdes from Paris next April and would like to know about train and plane service between the two cities. -- Rita M. Solomon, Masontown, Pa.
A.
To get to Lourdes, you can fly from Orly to either the Tarbes or Pau Airport.
A single Air Inter flight operates daily, departing at 10:55 A.M. and arriving at Tarbes Airport, six miles from Lourdes, at 12:10 P.M. (1:40 P.M. on Sunday).
Up to four flights a day serve Pau, which is 25 miles west of Lourdes.
Bus service links both airports to Lourdes.
For flight information, call (800) 237-2747.
Most passengers can take advantage of the Visite Fare of about $176 round trip (coded YAP) if they buy a ticket to Tarbes or Pau when getting an international ticket.
Another favorable fare is the Super Loisir, which is about $141 round trip; it requires a Saturday night stay.
The T.G.V., or high-speed train, which takes 5 hours and 20 minutes, departs from Gare Montparnasse in Paris at 8:10 A.M., 2 P.M. and 5:40 P.M.
The one-way fare for tickets bought in the United States or Canada in 1994 is fixed at $138, first class; $91, second class.
Reservations, at a cost of $10 for going and $10 for returning, are required for TGV service.
Handling fee: $10 per order.
Even less expensive is a France Pass, for unlimited rail travel in France for three days within a one-month period and is not sold in Europe.
The charge in 1994: $180 for first class, $125 for second class.
Information: Rail Europe, (800) 438-7245.
A one-way ticket bought in France is $100 to $116 for first class and $67 to $76 for second class.
But there are no extra fees.
Opera With Surtitles
Q.
My husband and I attended a performance at London's Royal Opera House of Puccini's "Madama Butterfly" at which surtitles were unobtrusively projected, high above the stage.
Where else in Europe is this being done? -- Barbara C. Bernard, Holyoke, Mass.
A.
Surtitles are, quite logically, in a country's native language.
So the place for English surtitles is Britain, and here's where:
Royal Opera House, box office: 48 Floral Street, London WC2E 7QA; (71) 240 1911, fax: (71) 497 1256.
All foreign-language operas presented with surtitles.
These are the works yet to be heard this season, which ends July 23: "Carmen" by Bizet, "Elektra" by Richard Strauss, "Cherubin" and "Manon" by Massenet, "Rigoletto," "Un Ballo in Maschera" and "Aida" by Verdi, "Katya Kabanova" by Janacek, "Fedora" by Umberto Giordano, "Mose in Egitto" by Rossini and "La Fanciulla del West" by Puccini.
Glyndebourne Festival Opera, Glyndebourne, Lewes, East Sussex BN8 5UU; box office phone Ringmer (273) 813813.
Booking by mail from April 6, by telephone from May 3.
The 1994 festival, May 28 to Aug. 25, will be the first in the new opera house.
With surtitles: Mozart's "Marriage of Figaro" and "Don Giovanni" and Tchaikovsky's "Eugene Onegin."
Welsh National Opera, New Theater, Cardiff CF1 3LN; (222) 394844.
Closed Sunday.
The season runs from Feb. 12 to July 16 at various houses and will be using surtitles for the first time when it performs Handel's "Ariodante" on Feb. 24.
Strauss's "Rosenkavalier" will also have sur titles.
Scottish Opera, 39 Elmbank Crescent, Glasgow G2 4PT; (41) 221 4567, fax (41) 221 8812.
Box office open daily.
Season ends June 25.
Most performances are given in Glasgow.
Operas with surtitles: Mozart's "Magic Flute," Donizetti's "Elisir d'Amore" and Wagner's "Tristan und Isolde." PAUL FREIREICH


A Homeless Program Where Jobs Are Key
In a homely, red-brick building in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Ready, Willing and Able achieves two goals unique among New York City programs for homeless men: It requires the men to work for $5 an hour and pay for room and board.
And it covers 70 percent of its own costs.
The men say they are grateful for the chance to make something of themselves.
"This program has turned me into a different kind of man," said Jacinto Collado, who used to live in his '77 blue Chevy Caprice and dealt drugs to support his cocaine habit.
"Today, I'm taking home $112 a week and I'm a very happy man."


Top Restaurants and Dishes of '93
WHAT were the restaurant trends of the year?
Who served the best dishes of 1993?
It is time to look back.
Once again, Italian restaurants dominated the Long Island scene, more of those having opened than any other category.
But 1990's Italian restaurants are not precisely like those that preceded them.
The latest crop of Italian cafes is softer and more rustic.
Think baskets and pottery rather than neon and mirrors.
And hardly a single one was launched without a wood-burning pizza oven.


Gabrielle Albert, Daniel Altman; Lisa Goldenberg, Michael Altman
Dr. and Mrs.
William Albert of Southfield, Mich., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Gabrielle Joy Albert, to Daniel Altman, a son of Justices Herbert and Myriam Altman of New York.
The couple plan a May wedding.
The justices' older son, Michael T. Altman, has also become engaged.
He and Lisa Michelle Goldenberg, a daughter of Idella and Phillip Goldenberg of Lawrence, L.I., plan to marry next November.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Dance/1993; 'Swan Lake' Went Slapstick, And the 'Nutcracker' Movie Deserved a Slap for Casting
Blithe Spirits -- Keely Garfield is dark-haired and impudent, John Maynard is fair and innocent; together these inspired British performers brought witty new life to popular songs and to "Swan Lake" as interpreted by Ms.
Garfield's aptly named Sinister Slapstick company.
Self-Polishing Gold -- Though one of the world's prima ballerinas, Kyra Nichols of New York City Ballet never calls attention to herself on stage but simply continues to burnish and expand her art in dance filled with revelations about ballet classicism.


Death Comes to the Professor
LITERARY MURDER A Critical Case.
By Batya Gur.
Translated by Dalya Bilu. 357 pp.
New York:  HarperCollins Publishers.


Patience Is More Than a Virtue for McIlvaine; It's a Strategy
Joe McIlvaine, the man with the mandate to restore the Mets to respectability, then to greater heights, has spent the past couple of months looking for a couple of teams to twist his arm and wrest Bret Saberhagen and Bobby Bonilla away from him in exchange for a shortstop, perhaps a starting pitcher and an assortment of promising young players.
Trading high-priced stars for low-paid young players.
If the idea rings a bell from a previous McIlvaine job, bang the gong loudly.
As general manager of the San Diego Padres, McIlvaine was directed by the Gang of 15 -- the owners -- to divest the club of its high-priced stars instantly, if not yesterday.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Art &amp; Photography/1993; Photos Invaded the Met, Sold for Record Prices, Created Dinosaurs And Made a Princess Cry
Beautiful Dreamer -- The Met staged the year's most beautiful show: "The Waking Dream," selections from the Gilman Paper Company Collection.
For the first time, the museum hung photographs in galleries where Mantegna and Seurat had reigned.
The photographs seemed not at all abashed.
Sleeper -- The big surprise was "Consuelo Kanaga: An American Photographer." This little-known photographer proves to have been a fine portraitist, a thoughtful documentarian and a darkroom ace.


Christina Ittleson, Sean P. Smith
May wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Anthony Ittleson of New York for their daughter Christina Bee Ittleson and Sean Patrick Smith, a son of Patricia Smith and Dennis Smith, both of New York.
Ms.
Ittleson, a graduate of Brown University, is a volunteer teacher at the Family Academy, an alternative elementary school in New York.
Her father is the chairman of Travel Ventures Ltd. in New York.


Commuter Train Gunman Haunts the Thoughts of Many; Not a Random List
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen (column, Dec. 12) is made even more uncomfortable by the possible attribution of race hatred than intentionality to Colin Ferguson, the commuter train gunman.
The act must be "unfathomable" because Mr.
Ferguson "seemed to have dozens of grievances."


Fire in 4 Homes Routs 12
Twelve people were evacuated from their homes on Friday night when a fire raced through four row houses in the Tremont section of the Bronx.
The fire began at 2041 Valentine Avenue and then spread to three other attached houses on the block through a small airspace between the upstairs ceiling and roof, said a Fire Department spokesman, Firefighter Elbert Washington.
The fire marshal's office has determined that the fire was accidental, from an electrical malfunction.
The 12 residents were relocated by the Red Cross.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Consumer confidence index, Dec.
71.2
73.0
Wednesday
Home resales, Nov., millions, ann. rate
4.08
4.05
Leading indicators, Nov., percent change
0.5
0.4
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
332
330
New-home sales, Nov., thous., ann. rate
679
693
Chicago purchasing managers' index, Dec.
65.3
66.0
This Week's Developments
Monday
Resolve not to overdo it next year.
Tuesday
Discard toys that have already broken.
Thursday
Make a last stab at getting some work done.
Friday
Give up and think deep New Year's thoughts.


Sentimental Spoof on the Good Old 40's
MAYBE they will be doing "Home Fires" until they get it right.
Still evolving in its third phase of development after productions in New Jersey and Manhattan, the musical revue at the Bay Street Theater Festival in Sag Harbor means to recapture the folkloric virtues of the 1940's, when it was easy to tell the good guys from the bad.
There were heroes then and flag-waving had no negative connotations.
To support what was called the war effort, big stars played U.S.O. shows.
You could "joke with Bob Hope" or "jitterbug with Dietrich."


Susan Jill Kadin, Andrew D. Rosson
Bobbie L. Kadin of Fort Lee, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Susan Jill Kadin, to Andrew David Rosson, a son of Dr.
Robert and Eileen Rosson of West Hartford, Conn.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Kadin, a graduate of Syracuse University, is an assistant vice president at Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Company, the investment bank, in New York.
Her mother is a real-estate broker with Oppler-Ketive Realtors in Fort Lee.
The prospective bride is also the daughter of Neal L. Kadin of North Miami, Fla.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about traffic problems in New York included an outdated reference to the 79th Street Transverse through Central Park.
It reopened on Dec. 16 after months of construction.


A SENSE OF PLACE
YOU say the New Year's countdown has already begun, but you haven't quite got around to sending out that Annual Holiday Letter?
Excuses, excuses: perhaps you couldn't face thinking about 1993.
Or you had absolutely no clue about what to say.
Or was it a problem of style: were you worried that your writing wasn't breezy and chirpy and shallow enough?


SURFACING
CHRISTMAS  The Salvation Army performers: One raps.
Another juggles.
Many of these cheery volunteers have updated their street acts to continue winning the hearts and donations of jaded New Yorkers.
RESTAURANTS  Spicy messages: "Narcissism," "Can't We All Just Get Along?" and other topical phrases are being stenciled with ground spices on select entrees at Bikini, a chic eatery in Santa Monica, Calif.
FASHION  Shooting Arizona: Offering great weather and a diversity of locales -- deserts to urban landscapes -- Phoenix, Sedona and other parts of the state are the backdrop for an increasing number of fashion spreads.


Rebecca Danziger, Michael Gamzon
Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Michael Danziger of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Rebecca Bloomingdale Danziger, to Michael Seth Gamzon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Gamzon of Hartsdale, N.Y.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Danziger graduated cum laude from Yale University and is a teacher at the Norwood School in Bethesda, Md.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander &amp; Ferdon.
Her mother, Lucy Danziger, is an executive vice president of the Museum of American Folk Art in New York.


Mexico's Ruling Party Surrenders a City Hall
In a move intended to quell criticism that it controls elections, Mexico's governing party has given the opposition an important mayoral seat that each side says it won fairly in a recent election.
The post-election turmoil on the Yucatan Peninsula could spell trouble for the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party in the presidential election scheduled for next August.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Dance/1993; A Balanchine Smorgasbord Kept the City Ballet Busy; Prince Did It for the Joffrey
Balanchiniana -- The blockbuster of the year was the New York City Ballet's "Balanchine Celebration," a superbly presented panorama of 73 ballets by the master.
Bleak Houses -- Theaters will seem emptier after a year in which too many choreographers and dancers died -- among them Rudolf Nureyev, Agnes de Mille, Alwin Nikolais, Kenneth MacMillan, John Butler, Louis Falco, Manuel Alum, Christopher Gillis and Gary DeLoatch.


Memories, Good And Bad
In an interview with the hypnotherapist Robert McGrath (Dec. 12), Mr.
McGrath tells the reporter that some clients may seek his services trying to recover memories of sexual abuse during childhood.
Mr.
McGrath states that "9 out of 10 times they can't recall a thing." He does not think that there is much sexual abuse and he concludes that "there does certainly appear to be a lot of people in the mental health field fueling their careers on it."
What the literature on the subject shows is quite different from Mr.
McGrath's views.
The American Humane Society's clearinghouse on child abuse show that 60,000 to 100,000 children are sexually abused annually in the United States; this is equivalent to saying that 10 to 14 percent of American families are affected by child sexual abuse each year.
According to the researchers, Kee MacFarlane and Dr.
Jill Waterman, in a study done in 1986, current reliable estimates range from 100,000 to 500,000 cases per year and another study, done in 1980 suggests that one-fourth to one-third of all children have at least one sexual experience with an adult.
Further, studies show that the vast majority of victims of incestuous abuse are females and approximately 98 percent of the perpetrators are males.
Usually the male perpetrator is someone familiar to the victim.


AMR Chairman's Pay Level Is Disputed
To the Editor:
"Helping a Union Find Its Way" (At Work, Dec. 12) grossly distorted the amount Robert Crandall makes as chairman of the AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines.
This is not surprising, considering the source, Abernathy &amp; Mitchell.


Is Your Flight Really a Charter?
WHAT kind of flight are you taking?
With new airlines wheeling out of the hangar almost every week, it can be hard to tell whether you are buying a seat on a charter trip or on a scheduled airline.
Morris Air, for example, has evolved in one year from a minor charter airline to a scheduled airline that on Dec. 13 agreed to be purchased by Southwest Airlines in a stock swap worth about $129 million.
The question is especially compelling at this time of year, when charters for the Caribbean and Mexico proliferate.


Data Bank/December 26, 1993
Data Bank/December 26, 1993
New Orders for Durable Goods
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Monthly percent change
2.0
2.6
1.1
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
0.6
0.7
0.2
Personal Spending
Monthly percent change
0.4
0.8
0.4
Gross Domestic Product
III Q'93
II Q'93
I Q'93
1987 dollars, in percent
2.9
1.9
0.8
Weekly Jobless Claims
Dec. 17
Dec. 10
Dec. 3
In thousands
332
328
337
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Dec. 23
Dec. 17
Dec. 10
Yield in percent
6.21
6.27
6.20
3-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
3.04
3.02
3.04
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
3.18
3.20
3.23


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Classical Music/1993; Mystics, Mystics Everywhere (But When Two of Them Met, The Chemistry Was All Wrong)
Most Justified Overhyping -- Cecilia Bartoli gave a breathtaking performance of the title part in Riccardo Chailly's recording of Rossini's "Cenerentola." Listen to the finale, and if you respond to this young singer's patented blend of girlish charm and seemingly effortless vocal fireworks, die happy.
Most Persuasive Effort to Make Schoenberg Palatable to Larger Audiences -- With Jessye Norman, James Levine conducted the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra in "Erwartung" and played piano in some of the Cabaret Songs for Philips.
Respectively, romantic and delightful.


Commuter Train Gunman Haunts the Thoughts of Many; Everyone a Dirty Harry
To the Editor:
To me, as a parent of three young children, the sort of boneheaded thinking in "Gun Control Today Has Proved a False Prophet" (letter, Dec. 14) by Adam C. Firestone is stomach-turning.
In Mr.
Firestone's mind, the Long Island Rail Road massacre proves the futility of gun control.
His solution is to arm all law-abiding citizens so that we can blow away the bad guys, Dirty Harry-style.


The Bottom Line
"Delia has an incredibly active social life. And" -- weighted pause -- "she doesn't even go out with married men." Knowing laughter.
We had gathered for the monthly meeting of my women's group, a spinoff of the old consciousness-raising groups but harboring no agenda beyond friendship, solidarity and gorging on Chinese takeout.
We were laughing at a shared -- and largely unvoiced -- presumption: that single women of middle years who enjoy an active romance frequently enjoy it with someone else's husband.


The Dark Side of Virtual Reality
To the Editor:
Am I the only reader of "Hang On for the Ride of Your Life" (Technology, Dec. 12) to recall Aldous Huxley's "Brave New World"?
The content and social consequences of virtual reality technology are as important as its economics.
Given society's recent experiences with computer games, which dwell almost exclusively on images of violence and misogyny, we have plenty of reason to worry.
RALPH A. HUMMEL  Huntington Station, L.I., Dec. 13


The Honor Roll, of Sorts, for 1993
IT WAS a wonderful year in the stock market, but not for all companies.
Some suffered for treating their customers badly, some for being too nice to them.
Some executives found opportunity in adversity, some made their own opportunity and some showed fortuitous timing.
And any year in which a football player becomes a Wall Street star clearly deserves note.
There will, unfortunately, be no presentation ceremony for the following, richly deserved, awards.
Fire the Messenger Award
To Prudential Securities, for dumping its ad agency as bad publicity grew.
The new agency is to find a slogan to replace "the most important thing we earn is your trust," which became embarrassing after Prudential agreed to pay $371 million to customers for abusing that trust when it sold highly dubious limited partnerships in the 1980's.
Our suggested slogan: "Let buygones be bygones."  Employment Security Award
To the top executives of General Motors, who gave themselves employment contracts in the wake of the departure to Volkswagen of Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the first (and so far only) G.M. executive to prove to have marketable skills.
Brilliant Management Award
To Maytag, the appliance giant, whose British executives cleverly calculated that they could bolster sales by offering two free trans-Atlantic plane tickets to anyone who bought at least $375 worth of appliances.
They were stunned when 200,000 people in Britain and Ireland tried to take them up on it.
Fool Me Once . . .
Award
To Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn, the large New York law firm.
Proskauer signed on to represent Towers Financial, the collapsing empire of the erstwhile publisher of The New York Post, Steven Hoffenberg, in suits alleging Towers had welched on fees it owed to other law firms.
Having failed to get payment up front, Proskauer wound up suing Mr.
Hoffenberg and Towers for -- surprise -- unpaid legal fees.
Watch What I Do . . .
Award
To Michael Dell, chairman of Dell Computer.
On March 9, he proclaimed that Dell was clearly in "the winner's circle" and said that "the power of our direct marketing approach continues to be underestimated." Within the next three weeks, he took in $11.3 million selling Dell stock, at an average price of $38 a share.
By summer, as profits turned to losses, the shares were fetching less than $15.
Best Self-Deal Award
To John Malone, the president and chief executive of Tele-Communications Inc.
In 1991, he spun off Liberty Media from the parent company, on terms that discouraged public holders from taking Liberty while allowing him to buy a lot of its shares without putting up much cash.
Now T.C.I. is repurchasing Liberty -- on vastly more friendly terms -- as a prelude to its own acquisition by Bell Atlantic.
But for the earlier transactions, the Bell Atlantic takeover might have been worth less than $100 million to Mr.
Malone.
Now, his stake will be worth about $1 billion.
Due Diligence Award: Lawyer Division
To the New York firm of Squadron, Ellenoff, Plesent, Sheinfeld &amp; Sorkin.
The firm helped to take public a company whose chief financial officer turned out to be a disbarred lawyer who had served time after being convicted of stealing money from clients.
Asked if the firm knew about the criminal record, which was not disclosed to investors, a partner shrugged off the query.
"That is not the responsibility of the law firm," explained Howard Squadron.
Due Diligence Award: Executive Division
To John Sculley, who left Apple Computer to take over Spectrum Information Technologies.
He expressed surprise when asked about a variety of Spectrum's past brushes with regulatory authorities.
"It sounds like you know more about it than I do at this point," he told a reporter.
All Bluster, No Bite Award
To Robert Crandall of American Airlines, for his repeated threats to replace flight attendants if they struck, without having any effective plan to deal with a walkout.
When it happened just before Thanksgiving, there was chaos, red ink and a quick surrender by American.
Labor Leader Of the Year Award
To Denise Hedges, head of the flight attendants union at American, for calling Mr.
Crandall's bluff and providing organized labor with one of its few prominent victories in recent years.
Stock Promoter Of the Year Award
To Lawrence Taylor, the linebacker for the New York Giants and part-time president of All-Pro Products, a company with virtually no operations whose stock almost tripled in its first seven days of trading.
After that move, Mr.
Taylor forecast it would double again, leaving him with stock worth $20 million, for which he had paid $5,750.
So far, the market value is holding at about $10 million.
I.P.O.
Reversal Award: Winning Division
To Motor Coach Industries, the bus manufacturer sold to the public by the Dial Corporation, at $13 a share in August.
The price cracked within minutes of the beginning of trading, and went as low as $11 in the next few weeks.
But in November, the company agreed to be acquired by a Mexican firm -- for stock worth $16.72 a share.
I.P.O.
Reversal Award: Losing Division
To Mathsoft, a software company that went public in February at $13, with insiders selling 1.25 million shares.
The shares traded for $23 the first day.
But they fell when the company posted disappointing profits in April, and again in July when it said it was losing money.
By September the share price was below $5 -- and is only a bit higher now.
Bad P.R.
Award
To CS First Boston.
In a year in which Wall Street compensation rose into the stratosphere, it was the only firm that came in for heavy media criticism -- not for paying too much but for paying too little.
Some investment bankers -- insulted by annual bonuses of less than $1 million -- drew sympathy as they fled to other, less parsimonious, firms.
Clouded Crystal Ball Award
To Bennett LeBow, for his forecast that Skybox International would be trading above $14 a share by early 1994.
Brooke Group, Mr.
LeBow's troubled conglomerate, had valued Skybox at that price in distributing shares as part of a plan to evade making good on a previous guarantee about Brooke's stock price.
The current value of Skybox is under $7.
Career Timing Award
To Louis V. Gerstner Jr., for abandoning tobacco by resigning as chief executive of RJR Nabisco a few days before Philip Morris devastated industry profits by slashing cigarette prices.
Mr.
Gerstner took over I.B.M., where the bad news was already known to everyone.
Money Can't Buy Harmony Award
To the members of the Haft family, who built a retail empire consisting of the Dart Drug, Trak Auto and Crown Book chains and in the process came to thoroughly despise each other.
Herbert, the dad, fired one son.
Another son lined up with Dad, but Mom and Sis stood with the fired son.
Everybody has sued everybody else, repeatedly.
Public Service Award
To Carlos Alves dos Santos, former budget director of Brazil, who was found to have $1.7 million stuffed in his mattress, plus $300,000 and 212 pounds of gold (value, about $1 million) in safety deposit boxes.


INSIDE
A Balkan War of the Words
Although Serbo-Croatian is a single language, leaders of ethnic groups throughout the former Yugoslavia are focusing on differences in dialect to support nationalistic goals.
Page 3.
Employing the Homeless
A Brooklyn program provides jobs to homeless men who pay for room and board, but for reasons of bureaucracy the plan has not been copied elsewhere in New York City.
Page 31.
Farm Won't See 200th Year
Founded in 1794, the oldest farm in Dutchess County, N.Y., is going out of business.
It is a victim of evaporating profits as new neighbors, with more needs, bring higher taxes.
Page 37.
Lower Tally for Russia Party
Final election results gave the ultranationalist Liberal Democratic Party 59 of 225 parliamentary seats apportioned by party, down from the 67 it had been projected to gain.
Page 18.
Norman Vincent Peale Dies
The upbeat pastor of the Marble Collegiate Church in Manhattan, whose "Power of Positive Thinking" remained on the best-seller lists for years, was 95 years old.
Page 40.


Optimism Grows Along With Seawall
With the recent rebuilding of one seawall and the start of work on another in the northern part of Roosevelt Island, engineers plan to begin clearing a site next year for a new southern wall and esplanade.
That project -- the last link in a 4.5-mile promenade circling the island -- has raised hopes for Louis Kahn's long-delayed Franklin D. Roosevelt memorial and park (above).
"Our agency is now focusing on development of the entire southern part of the island," said Alyce Russo, director of planning and development at the Roosevelt Island Operating Corporation.
The southern area is a jumble of undergrowth and ruins that has been closed to the public for safety reasons.


Holiday Good Will Brings Out Help for the Homeless


Corrections
An article last Sunday about efforts to revive the Orchard Street shopping district referred incorrectly to one store, Eldridge Textile Company.
It remains in business, at 277 Grand Street.


Ruling That Limits Post-Trial News Interviews of Jurors Stirs Legal Fight
At the close of most high-profile trials, a judge can be expected to turn to the jurors and do two things: thank them for their service and warn them about the tenacious reporters who will immediately seek them out for post-mortems.
Although there are no official rules or guidelines, judges in Federal and state courts customarily tell juries that they are under no obligation to reveal details about their deliberations, though they are not expressly prohibited from doing so.


SUNDAY, December 26, 1993; Swiss Cheese
There's a new name in fashion: Swiss Army.
First there was the Swiss Army knife, one model of which is actually used by the Swiss Army.
Two companies make the knives and both sell them in this country; one is the Original, the other the Genuine.


A More Accurate Historical Model
To the Editor:
I take issue with Albert Sindlinger's likening the current economy to that of the late 1920's in "Kill-Joy at the Recovery Ball" (Profile, Dec. 12).
The debacle after the 1920's was the result of poor distribution of income, a jerry-built system of holding companies, investment trusts and banks and prolonged abdication of political leadership.


More Schools Start Students' Day By Serving Breakfast
MORE than 50 children in first through fifth grades were having breakfast at Center Road School in Vernon one recent morning, and the noise level would have compared favorably to a church service.
New arrivals would file in, put their coat on a table at one end of the room, pick up a muffin, juice, crackers, and their choice among five kinds of dry cereal, then go to their place, with at most a quiet greeting to a friend.
When they were done they would get up and put their empty trays on a shelf for cleaning, pocketing anything that was left over for snack time later in the morning.
Finally they would retrieve their coats and head for class.


Clock Is Ticking For the Knicks
To the Sports Editor:
Can the Knicks be a championship-caliber team without Doc Rivers but with Corey Gaines, a newly acquired player from the Continental Basketball Association?


Reaganism a Factor In Florio's Loss
The article "Pundits Still Ponder Why Florio Lost" (Nov. 14), wherein the "pundits," notably Prof.
Stephen Salmore of the Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers University, ponder why the traditional Democratic majorities did not materialize for Gov.
Jim Florio in the gubernatorial election, omitted two glaring causes.
One is the "last hurrah" of Reaganism, where the myth is perpetuated one more time that a great state can provide vital services without revenues by going into debt, so that our children and grandchildren will pay many times over because the present generation will not pay as it goes or do without.


Sound Bytes; A Song-Writing Cowpoke Hits the Cyberspace Trail
JOHN PERRY BARLOW ran a cattle ranch in Wyoming for 17 years while writing lyrics for Grateful Dead songs ("Cassidy," "Estimated Profit," "I Need a Miracle" and others) and rising within the state Republican Party.
He still writes for the Dead.
But in 1988, he says, "under impending financial duress," he sold the ranch, which had been in the family for three generations, and began a career writing and speaking about the electronic community called cyberspace.
He is a co-founder, with Mitch Kapor, of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a group that seeks to influence judicial and legal issues relating to cyberspace.
He is also on the board of directors of the Well, an Internet community based in San Francisco.
Question: For years the Internet has had its own culture, and suddenly it's being flooded with tens of thousands of new subscribers each month.
Is there a culture clash?


Hannah Lauck, John F. Wood
Mary MacInnis Lauck of Alexandria, Va., has announced July wedding plans for her daughter Mary Hannah Lauck and John Freeman Wood, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry F. Wood Jr. of Short Hills, N.J.
Ms.
Lauck, 30, is known as Hannah.
She is an associate with Anderson Kill Olick &amp; Oshinsky, a Washington law firm.
She graduated from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her law degree from Yale University.
The future bride is also the daughter of the late Rex W. Lauck.


Finding Niches and Other Places to Stow Odds and Ends
CLUTTER is an inevitable byproduct of home repair, as anyone who has hung a picture or oiled a hinge can attest.
Where to keep the extra picture wire?
The can of oil?
Manufacturers of storage products seem to know that, and abound with gadgets like boxes, bins, hooks, trays, magnetic strips and jars on revolving racks that are a kind of clutter by themselves.


The World; The Social Safety Net Most Russians Need is Cold Cash
AS the United States and the West scramble for responses to the electoral success of Russian extremists, building Russia "a social safety net" has become the cliche of the day.
If only Russians were better protected from the pain of economic reform, the argument goes, they wouldn't vote for neo-fascists and neo-Communists.
So Russia should slow down reform and focus on social benefits now that there is no longer a Soviet-style guarantee of employment.
This argument has found favor so far among figures as far-flung as Russia's President, Boris N. Yeltsin; Vice President Al Gore, and the deputy director of the International Monetary Fund, Ernesto Hernandez-Cata.


Confidence and Cold Concern the Jets
Earlier this week, Jets Coach Bruce Coslet wouldn't answer a question about his confidence level heading into the final two games of the season -- games his team must win in order to have a shot at the playoffs.
"How do you gauge the confidence level?" he asked before his team played in Buffalo today.
"I don't know. I'd be sitting here lying if I said I could. You can't either. It's an individual by individual thing."


Method and Madness; The Vindication of Robert Gallo
I have found the world kinder than I expected," Samuel Johnson remarked, "but less just." Of late, the world has not been particularly kind or just to Robert C. Gallo, a virologist at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md.
For years, Gallo has been under a thick cloud of suspicion that he stole from French scientists the credit for discovering the AIDS virus.
The suspicion has proved groundless.
As a Government appeals board concluded last month: "One might anticipate that from all this evidence, after all the sound and fury, there would be at least a residue of palpable wrongdoing. That is not the case."


RECORD BRIEFS
Paisiello: The Piano Concertos, Volume 1 Mariaclara Monetti, pianist; English Chamber Orchestra led by Stephanie Gonley, violinist.
ASV DCA 872; CD.


Miss Seldes, Mr. Carnahan
Aileen Patterson Seldes of New York and Timothy Seldes of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elisabeth Hall Seldes, to Matthew McNair Carnahan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth M. Carnahan of Kirkland, Wash.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Seldes, 30, is a vice president of production at M-G-M Pictures in Santa Monica, Calif.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father is the president of Russell &amp; Volkening, a literary agency in New York, and her mother is a freelance journalist and author.


Taming the Mean Season; Sleet, Snow, No Heat, Flu . . .  Winter's Plagues Are Many. So Are Its Comforts and Joys
IT is a pair of perfectly good blue-cloth pumps, ruined by the speeding bus that just splashed a wave of black slush on you.
Tornadoes of fast-food wrappers that ricochet off tall buildings.
An apartment that greets you at the end of the day with a hunk of ice on the kitchen floor and a recorded message on your super's answering machine that says he is in St.
Lucia for the next week.
It is a frigid walk to the nearest subway stop, which, of course, is not so near at all, rush-hour trains full of people who would rather die than miss work (and the chance to sneeze their germs into your hair on the way), and an object that resembles your car buried beneath six feet of rock-hard snow in front of your apartment, courtesy of the Department of Transportation.


Home Alone Too: Pampered at the Plaza
The first thing Christopher Gruenberg, 7, and his 4-year-old sister, Katherine, did after their parents checked into the Plaza hotel on a recent visit was raid the refrigerator for candy and chocolate-chip cookies, just as Macaulay Culkin did in the movie "Home Alone 2: Lost in New York."
Nicole Paxson, 10, checked the bathroom of Suite 411, where Culkin's character, Kevin McAllister, stayed, against a photograph on the cover of her "Home Alone 2" videotape, which she had brought from home in Clearwater, Fla.


County Board Increases Budget by $10 Million
THE Board of Legislators last week formally buried County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke's attempt to create a third straight no-tax-increase budget by approving a $948.6 million spending plan, which will raise the county tax levy -- the amount raised through property taxes -- by 2.87 percent.
Individual tax bills could vary, depending on differences in assessed valuation in various communities.
The lawmakers added $8.389 million to the proposed budget while trimming an almost like amount, $7.158 million.
They incurred an additional debt of $9 million, however, by transferring that amount from the 1992 surplus to restore pension funds that had been underdeducted since 1990, bowing to a recent court ruling.


Hospitals Unite to Expand Service
The Brooklyn Hospital Center and the New York University Medical Center have agreed to share physicians, medical students and patients.
The affiliation, part of an industry trend to broaden services by forming partnerships, is to be formally announced on Jan. 5 at Brooklyn Borough Hall.


Allegra Biggs, Steven Lubrano
Jeremy H. Biggs and Brenda B. Anderson, both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter Allegra Georgene Biggs to Steven David Lubrano, the son of David G. Lubrano and Jean H. Lubrano of Hingham, Mass.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Biggs, 30, graduated from Hampshire College and received a law degree from Boston University.
She is an environmental lawyer at Wright &amp; Moehrke, a law firm in Boston.


HOW TINA BROWN MOVES MAGAZINES
Elizabeth Kolbert's article confirmed some important theories for this second-generation New Yorker subscriber.
An inveterate reader, I thought I had the magazine world of popular literature all figured out: tabloids were read surreptitiously in the market checkout line, People in the dentist's office, Vanity Fair was for train and plane travel, The New York Times Magazine for leisurely weekends and The New Yorker for cozy bedside reading.
Now that I'm having such a hard time telling one publication from another, I don't know what day it is or where I am!
RUTH E. MELLK Pennington, N.J.


Wendy McLean, Jeffrey Denham
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Taney McLean of Covington, La., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Wendy Hastings McLean, to Jeffrey Hunter Denham, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Denham of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss McLean graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and is a medical student at Louisiana State University.
Her father is the president of Peter McLean Ltd. in New Orleans, which arranges educational tours and summer school programs.
Her mother, Cecily McLean, is the college adviser at St.
Paul's School in Covington.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
NEUBERGER KIOSK
Imagine watching the late Jackson Pollock at work!
Even those who care little for the stand-up-and-splash technique of painting would tend to be riveted by seeing him perform.
And that is only part of what the Eden Interactive kiosk offers at the Neuberger Museum at Purchase College, State University of New York.
At one's fingertips are what would otherwise require weeks of painstaking research.


Caring for Plants After the Bloom Is Off
PLANTS are wonderful, lasting gifts.
But how to take care of them after the holiday hoopla fades?
First, a few generalities.
Keep the plants out of drafts.
Sometimes when a door or a window is opened the plant is in a position to take the brunt of the breeze, and in no time it starts to show yellow leaves and drop blossoms.
Particularly sensitive are poinsettias.
Rule No. 1 then, is to keep the plants out of drafts.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Classical Music/1993; Schubert and the Piano; Dvorak and a Beer Truck
Bringing Schubert Back Alive -- In six concerts at the 92d Street Y, Andras Schiff breathed life into the sonatas, playing with serene dignity and thoughtfulness.
Fondest Farewell -- Christa Ludwig, in her final Carnegie Hall recital, showed that singing is more than vocal cords and sweet sounds: a form of storytelling as well.


Can a Mayor Make a Difference?
NEXT weekend, Rudolph W. Giuliani will be inaugurated as the 107th mayor of New York City.
There will be hoopla and many bold words.
But can a mayor really make a difference?
Fiscal monitors judge his every move.
An ailing economy puts him in a box.
Strong unions tie his hands.
And AIDS, drugs and poverty are problems hardly unique to New York.
Can a mayor really set a course for the city?


Dedication to Principle Is a Boy Scouts Virtue
To the Editor:
"The Exclusionary Boy Scouts" (editorial, Dec. 12) is in error about the role of religious and moral credos in private organizations.


'Add-On' Costs In Historic Districts?
To the Editor:
Your excellent article on Dec. 5 entitled "Clinton Hill: The Past Serving the Present"clarified the issues surrounding historic district designation by the Landmarks Preservation Commission and crystallized many of the real and intangible benefits that have come to the 61 historic districts in New York City.


Where Should Statue Of Barnum Reside?
A.
H.
Saxon of Fairfield (Letter to the Editor, Oct. 31) is entitled to his opinion that the statue of P. T. Barnum should be relocated to downtown Bridgeport from Seaside Park after the statue is restored ("The View From Bridgeport: Bronze Barnum Awaits Restoration," Sept. 26).
However, as someone who chose to buy a house in Bridgeport after spending two years researching the real estate market in Fairfield and New Haven Counties, I find Mr.
Saxon's arguments for the statue's relocation to be nothing more than the usual emotional pandering to the public's fears and prejudices.


Sad Days for the Lads of the Carriage Trades
THE lads are cautious.
When the stranger in the rumpled raincoat asked for Kieran Kelly one Saturday morning, it was Kieran Kelly himself who dug a boot tip into the sweet earth of the stable floor and said, "Never heard of him."
"Jimmy Archer set it up," said the man in the rumpled raincoat, invoking the former boxing manager who owned the stable and rented stall space to Mr.
Kelly and eight other carriage drivers.
But who's to say the raincoat wasn't really a snooper from Health, Immigration, Transportation, the police or, worst of all, the animal rights lobby?
"Kelly's supposed to be here right now, 8 o'clock."


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Classical Music/1993; One Director Stayed (Phew!), Another Director Left (Phew!)
Biggest Sigh of Relief (Tie) -- At the New York City Opera, Christopher Keene and the board skirmished over a division of administrative power but ultimately compromised.
At the battle-scarred Spoleto Festival U.S.A., in Charleston, S.C., Gian Carlo Menotti's annual threat to resign as artistic director was gratefully accepted by a war-weary board.
For Whom the Pop Pays -- Christopher Rouse, a 44-year-old composer who hides Led Zeppelin and Canned Heat riffs in his symphonic scores, and whose works appealingly combine rigor and Romanticism, won a Pulitzer for his Trombone Concerto.


Living Where Edison Filmed
Construction of a much-awaited apartment building for the low-income elderly was completed earlier this month at the very spot where Thomas A. Edison's studio made movies nearly a century ago.
At least 40 tenants are expected to start moving into the new building, called the Edison Arms, next month.
The building has 69 studio and one-bedroom apartments, all of them being rented for $400 a month to individuals or couples.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Pop &amp; Jazz/1993; Rolled Down Bobby Socks and Pearl-Handled Glocks
Theme of the Year -- The suffering child.
Rockers like Pearl Jam, Smashing Pumpkins and Scrawl wrote songs about surviving abuse; Michael Jackson was accused of committing it.
Ars Longa, Shock Value Brevis -- Madonna's "Girlie Show" tour promised a sexual circus with its opening number, "Erotica." But all it delivered was a variety show, as if Madonna could be the next Paula Abdul.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 12 about two hotel resorts in Phoenix misspelled the family name of an American writer of Western stories.
He was Zane Grey, not Gray.


Corrections
Because of a production error, a picture last Sunday of Prince Charles celebrating the 40th anniversary of Queen Elizabeth's coronation was printed in mirror image.
He carried an umbrella in his right hand.


Business Diary: December 19 - 24
COMPANIES Now Why Is It That Everyone's After Paramount?
Just what is it about Paramount that makes everyone want to spend big, big money to buy it?
It's time to sort that one out -- now that the four-month battle might actually be over.
Last week Paramount's board, with a Delaware court's gun at its ribs, agreed to merge with QVC unless its preferred buyer, Viacom, tops QVC's $10 billion bid by Jan. 7.
So what's going on?
Well, Barry Diller, head of QVC, has a grand vision of the entertainment future and is known to take whatever risks are necessary.
And why Paramount?
To fill the mind-boggling need for something to show on all those hundreds of channels the media folks keep threatening us with.
Paramount's got a big film library, television programs, sports, you name it.
"Diller is buying a factory for producing entertainment content of all kinds," one consultant said.
But what, one wonders, will happen if they build that costly media turnpike and nobody will pay the toll?


All-Asian Entertainment
For their 23d Community Holiday Festival the Queens Council on the Arts presents "A Festival of Chinese American Arts" at Lincoln Center.
Featured performers of Queens Performing Arts Connections, the presenting troupe are: Jue Yao, a Shanghai born violinist who is a soloist with the China Broadcasting Symphony Orchestra, Grace Chang, a magician who is part of an entertaining dynasty (her grandfather performed for the last Emperor of China), and Tan Jing-Xu an acrobat who has been a member of various Chinese troupes and the Ringling Brothers Barnum and Bailey Circus.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Theater/1993; The Attack of the Souped-Up Cipher Musicals
Form and Dysfunction -- The unhappy American family was seen through the perspective of Wagnerian opera ("The Twilight of the Golds"), musical comedy ("The Loman Family Picnic"), absurdist anthropology ("Pterodactyls") and vintage domestic melodrama ("Any Given Day").
And No One Called Him King-Boy, Either  Richard Thomas delivered a dynamic, convention-reversing "Richard II" at the Shakespeare Theater in Washington.


Sculpture Garden Rises on Rubble Of a Vacant Lot
It has taken 14 years and $1.4 million, but the Studio Museum in Harlem is about to realize a dream.
The unsightly vacant lot next door has been cleared for a sculpture garden, the first in Harlem, and new exhibition space and an auditorium are being created under the garden.
The lot is now a courtyard paved with uneven stones, connected to the museum by a doorway.
"Most of you who have been here for the long haul know that the garden did not always look like this," said Charles E. Inniss, chairman of the museum's board of directors, who presided over a recent ribbon-cutting ceremony.
"Tin cans lay where great works of art will soon stand."


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Video &amp; Audio/1993; Some of the Better Stuff Was Stolen, Used, Shrunk Or Bagged to Take Out at McDonald's
Crime Wave -- A study of pay-per-view conducted by the rival video industry alleged that for every one movie ordered via pay-per-view, two movies were stolen by subscribers using signal descramblers called black boxes.
And You Can Even Buy the Movie -- Just a few of the products tied in to the release of "Home Alone 2": lunch boxes, tank tops, watches, walkie-talkies, jewelry, buttons, key chains, shoelaces, books, pens, puzzles, gloves, stamps, towels, airplane tickets.


Listening to 1993
Prozac had its say, but style really spoke to us this year, in buzzwords, sound bites and catch phrases that tell the fashions and trends of '93.
SHAQ ATTACK  With Michael Jordan's retirement, the 7-foot-1, 305-pound Shaquille O'Neal has become basketball's biggest marketing and style force.
He made the cover of GQ and Rolling Stone and earns roughly $8 million a year in endorsements (from the likes of Reebok and Pepsi).
More style points accrued with the release of his rap album, "Shaq Diesel."


Selina Peyser And David Lamb
Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick M. Peyser Jr. of Vero Beach, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Selina Wilma Peyser to David Coleman Lamb, a son of Sheila Keating Lamb of Stonington, Conn., and Jerry C. Lamb of Groton, Conn.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Peyser, 30, graduated from Williams College.
She is the president of Calypso Cowboy, a sportswear and home furnishings retail company, and the general manager of Island Wash, a design and fabric-finishing consulting company, both in Darien, Conn.
Her father, now retired, was the managing partner of Hallgarten &amp; Company, an investment banking firm in New York now known as Moseley, Hallgarten, Estabrook &amp; Weeden.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Classical Music/1993; There Are More Where 'Vixen' Came From. Any More Where Bernstein Came From?
20th-Century Fox -- Covent Garden's delicately mechanized production of Janacek's "Cunning Little Vixen," led by Christopher Keene at the Washington Opera, afforded an indescribably moving theatrical experience and a clear indication of where the operatic repertory should spend more time.
Biggest Shoes Still to Be Filled -- As the ritual fuss over Leonard Bernstein continued unabated, it was sad to recall the irregularity with which he fulfilled the giant roles American music cut out for him, and even sadder to acknowledge the unlikelihood that anyone will fulfill those roles now.


A la Carte; Two Over Light, a Side of Bacon, Rye Toast and Hold the Grits
THE Arizona Grille in Port Washington has the familiar look of luncheonettes and diners everywhere.
The restaurant, across from the Long Island Rail Road Station, is open daily, serves breakfast, does a brisk takeout business and has the obligatory lunch counter.
The prices are low, portions are large and the menu is long.
Countermen shout orders to the cooks, who pass food to waitresses through a little window between the kitchen and dining room.


Norman Vincent Peale, Preacher of Gospel Optimism, Dies at 95
The Rev.
Dr.
Norman Vincent Peale, one of the most influential religious figures of his time, died on Friday afternoon at his estate in Pawling, N.Y.
He had suffered a stroke earlier this month.
He was 95.
His wife of 63 years, Ruth, was at his bedside when he died.


The Immortality Of Bean Soup
MORE HOME COOKING A Writer Returns to the Kitchen.
By Laurie Colwin. 224 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $22.


Duck Breasts Fit Well on Festive New Year's Menu
NEW YEAR'S EVE looms.
A lovely intimate dinner, perhaps?
A big open house?
And what about New Year's Day?
Brunch?
An informal gathering with television tuned to bowl games?
There is still time to consider all this and, whether such plans have already been made, to think about what to serve.
Food for these occasions should be festive, flavorful and easy to prepare and serve.
Dishes that can be assembled in advance and wait for the guests to arrive or that can stand the test of time on a buffet table are best.


New Tower Rules Come Up Short
The City Planning Commission approved new zoning guidelines last week limiting building heights and commercial space in an area around Lincoln Center.
But many residents said the rules don't go far enough.
Demolition began last week at the site of the first building the new rules would affect: the triangular block at 66th Street being developed by Millenium Partners, which is also building a tower on the next block.


Martha Chace, Thomas Loring
Mr. and Mrs.
Minturn V. Chace of Mount Kisco, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Martha Symington Chace to Thomas Bowen Loring, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen B. Loring of Holden, Mass.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Chace, 26, teaches fourth and fifth grades at the Brimmer and May School, a private school in Brookline, Mass.
She graduated from Bowdoin College and received a master's degree in education from Lesley College.
Her father is the president of the Westmoreland Sanctuary, a nature sanctuary in Mount Kisco.


How Beggars' Vouchers Came to Be
New York City's first program to give vouchers, instead of money, to beggars was the brainchild of two women who say they were shocked at their neighbors' anger at the homeless in their midst.
And it took them a year and half of community organization and persuasion to make it happen.
Laura Friedman, who has lived on 112th Street for 18 of her 40 years, had gone to a meeting of the Broadway Democratic Club after a dispute over a methadone clinic.
Residents had bitterly fought the clinic plan, saying the area was saturated with services and expressing anger at those who needed them, which dismayed Ms.
Friedman and another club member, Paula Diamond, 30, who grew up on the West Side.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Will Success Spoil Kwanzaa?
Today is the first day of Kwanzaa, a 27-year-old African-inspired harvest celebration in which many American blacks give thanks over a period of seven days.
Each day a candle is lit and families share intimate feasts.
Each day, families dedicate themselves to a different guiding principle.
One of these principles is ujaama, a Swahili word meaning cooperative economics.
At last week's Kwanzaa Holiday Expo in New York City, ujaama was flourishing.
Some 300 exhibitors paid $900 each to set up shop at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center to sell African sculpture, Kwanzaa cards and wrapping paper, teddy bears in African garb and Kente pattern tablecloths.


Q and A
Over-55 Exclusion On Co-op Mortgage  Q. A prospective purchaser has asked me to consider taking back the mortgage on the co-op she will buy from me.
I am 68 years old.
Can I take the $125,000 income tax exclusion? . . .
Lionel Ruberg, Manhattan


Trivializing Indian Tradition
To the Editor:
I was shocked and saddened to see my picture in "On the Street: Somewhere East of Laramie" (Dec. 5).
I am Lakota, from my people's aboriginal territories on the western Great Plains.
I work for the American Indian Law Alliance in New York and the American Indian Community House.


Moods for Two
THE FOUR SEASONS *** (212) 754-9494; 99 East 52d Street, near Park Avenue; $$$$; all major cards


Just Can't Wait for the Test Run


HOW TINA BROWN MOVES MAGAZINES
At 52 cents an issue, I will keep my New Yorker subscription for "Goings On About Town" and the local arts commentary.
Still, if the magazine is going to anyone outside New York, damned if I know what's in it for the "little old lady in Dubuque." JACK ELLENBERGER New York, N.Y.


Commuter Train Gunman Haunts the Thoughts of Many
To the Editor:
Around the country commentaries, editorials and articles about Colin Ferguson, the man who opened fire aboard a Long Island commuter train, are accusing him of being a racist.
This little quiz might help answer the question of his racism.


Stakes Reach Beyond Boat Race
Stuart Hayim says his championship powerboat Recovery, "is energized by a lot of horsepower, but a lot more emotion." Hayim, who has crested the highest wave of powerboat racing over the past 15 years while battling cancer, could use those very words to describe his own existence on a daily basis.
"No one goes across the bridge of life without paying a toll," said the 46-year-old Hayim, who lives with his wife, Lorna, and their three children in Great Neck, L.I.
"I have a form of cancer that affects my immune system called lymphoma. I can't run from this disease. But I can use whatever success I've gained to help people like me fight it the way I have."


F.Y.I.
Refunds: Rule of Law Q. Well, it happened again.
Ugly ties, simulated wood carvings of wild game, sweaters two sizes too small.
What are the rules about returning greatly appreciated but completely loathed gifts?


They Came, They Saw, They Built a City
NEW YORK is a city of immigrants, and the stories of its immigrants could fill a very large bookshelf.
Here are some starters.Most of these books are at New York Bound Bookshop (50 Rockefeller Plaza, 212 245-8503); and many can be found in other stores.
CHINATOWN: A PORTRAIT OF A CLOSED SOCIETY by Gwen Kinkead (Harper Collins).
This book covers a wide range of Chinese experiences, from food to work to organized crime.
ADAPTING TO ABUNDANCE: JEWISH IMMIGRANTS, MASS CONSUMPTION AND THE SEARCH FOR AMERICAN IDENTITY by Andrew R. Heinze (Columbia University Press).
A deconstructive history of a group of immigrants who experienced wealth for the first time, and how consumerism and the immigrants' traditional values faced off.
CARIBBEAN NEW YORK: BLACK IMMIGRANTS AND THE POLITICS OF RACE by Philip Kasinitz (Cornell University Press).
An examination of American and Caribbean blacks, and a look into West Indian neighborhoods.
ELLIS ISLAND TO EBBETS FIELD: SPORT AND THE AMERICAN JEWISH EXPERIENCE by Peter Levine (Oxford University Press).
The stories of Jewish-American sports stars, from the days when Hank Greenberg and Sandy Koufax were baseball heroes.
THE ITALIANS OF GREENWICH VILLAGE by Donald Tricario (Center for Migration Studies).
A study of second-generation Italian-Americans and their adaptation to American life.
LITTLE GERMANY: ETHNICITY, RELIGION AND CLASS IN NEW YORK CITY by Stanley Nadel (University of Illinois Press).
A history of Kleindeutschland, the German enclave in the Lower East Side, home to 350,000 Germans at its height in the mid-19th century.
THE DEMOGRAPHICS OF IMMIGRATION by Nadia H. Youssef (Center for Migration Studies).
An analysis of the demographic, social and economic characteristics of immigrant groups in New York.
DOWN THESE MEAN STREETS by Piri Thomas (Vintage Press).
A true story of a Puerto Rican boy's struggle in East Harlem.
BROWNSVILLE by Alter F. Landesman (Bloch Press).
A study of Brownsville, Brooklyn, which was rural in the late 19th century, and by 1925 was the largest Jewish section of New York.
AROUND THE WORLD IN NEW YORK by Konrad Bercovici (out of print).
The author shares what he learned about Syrian, Greek, Chinese, Hungarian and Czech New York.
NEW IMMIGRANTS IN NEW YORK edited by Nancy Foner (Columbia University Press).
Essays on the experience of immigrants from Asia, Latin America, the West Indies and Russia since 1965.


Christina Ferrari, Philip Whitney
Christina Margaret Ferrari, a daughter of Margaret Ferrari of Palo Alto, Calif., and Burke Ferrari of Los Altos, Calif., and Philip Reinke Whitney, the son of Ruth and Daniel Whitney of Irvington, N.Y., have announced September wedding plans.
Ms.
Ferrari, 29, is an articles editor at Redbook magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is the president of Golden Gate Warehousing in Union City, Calif.
Her mother is a real estate broker at Cornish &amp; Carey Commercial in Palo Alto.
The prospective bride is also a stepdaughter of Sandra Reese Ferrari.


Banville's 'Ghosts'
To the Editor:
Wendy Lesser, in her review of "Ghosts," by John Banville (Nov. 28), notes in passing that the book's narrator turns out to be the somehow updated murderer-protagonist of his previous novel, "The Book of Evidence." What she fails to point out is that yet another of "Ghost" 's major figures has been imported from a previous work; Felix, the formerly redheaded petty criminal and emanation of Satan, originally made his appearance in "Mefisto." In fact, it has been Mr.
Banville's practice for some time now to allude in his fiction to previous works.


THE WILD WILD EAST
AS HE DROVE ACROSS THE LONGVIEW BRIDGE over the Black River one day in the winter of 1985, David W. Stahle, a researcher at the University of Arkansas, gave a long, low whistle.
He had come to the Cape Fear region of North Carolina in search of old trees that he could core for his ongoing climatic research, hoping for specimens as old as the 600- and 700-year-old stands he already knew about on other lonely rivers.
What he found along the Black, though, defied every stereotype of the East Coast -- an untouched stretch of river bordered by bald cypresses that dated back at least 1,700 years.
"Since one of the characteristics of these old trees is hollowness in the cores, there's no question in my mind that many of those trees are 2,000 years old," Stahle says.
And little question that they are the oldest living things in eastern North America, the most venerable organisms this side of the bristlecone pines of eastern California.
This place exists as much in time as in place; it was protected by the Washington-based Nature Conservancy in the wake of Stahle's discovery and is now a living museum of natural history -- a kind of Pleistocene park.
"These trees -- these very trees -- had Carolina parakeets and ivory-billed woodpeckers in them," said J. Merrill Lynch, a protection specialist at the North Carolina chapter of the conservancy, as we paddled the sleepy river in the spring of 1993.
"Now those species are both extinct. We don't want these old-growth forests to go the same way."
Most of the clamor about old-growth forests has come from the West, where environmentalist pressure to protect remaining large stands of ancient woods brought a halt to logging on many Federal lands and led to President Clinton's timber summit and recent compromise plan designed to protect habitats for endangered species.
But biologists and conservationists in the East have recently begun to realize that there is more original forest here than was long believed to be the case, scattered remnants of the mighty forest that greeted the arriving Europeans.
These woods seem to harbor no equivalent of the spotted owl, which is dependent on old growth, but scientists argue that their preservation is crucial.
The first conference on the topic was convened in August at the University of North Carolina in Asheville, an event that also marked the publication of Mary Byrd Davis's landmark catalogue of the region's untouched woods.
Though "old growth" is notoriously hard to define -- there are those who insist on absolute virgin forest, while others make concessions for human intrusion that hasn't altered the basic character of a grove --researchers are becoming more aware of undamaged tracts, and of what can be learned from them.
"We have entries from every state in the East," Davis says, "and new discoveries being made all the time. People are just beginning to realize what's out there."


Barbara A. Blank, Max G. DeShaw
Drs.
Stuart and Bette Blank of Madison, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Barbara Anna Blank, to Dr.
Max Gerald DeShaw, a son of Katharine Rheinberger of Minneapolis and John E. DeShaw of Carlton, Minn.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Blank, 24, is a third-year medical student at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, where her fiance is a fellow in infectious diseases, in the Bronx.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.


AMTRAK PRESSING FOR CAPITAL FUNDS
Although Amtrak is approaching self-sufficiency in its operating budget, the Government-owned railroad needs a substantial infusion of Federal money to replace dilapidated equipment and property, Federal and Amtrak officials say.
Fares paid 80 percent of the railroad's operating costs in 1993, continuing a steady increase from the 48 percent they contributed in 1981.
The officials say the railroad could be self-sufficient in the next decade.


DEC. 19-24: Embarrassing Defection; Castro's Daughter Sneaks Out of Cuba
In an act of defiance both political and personal, the estranged daughter of Fidel Castro, Alina Fernandez Revuelta, disguised herself as a Spanish tourist, boarded a commercial flight from Havana and defected to the United States last week, leaving the dictator who styles himself as "the father of all Cubans" with one less child to care for.
Ms.
Fernandez Revuelta, a 37-year-old fashion model, had quarreled with Mr.
Castro for years, once going so far as to tell a Spanish newspaper reporter that "he's a crazy man, please don't say he's my father." Mr.
Castro had long disapproved of her choice of career and husbands, which he made clear in complaints to members of the elite Havana circles in which she moved, and for several years had thwarted her desire to leave Cuba.


Oldest Dairy Farm Is Put to Last Pasture
After 199 years of raising animals and growing crops to feed them, the oldest farm in Dutchess County is going out of business.
The 200-acre Ken-Ray Farm here, founded in 1794, auctioned off its herd of 160 cows last month and plans a spring sale of tractors, balers, manure wagons and plows.
The land itself is on the market, too, at a price of $1.5 million.


49ers Meet Their Match: The Oilers Are for Real
Steve Young watched the last quarter in a windbreaker, Warren Moon's bruised ribs sapped him of his breath, but the man still ticking at the end of today's game was a fullback named Gary Brown.
The Houston Oilers could not run out the clock on the Buffalo Bills in last year's playoffs, but that was before they had the Brown alternative.
Today, San Francisco's Steve Bono took his turn doing a Joe Montana impression, but his comeback failed because the 49ers' defense could not pry the ball from Brown or from backup quarterback Cody Carlson in the final 6 minutes 41 seconds.
Brown bulldozed for 144 rushing yards, the Oilers won their 10th straight game, 10-7, and Houston is looking more and more like a Buddy Ryan team every day.


Central Question in Connecticut's Fight Over Lobbyists: What's a Lobbyist?
Anybody can spot a lobbyist -- they all wear tasseled shoes, right?
On the other hand, maybe it's not as easy as the glib definitions or name tags would have it.
Where and when, for example, does the right of the citizen to petition government on matters of personal or philosophical interest become lobbying, if the person is calling about a company and a lucrative state contract?


Linda Pollak, R. R. Goldsmith
Carole Hollander Pollak of Rye, N.Y., and Jerome S. Pollak of Bedford, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Linda Pollak to Richard Robert Goldsmith, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Goldsmith of Scarsdale, N.Y.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Pollak is a second vice president in human resources for the Chase Manhattan Bank, in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Clark University.
Her father is the president of the American Outerwear Group, a manufacturer in New York.


Pen Pals


A Rare Warm Welcome for an AIDS Project
Even small AIDS projects draw local opposition, but Rivington House, which will be one of the nation's largest nursing homes for people with AIDS, is generally receiving an enthusiastic welcome from a neighborhood ravaged by the disease and eager for stability and jobs.
The nursing home is taking shape at 49 Rivington Street, at the corner of Forsyth.
Scaffolding envelops the old Public School 20, built in 1898, as work crews transform it into a modern center with 219 beds, including 45 beds in rooms designed for patients with tuberculosis.
There will also be an outpatient treatment center, serving 56 people a day.


Labs Conjure Up Fragrances And Flavors to Add Allure
JUST off Route 22 here, where fast-food chains emit odors of fries and burgers, the aroma of roast beef and pralines and cream wafts through the halls of a building complex.
These scents come not from a kitchen but from a laboratory at the headquarters of the Haarmann &amp; Reimer Corporation, an international flavor and fragrance company.
Bottles of flavors, in liquid and powder form, line the laboratory's walls.
Like a genie, once out of the container they can perform wonders: the roast beef flavor livens up the gravy in a frozen food entree, or a cookie becomes a crisp confection infused with the flavor of pralines and cream.


Topics of The Times; A Grand Grand Central
There is no sky more beautiful than the one that spans Grand Central Terminal, but it's been a long time since its extraordinary constellations were in full twinkle.
Soon they will be again, though, now that the terminal's landlord, the Penn Central Corporation of Cincinnati, has given the Metropolitan Transportation Authority a new 110-year lease.
The lease, along with Penn Central's agreement to relinquish its right to build a skyscraper over the terminal, means the M.T.A. will now go full steam ahead on its plans for a $100 million renovation.
The ceiling is part of that renovation; so are the construction of a monumental staircase to the east balcony and the restoration of historic storefronts and entrances.


Caring for Plants After the Bloom Is Off
PLANTS are wonderful, lasting gifts.
But how to take care of them after the holiday hoopla fades?
First, a few generalities.
Keep the plants out of drafts.
Sometimes when a door or a window is opened the plant is in a position to take the brunt of the breeze, and in no time it starts to show yellow leaves and drop blossoms.
Particularly sensitive are poinsettias.
Rule No. 1 then, is to keep the plants out of drafts.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the "Your Home" column last Sunday about what employees do with their homes when transferred overseas misstated the current rate of such transfers.
The 10,000 moved annually is twice the total of five years ago, not half.


A Lesson Well Learned
To the Editor:
"Loverly Memories of 'My Fair Lady' "  [ Dec. 5 ]  prompts the following: I was a student at the Yale Drama School during the 1950's, and one of my jobs was ushering at the Shubert in New Haven, a handy way to see and study plays and earn pocket money.
We were required to stay until the second act was seated.


U.S. Immigrants Make Christmas Their Very Own
Ranjit Singh Janjua went to the library recently to determine why so many people in Astoria, Queens -- he and his wife, Ranjeet, included -- were buying evergreen trees and draping them with blinking lights at this time of year.
When he was unable to find the answer among the books, he and his wife developed a theory about the Christmas trees.


Proclivities of Criticism
TENDENCIES By Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick. 281 pp.
Durham, N.C.:  Duke University Press.
Cloth, $44.95.
Paper, $15.95.
THE APPARITIONAL LESBIAN Female Homosexuality and Modern Culture.
By Terry Castle.
Illustrated. 307 pp.
New York:  Columbia University Press.


Ms. Sanders And Mr. Diggs
Tence L. Sanders and Clayton Sanders, both of the Bronx, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Carsandra Sanders, to William Andrew Diggs, the son of Bernice M. Diggs of Chester, Va., and the late William A. Diggs Sr.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sanders, 32, graduated from Howard University and Touro College and received a master's degree in public health from Columbia University.
She is a physician's assistant at the Peter Krueger Clinic of Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.
Her mother is a teacher at the Trinity Elementary School in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Her father is a bus driver in the Bronx.


Holiday Glow Among the Ruins
Two years ago, Arnold Scaasi, the fashion designer, delighted a roomful of guests by paying $200 to bathe the Gothic ruins on the southern end of Roosevelt Island with light.
This week, anybody heading up Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive will be privileged with the same view.
The apparition is the crumbling hulk of the 19th-century Smallpox Hospital, designed by James Renwick Jr., the architect of St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
Floodlights will illuminate it nightly through New Year's, from 7 to 10 o'clock.
The best view of the glowing ruin is from Sutton Place or near F.D.R.
Drive from 49th to 53d Streets.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Classical Music/1993; There Are More Where 'Vixen' Came From. Any More Where Bernstein Came From?
The Party's Over -- Dizzy Gillespie's death still hasn't fully sunk in.
Who alive can mix the transcendent brilliance of his improvisations with the subversive elements of vaudeville and slapstick?
Who else can walk on a stage and make a dull house glow with joy?
Where's the Music? -- Jazz records were mostly terrible this year.
Just a peek into the clubs shows that the musicians weren't so bad.
Maybe it's that listeners' expectations have risen, and record companies aren't keeping up.


The Value of Music as an Avocation
DOES music have "charms to soothe a savage breast"?
Robert A. Berman, who has been running a weekly jazz session at his home in Amawalk for the last two years, says the answer is yes.
"In tough economic times like these, people need other outlets more than ever," Mr.
Berman said.
"What sets my jam apart from all others is the caliber of the musicians who attend. Half are professionals who are among the most talented in the country. The other half are business people who also happen to be excellent players. Both halves agree that playing together helps keep them sane. The result is that some of the best jazz in the metro area is being played behind closed doors simply for the satisfaction of the musicians."


Jennifer Mnookin, Joshua Dienstag
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Mnookin of Cambridge, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Leigh Mnookin to Joshua Foa Dienstag, a son of Jerome Dienstag of Rochester and Eleanor Foa Dienstag of New York.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Mnookin, 26, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, as did her fiance.
She is a doctoral student in science, technology and society at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and a law student at Yale University.
Her father is the Samuel Willston Professor of Law at Harvard.


What a Police Force Should Look Like
Re: "Nassau's New Police Officers Shape Up"  [ Dec. 12 ] , it is important for us in Nassau and Suffolk Counties to recognize that employment discrimination is a source of tension in police-community relations.
This is so primarily because it makes our police departments appear to be all-white, or predominantly white, institutions in the eyes of racial-minority communities.
The basis of support for policing our society must come from all citizens.
Given this basic tenet, it follows that police agencies should be representative of the populations they serve.
To be otherwise diminishes their ability to respond empathetically to many community concerns and reinforces the perception held by some segments of the minority public that law-enforcement agencies represent the force of the dominant society, to preserve the status quo.


For Travelers, Time Does More Than Fly
WHEN I was 17, I discovered the magic of travel time.
As a freshman at Smith College in Massachusetts, very far from my home in Ames, Iowa, I read about Travel Time in the students' handbook.
Christmas vacation at Smith always began at a sternly precise minute -- 12:50 P.M., as I remember -- and failure to register in that last morning class, on what was called an Official Calendar Day, brought dire punishment.
But those few students who lived beyond the Mississippi were eligible for travel time.
If they could satisfactorily prove to the registrar that their journey took more than 36 hours, they were allowed to leave up to 48 hours early.
All that first fall I had been desperately homesick, marking off each alien day until I could return to my loved and familiar Midwest.
Two days early?
Incredulous, but hopeful, I read that paragraph in the handbook again.
Quickly I figured my train connections.
First the Boston &amp; Maine commuter from Northampton to Springfield, then the long-haul New York Central to Chicago and finally the stop-and-go, rackety ride on the Chicago &amp; Northwestern right into the Ames station.
At first my total was several hours short, but I judiciously adjusted here and there until I came up with an only slightly padded figure of 37.
Suddenly it was as if someone had erased two days from an immutable sentence.


Duck Breasts Fit Well on Festive New Year's Menu
NEW YEAR'S EVE looms.
A lovely intimate dinner, perhaps?
A big open house?
And what about New Year's Day?
Brunch?
An informal gathering with television tuned to bowl games?
There is still time to consider all this and, whether such plans have already been made, to think about what to serve.
Food for these occasions should be festive, flavorful and easy to prepare and serve.
Dishes that can be assembled in advance and wait for the guests to arrive or that can stand the test of time on a buffet table are best.


Deconstructing Sendak
To the Editor:
Brian Alderson's review of Maurice Sendak's new dark epic, "We Are All in the Dumps With Jack and Guy" (Nov. 14), itself is masterly in deconstructing the mysteries of Mr.
Sendak's allusions and idiosyncratic vision, but I would suggest that this new work takes an even more radical stance.


Topics of The Times; An Uneducated Life
In due course the law will decide the validity of the sexual molestation charges against Michael Jackson.
But it is not necessary to await a legal determination to understand the sad human story involved in the life of the man from Neverland.
Like Elvis Presley, Mr.
Jackson entered the world with phenomenal natural talents.
And it was also his lot to be born into a family that, while well versed in music, apparently lacked the resources or will to foster rounded development.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
EAST VILLAGE A Week of Gospel Music, In Person and on Film
Gary Keys, who teaches film at Yale University, had always wanted to make a film about gospel music.
Then he heard Salt and Pepper (pictured below), an interracial gospel group at the university, and suddenly, he says, he had "his hook."


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Pop &amp; Jazz/1993; Pals on the Comeback Trail: Frank Sinatra, Jimmy Durante And Meat Loaf
Old Dog, New Trick -- Frank Sinatra made the ultimate pop comeback at age 77 with his album "Frank Sinatra Duets," in which he sang with everyone from Bono to Aretha Franklin.
So what if nobody was actually in the recording studio with him?
The best cuts had an energy and verve that made the album an event.
The Official Word -- Barbra Streisand's friendship with President Clinton was reflected in her "Back to Broadway" album, in which she orated songs by Stephen Sondheim, Frank Loesser and others as though they were White House position papers on parenting, feminism and embracing one's inner child.


HAVING TO SAY YOU'RE SORRY
"Having to say you're sorry?" What bloody nonsense.
When guilt by proxy becomes law, I will personally apologize for every crime committed since the beginning of time.
Until then, apology by proxy be damned.
JOHN HENDRICKSON Spring City, Utah


POSTINGS: New Facade on a 1955 Building; Making 'an Elegant Statement on Fifth Avenue'
In renovating the facade of 555 Fifth Avenue, the owner and the architect decided not to follow the white brick road.
"We wanted to make an elegant statement on Fifth Avenue," said Peter L. DiCapua, senior vice president of Atco Properties and Management, the owner and manager.


HOW TINA BROWN MOVES MAGAZINES
I read the 50,000-word New Yorker piece on zinc.
If I want to read about Jay Leno or Lorena Bobbitt, I buy People.
CAROL SIDORICK Philadelphia


Link Up the Airport Train And the 42d Street Trolley
To the Editor:
The Port Authority's plan to run a train from Kennedy to La Guardia and then across the 59th Street bridge is flawed because it terminates too far from midtown.
The 42d Street trolley, as proposed by the 42d Street Development Corporation and the Department of Transportation, would connect hubs like the United Nations, Grand Central and the Port Imperial Ferry at 39th Street on the Hudson River -- but as planned, it doesn't offer enough advantages over existing buses to justify its cost.


Corrections
The What's Doing column on Nov. 28, about Los Angeles, misstated the telephone number for the Shibucho restaurant on Beverly Boulevard.
It is (213) 387-8498. (The number given was for a restaurant of the same name, though not related, on South Alameda Street.)


The Really Real Author Photo
To the Editor:
Dick Teresi, the editor of a Harley-Davidson magazine, doesn't like authors posing in front of books? ("Haul Out the Old Cliches, It's Time to Shoot an Author Photo," Dec. 12.) Sorry, Dick, I would have posed in a machine shop with my hand on a drill press, but there wasn't a dang one in my Victorian home anyplace!
And you don't like authors with hair?
Sorry again, but some of us come that way.


TODAY IN The City
TAMING THE MEAN SEASON
The plagues of a New York winter are many.
So are the comforts and, yes, the joys.
Page 1.
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT
A pizza war in downtown Brooklyn; a Woolworth's is mourned in Norwood.j Pages 5 to 7.
SOAPBOX
Prelude to an inauguration:j Does a Mayor make a difference? Eight views. Page 13.
The City, section 13 (distributed in most of New York City).


How Bronx Cheer Began: A Vote for the Bleachers
To the Editor:
In your F.Y.I. column on Dec. 5 there is the suggestion that the Bronx cheer was given that name because of disapproving noises made by audiences in a Bronx theater.
I wonder.


What Would Happen If . . . ?
RUSSIA 2010 And What It Means for the World.
By Daniel Yergin and Thane Gustafson. 300 pp.
New York: Random House. $23.


An Opportunity to Discriminate
To the Editor:
I strongly disagree with the recommendation in "Finding a Better Way to Test for Drugs" (Viewpoints, Nov. 28) that impairment tests replace traditional drug tests in the workplace.
While urine tests may be unreliable and an invasion of privacy and dignity, impairment tests could help employers discriminate.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
TELEVISION STAR TREK MEMORIES  By William Shatner with Chris Kreski.
HarperCollins, $22.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
110.60
110.17
123.07
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6950
1.7092
1.5641
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3255
1.3398
1.2753
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5040
1.4860
1.5560
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$386.00
$387.10
$337.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Deborah A. Greenberg, Paul G. Ryan
Mr. and Mrs.
Carl Greenberg of New Vernon, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Deborah Amy Greenberg and Paul Gregory Ryan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Ryan Jr. of Cortland, N.Y.
Ms.
Greenberg and Mr.
Ryan, both 24, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is the manager of Portico Bed and Bath in Westport, Conn.


Warming to Tradition
It was 6:15 P.M. on Wednesday, and Samantha Ann Gregory, a featured debutante at the 58th Debutante Cotillion and Christmas Ball, had 15 minutes to grow into her role.
In pearls and a no-nonsense black cocktail dress, she stood by the bar at Mortimer's while her mother, Mrs.
Jamee Gregory, the cotillion's co-chairwoman, went bouncing around in a black velvet Bill Blass gown, checking place cards for the dinner she was giving before the ball at the Waldorf-Astoria.
"It's basically not my kind of thing," Miss Gregory, a freshman at Brown University, said while twisting a ring on her finger.
"I'm more the preppy athlete than the debutante type. People at Brown totally don't respect debutantes. But I'm also more of a sportswoman than a feminist. I mean, I'm not P.C. or anything. If I could be anywhere else right now, it would probably be in Wyoming or playing squash or hanging out somewhere low key."


UNDER THEIR SKIN
Eugene Richards's presumed "guilty" feelings are the worst form of white guilt ("Under Their Skin," Dec. 5).
Exploiting drug addicts, while appearing paternalistic and concerned, is patronizing and condescending.
It would be interesting to see his view of the hordes of white Americans who abuse hallucinogenic drugs on college campuses, in their homes and nightclubs.
It's not the "misery" of the photographs that bothers me, but rather the dishonesty perpetrated against my community.
PATRIK HENRY BASS Brooklyn


The Executive Computer; From Novelty to Necessity: Reminiscences of a PC Fanatic
FOUR score and seventeen megabytes ago I started writing computer columns for this newspaper, dedicated to the proposition that personal computers were maddeningly difficult, endlessly fascinating and rich with the potential to change our lives.
All those megabytes, and nine years, later, not much has changed.
Personal computers are still too hard to use, they are used in ever more creative ways, and their potential to enrich our lives grows even as they become ubiquitous in businesses and homes.


DEC. 19-24: Brakes on Delivery; Huge Jury Award Ends Speedy Pizza
For those in need of instant gratification, there was never anything quite like Domino's Pizza.
Ring up the nearest store.
Order a pizza.
Wait no more than 30 minutes for delivery, or else it cost nothing (until 1986) or came with a $3 discount (ever since).
Such a deal.
By the 1980's, Domino's had become the biggest pizza-delivery operation nationwide, with sales in recent years upwards of $2 billion.


The State of the Game: In Extra Innings, No Score
For the better part of half an hour, Bud Selig, the titular head of baseball, recently tried to sum up the state of the game.
He talked about the restructuring and filling of the commissioner's office, which has been vacated for 16 months after the forced resignation of Fay Vincent, and he addressed the many pending policy matters that often seem to be in indeterminable states of being.
"When all is said and done, and our industry is looked at in the retrospect of history, people will understand exactly what we were trying to do," said Selig, baseball's acting commissioner since September 1992.


SUNDAY, December 26, 1993; Big
Anaheim, Atlanta, Baltimore, Boston, Buffalo, Calgary, Charlotte, Chicago, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Dallas, Denver, Detroit, Edmonton, Green Bay, Hartford, Houston, Indianapolis, Kansas City, Los Angeles, Miami, Milwaukee, Minneapolis, Montreal, New York, Oakland, Orlando, Ottawa, Philadelphia, Phoenix, Pittsburgh, Portland, Quebec, Sacramento, San Antonio, San Francisco, San Jose, Seattle, St.
Louis, Tampa, Toronto, Vancouver, Washington, Winnipeg and so on.
Once upon a time Big League meant Big League.
New York, Chicago, Boston, Green Bay (Green Bay?) -- well, pretty big anyway.
Those were the days when men were men, and tobacco wouldn't hurt you.
Today, with the new Jacksonville Jaguars and Carolina Panthers coming into the National Football League and baseball talking about yet another expansion there seems no end to Big Leaguehood.
Including hockey and basketball there are now 111 big league teams in well over 40 cities, towns and other geographic entities (and that's not counting soccer or box lacrosse).


A Dropout Program Is in Jeopardy
School district officials in Williamsburg, long an arena of friction between Hispanic and Hasidic residents, have refused to cooperate with a dropout prevention program aimed at minority students, the sponsor of the program, United Way, says.
As a result, the charity is recommending that the program be switched to another school district.


West Side Apartment Fire Kills Elderly Woman
An elderly woman died in a fire in her apartment on West 71st Street early yesterday morning, and another woman was rescued by firefighers who entered her third-floor apartment from a cherry picker.
The fire began about 5:30 A.M. in a second-floor apartment at the rear of a residence for the elderly at 111 West 71st Street, just west of Columbus Avenue.
The fire was declared accidental, but its cause was still under investigation yesterday, said a Fire Department spokesman, Firefighter Elbert Washington.


Corrections
A credit for a drawing on Nov. 14 with an article about the reconstruction of 320 Park Avenue misidentified the firm that rendered the building as it would have looked under a plan proposed in 1990.
In a letter dated Dec. 14, a reader reported correctly that it was Kapell &amp; Kostow Architects, not Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill.


The Clock Runs Out, and Dig They Must
Why has Con Edison been digging up the busiest part of Columbus Avenue -- the 70's and lower 80's -- during Christmas week, the busiest traffic week of the year?
The answer, says Con Ed, is that sometimes being solicitous of community opinion can backfire.
The utility has to move all its gas and electric lines to prepare for a two-year reconstruction of the avenue, scheduled for the spring.
But that means digging its own pits, mostly at the edges of the street and on the sidewalks, which makes many store owners angry about blocked access.


On the Restricting Of Civil Suits
Re: "New Effort to Restrict Civil Suits Is Started," Dec. 5:
Severely restricting the access of injury victims to the courthouse by having losers pay legal fees, among other things, would have the effect of making New Jersey appear as one of the more regressive states in the nation in the area of consumer rights.
Most tort cases may be seen in that light, since we are consumers of goods and services.


When Will Troubled Tram Reopen? Give It a Few More Weeks
Residents of Roosevelt Island who planned to celebrate the reopening of the tram to the East Side this weekend have had to put off the party.
The tram, closed two months ago for repairs, is now expected to be up and running by the middle of January.
The tram has had other problems.
Since the Q Line subway station opened on the island in 1989, said Barry Chafetz, vice president of the Roosevelt Island Operating Corporation, a state agency that runs the island's public services, the average number of daily paying riders has dropped from 5,500 to 3,000.
Annual revenue has fallen from $2.1 million in 1989 to about $1.5 million.


Michelle Oppenheimer, David Gellman
Michelle Oppenheimer, a daughter of Evelyn and Allen Oppenheimer of West Hempstead, L.I., was married on Wednesday to David Gellman, a son of Evelyn and Elliot Gellman of Teaneck, N.J.
Rabbi Aryeh Weil performed the ceremony at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.


Revival


The C-Class: A Baby Benz Grows Up
WHEN Mercedes introduced its Baby Benz, the 190 and 220 models of the early 1980's, the amazing thing to me was the ability of the company to cram so much solidity and luxury into a package that seemed no bigger than a breadbox.
That was a decade ago, remember, and we were just getting used to the notion -- if not liking it much -- that oil shortages demanded asthmatic econocars with all the soul and heft and luxury of soapbox racers.


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING  Smith Ties Record  Mike Smith tied a record for most stakes victories in a single year when he captured two stakes races at Calder in Miami yesterday.
Smith, a contender for the Eclipse Award as leading jockey of the year, has won 60 stakes, equaling Pat Day's 1991 mark.
He took both divisions of the $35,000 Tropical Park Oaks for 2-year-old fillies yesterday with strong come-from-behind rides.
Smith won the first division on Shahara Bay and came back to take the second division of the mile-and-sixteenth grass feature with Long Gone Blues.
Shahara Bay won by 1 1/2 lengths over Cut the Pot and paid $8 to win.
Long Gone Blues won by 3 1/2 lengths over Roam N Ramble and paid $5.80. (AP)


'Let's Check In With Our Football Expert, Bart Simpson!'
IS Madden going to Fox?
This is the question viewers were asking last week, after upstart Fox took pro football away from establishment CBS.
Of course, John Madden is going to Fox.
What else would he do -- take up hang-gliding?
Ride his private bus just to attend football games as a fan?
The real question is what Fox can do differently with the Dallas Cowboys and the New York Giants and the rest of the National Football Conference in the next four years.


Russian Gadfly: From TV to Politics
He is one of Russia's most caustic political figures, with a virulent antipathy toward the market-economy reforms that have taken root in St.
Petersburg and much of the rest of Russia.
He rose to fame with his television program, "600 Seconds," which began in 1987 with expose-like reports on the disasters of Communism and then turned to the uglier aspects of economic change in Russia.


Society Calling
Dancing, dining and coming out at the Debutante Cotillion and Christmas Ball at the Waldorf-Astoria, Dec. 22.


Those People; An Unfinished Portrait of the Poor
"IT'S yellow," she explained to the blinking, uncomprehending man.
"It's a yellow-looking substance that's coming out of his ear."
The subject was ear wax.
The setting was parents' night.
And the ear belonged to Chinedu Ezeriki, a fifth-grader in a parochial school uniform who could no longer hear his lessons.


Landmarks With Steps Can Welcome Wheelchairs
To the Editor:
One of the buildings drawn by Peter Kuper is the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
As a volunteer there, I want to point out that it is eminently accessible to the handicapped.
Not only is there a street-level, handicapped-accessible entrance facing 81st Street, but there is handicapped accessibility from the parking garage.
LYNN LERMAN Manhattan


Army Was Warned On Design of Groins
Baymen and homeowners are at odds concerning the Army Corps of Engineers' closure of the Little Pikes Inlet breach through the Westhampton barrier island  [ "Baymen Fear Breach May Recur in Winter," Nov. 7 ] .
Problems at Westhampton will continue forever unless the 15 rock groins constructed by the corps in the 1960's are modified to correct their basic design flaws.
They are too large, causing them to trap too much sand from the westward-moving shore current.
This forces the shore current to continually erode sand from areas beyond the last groin; where beaches, dunes and dozens of homes have been destroyed over the years and where storm breaches have occurred twice in the last 12 years.


Fashion Resolutions
Imagine stepping into a huge, swoopy, petticoated skirt with lots of train.
Now pull on a man's undershirt.
Next slip into satin sneakers.
That's the way the designer Isaac Mizrahi suggests dressing for big "dos" this coming year.
It's a look that combines swashbuckling fantasy with no-nonsense guy's gear; the thrill of romance crossed with a "stick-it-to-'em" sense of rebellion.
Young women will love it.
Like a lot of the new spring fashions, it's great if you're a certain age.
Slip dresses, sheer layers, bare midriffs, the shortest skirts, lingerie on the loose -- all are fashions meant to reveal a lithe, supple body.
Then there are silver-shaded pseudo-leather styles, Asian influences, weightless jackets, schoolgirl kilts, sloppy sweaters, baby-doll dresses, cropped white-heat blond hair, bobby socks, clunky shoes and men's-style boots, navel and nose rings and the occasional tattoo.


THE WILD WILD EAST
AS HE DROVE ACROSS THE LONGVIEW BRIDGE over the Black River one day in the winter of 1985, David W. Stahle, a researcher at the University of Arkansas, gave a long, low whistle.
He had come to the Cape Fear region of North Carolina in search of old trees that he could core for his ongoing climatic research, hoping for specimens as old as the 600- and 700-year-old stands he already knew about on other lonely rivers.
What he found along the Black, though, defied every stereotype of the East Coast -- an untouched stretch of river bordered by bald cypresses that dated back at least 1,700 years.
"Since one of the characteristics of these old trees is hollowness in the cores, there's no question in my mind that many of those trees are 2,000 years old," Stahle says.
And little question that they are the oldest living things in eastern North America, the most venerable organisms this side of the bristlecone pines of eastern California.
This place exists as much in time as in place; it was protected by the Washington-based Nature Conservancy in the wake of Stahle's discovery and is now a living museum of natural history -- a kind of Pleistocene park.
"These trees -- these very trees -- had Carolina parakeets and ivory-billed woodpeckers in them," said J. Merrill Lynch, a protection specialist at the North Carolina chapter of the conservancy, as we paddled the sleepy river in the spring of 1993.
"Now those species are both extinct. We don't want these old-growth forests to go the same way."
Most of the clamor about old-growth forests has come from the West, where environmentalist pressure to protect remaining large stands of ancient woods brought a halt to logging on many Federal lands and led to President Clinton's timber summit and recent compromise plan designed to protect habitats for endangered species.
But biologists and conservationists in the East have recently begun to realize that there is more original forest here than was long believed to be the case, scattered remnants of the mighty forest that greeted the arriving Europeans.
These woods seem to harbor no equivalent of the spotted owl, which is dependent on old growth, but scientists argue that their preservation is crucial.
The first conference on the topic was convened in August at the University of North Carolina in Asheville, an event that also marked the publication of Mary Byrd Davis's landmark catalogue of the region's untouched woods.
Though "old growth" is notoriously hard to define -- there are those who insist on absolute virgin forest, while others make concessions for human intrusion that hasn't altered the basic character of a grove --researchers are becoming more aware of undamaged tracts, and of what can be learned from them.
"We have entries from every state in the East," Davis says, "and new discoveries being made all the time. People are just beginning to realize what's out there."


Miss Ward, Mr. Oppenheimer
Mr. and Mrs.
Rodman Ward Jr. of Wilmington, Del., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Jennifer Janvier Ward and Jonathan M. E. Oppenheimer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas F. Oppenheimer of Johannesburg.
Miss Ward is an associate with the law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell in New York.
She received undergraduate and law degrees from Harvard University.
Her father is the managing partner of the Wilmington office of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, the New York law firm.


Finding Niches and Other Places to Stow Odds and Ends
CLUTTER is an inevitable byproduct of home repair, as anyone who has hung a picture or oiled a hinge can attest.
Where to keep the extra picture wire?
The can of oil?
Manufacturers of storage products seem to know that, and abound with gadgets like boxes, bins, hooks, trays, magnetic strips and jars on revolving racks that are a kind of clutter by themselves.


Which Wine Will Go Well With Curry?
Just over a rise of stubbly wheat fields and around a twist of torn macadam spreads Kanwal K. Grover's dream, a march of granite pillars and wire lacing draped and wound with the leaves and budding fruit of cabernet sauvignon grapes.
His dream is one of revolution: changing the habits of India's upper middle classes by transforming them into drinkers of wine.


Germans Find Unity May Mean Long-Term Change and Sacrifice
More than three years after the initial euphoria over reunification, Germans are beginning to discover that they have to build a new country not only in the formerly Communist east, but also in the industrial west, requiring new ways of thinking and more sacrifice than they ever imagined.
Those in the west learned quickly that absorbing East Germany entailed more than enlarging and enriching the old Federal Republic of Germany.
The new, united Germany is finding that the post-cold-war world is a more harshly competitive place than it was before.
For many western Germans, the biggest shock is the discovery that the forces that made their country the richest welfare state in Europe and made its economy the Continent's most powerful can no longer guarantee the annual raises and increases in leisure time and the social security that they took for granted for decades.
Ruhr Steel in Crisis
Nowhere is the shock more dramatic than here in the Ruhr, where recession and inexpensive imports have thrown the steel industry, long the core of the region's prosperity, into crisis.


THE MIST OFF PERFUME RIVER
Perhaps you do not see anything unseemly about photographing models wearing $3,000 dresses in a country where the annual per capita income is about $200.
Can we look forward to a similar feature set in Bosnia?
FRED KAMENY Hew Haven


The Knicks' House of Cards Is an Ace Short
At some point, it's time to cut the Knicks a holiday break.
They may not be the next National Basketball Association champions, but they are not exactly the New Jersey Nets.
They have tried, since the start of the Dave Checketts era, to put a better team on the Madison Square Garden floor.
For the most part, they have succeeded, from 38 victories to 50 to 60, right up until Doc Rivers blew out his left knee.
They have a Shaquille O'Neal-sized hole at point guard right now, among other offensive deficiencies, that has to be addressed if they're even to have a chance to win it all.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 26, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
45
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
2
4
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A woman tells about killing her husband nearly 30 years earlier.
3
6
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
4
5
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Warner, $5.99.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a serial killer in Washington.
5
2
DESIRE, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) The romance of a daring lady and a knight who battle to control an isle in medieval Britain.
6
10
THE KILLER ANGELS, by Michael Shaara. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A 1974 novel about the Battle of Gettysburg.
7
89
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
8
52
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
9
93
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
10
5
RED SQUARE, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The detective Arkady Renko returns to Moscow after the fall of Communism.
11
5
THE REMAINS OF THE DAY, by Kazuo Ishiguro. (Vintage, $11.) The life of an English butler and the "great gentleman" he served.
12
9
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $6.50.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
13*
16
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
14
3
PRIVATE PLEASURES, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A scientist's discovery results in sex and violence among a group of Floridians.
15
1
THE INVITATION, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) A famous daredevil pilot finds romance when she returns to her Colorado hometown.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
529
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
2
8
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photos by Walter Iooss Jr. and observations by the retired basketball superstar.
3
15
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
4
45
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
5
9
SUBMARINE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $14.95.) A guided tour of a nuclear warship.
6
34
THE CAT WHO CAME FOR CHRISTMAS, by Cleveland Amory. (Penguin, $8.95.) A self-styled curmudgeon's memoir of a cat.
7
5
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of murders.
8
115
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
9
9
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
10*
2
OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.
11
4
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy, as seen in the actions of an A.A.
Milne character.
12
19
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
13
4
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
14*
40
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
15*
23
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
16*
24
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
17*
12
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Bantam, $6.99.) The autobiography of the general.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
13
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
7
THE FAR SIDE GALLERY 4, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of cartoons.
3
2
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1994. (World Almanac/Funk &amp; Wagnalls, $8.95.) The latest edition of the reference work.
4
4
MTV'S BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD, by Sam Johnson and Chris Marcil. (MTV/Callaway/Pocket, $10.) Cartoon humor featuring the television characters.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 11, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Film/1993; Much Ado About Clint, Sly, Woody and Emma
Self-Inflicted Wounds -- Madonna's performance in "Body of Evidence," playing a sex toy who is supposed to arouse, not tranquilize.
Arnold Schwarzenegger's all-out assault on the public to promote his "Last Action Hero," turning some people off from the film itself, which is actually pretty funny.
It's All in the Teamwork -- Woody Allen and Diane Keaton together again in "Manhattan Murder Mystery," the most satisfactory comedy team since Tracy and Hepburn.
James Le Gros and Drew Barrymore in Tamra Davis's "Guncrazy," the most satisfactory outlaw team since Henry Fonda and Sylvia Sidney.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SPORTS MEMOIR I'D LOVE TO BUT I HAVE A GAME 27 Years Without a Life.
By Marv Albert with Rick Reilly.
Doubleday, $20.


Commercial Property/A New Brand of Broker; Competition for Jobs Lifting the Quality of Recruits
A FEW years ago, Koeppel, Tener, Riguardi ran a help-wanted ad for someone who could help its real estate brokers work out the combinations and permutations of rents, contributions to building the space, and the like.
The firm figured someone with, say, three to five years of numbers experience would fit the bill just fine.
It never expected the response it got.
People with M.B.A.'s, C.P.A.'s, some with extensive trading experience who had fallen victim to the financial community's downsizing, others with newly minted degrees who had become disenchanted with the idea of a Wall Street career.


Landmarks With Steps Can Welcome Wheelchairs
To the Editor:
While it is true that the giant staircase entrances at many of New York's most famous landmarks are daunting to people with disabilities, as suggested in Peter Kuper's "Eye of the Beholder," Dec. 5, it is also true that many of these institutions have wheelchair access.
The New York Public Library at Fifth Avenue and 42d Street, one of the institutions pictured, is one of them.
A graduated wheelchair access ramp at the 42d Street door leads directly to the elevators inside.
JOHN MASTEN Manhattan The writer is executive vice president of the New York Public Library.


HOW TINA BROWN MOVES MAGAZINES
The Tina Brown article makes clear that her genius is not so much for editing a magazine as it is for marketing so that people will talk about, buy, advertise in and, perhaps, even read the publication.


HOW TINA BROWN MOVES MAGAZINES
This is the third time I've heard Tina Brown describe the old New Yorker as a bastion of "fakery" ("How Tina Brown Moves Magazines" Dec. 5).
She who perused a boxful of old issues doesn't know what she missed -- a great magazine that respected its readership and wasn't concerned with having a niche in the public relations and commercial circus.
I miss the fakery.
CHARLIE KOHLMEYER New York, N.Y.


Sixth Grader With the Voice of an Angel and a Love of Sports
A MISCHIEVOUS-LOOKING, angelic-sounding 12-year-old has literally stage- hopped his way to celebrity this season in two classic roles as a heart-rending child.
Matthew Butler, a sixth grader at the Bronxville Middle School here, sang the title role of Amahl in the Little Orchestra Society's recent production of Gian Carlo Menotti's opera "Amahl and the Night Visitors" at Avery Fisher Hall in Manhattan.


Corrections
An article on page 6 of the Travel section today, about restaurants in Rome, misstates the address of Dal Bolognese in some copies.
It is at 1/2 Piazza del Popolo.


Dudley Still Out
CHRIS DUDLEY, the former Nets center who signed with Portland as a free agent in the off season, is weeks away from returning to the lineup.
Dr.
ROBERT COOK, the Blazers' team physician, said Dudley won't be back before late January from his broken ankle, suffered in a Nov. 9 game.
"Mid- to late February might be more realistic," Cook added.


There Is Life Beyond the Hudson
To the Editor
Conrad L. Osborne's article "It's Time for Opera to Get Real"  [ Dec. 5 ]  assumes that nothing of moment happens in American opera west of the Hudson.
Reading it one might conclude that the action takes place (or doesn't) only at the New York City Opera and/or the Metropolitan Opera.


Antonia Lewis, Richard Loomis
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward D. Lewis of Gladwyne, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Antonia Bonaccorsi Lewis to Richard Alan Loomis, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie J. Loomis of Mountaintop, Pa.
An April 1995 wedding is planned.


Alison Sughrue, James Feeley 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
O.
Stevens Sughrue Jr. of Winchester, Mass., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Alison Mary Sughrue, and James Aloysius Feeley 3d, a son of Patricia Larkin Feeley of Winchester and Mr.
Feeley Jr. of Needham, Mass.
Miss Sughrue, 28, is an underwriter in Boston with the American International Group, an insurance company.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire.


Nadine B. Stein, Scott Waxenberg
Nadine Beth Stein, a daughter of the late Eugene and Doris Stein, plans to marry Scott Stephen Waxenberg, the son of Alan and Suzanne Waxenberg of Scarsdale, N.Y., in May.
Miss Stein, 31, is an advertising sales manager at Self magazine in New York.
She graduated from Pennsylvania State University.
Her father was the president of the Generation Metals Corporation in Hauppauge, L.I.


The Executive Life; Silicon Valley Charity Has a Competitive Edge
COMPETITION in the heartland of electronic entrepreneurship is always intense, but seldom is it as impassioned or as diverting as during the annual holiday "Food Bowl," when some of Silicon Valley's biggest companies challenge each other to raise the most food for the needy.
The companies are spurred by their top officers, who take the three-month effort personally.
This year's campaign was kicked off with a written challenge from E. Joseph Zemke, chief executive of Amdahl, to T. J. Rodgers, chairman of Cypress Semiconductor, that ended: "We're up to it. . . . are you?" Mr.
Rodgers replied: "To paraphrase a famous heavyweight: I float like a butterfly, sting like a bee. You'll be buried in food if you mess with me."


Instead of Gifts to Friends, A Single Gift to the Neediest
This year, as Judith Schreier pondered long and hard over Christmas gifts for her fellow reading teachers at Emerson Junior High School in Yonkers, a thought occurred to her.
Instead of giving each of her co-workers small, inexpensive gifts -- gifts that would probably end up in the nether reaches of a closet despite her good intentions -- why not give a single gift to someone who really needed it?


Salvaging Military Technology
To the Editor:
In "Wall St.'s Role in Military Conversion" (Viewpoints, Dec. 12), Jon B. Kutler says too little Federal money -- a mere half billion dollars -- has been earmarked to develop civilian products by military contractors.


Cheryl A. Savage, Douglas K. Jacobs
Jane and Eugene Savage of Demarest, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Cheryl Anne Savage to Douglas Keith Jacobs, a son of Marti and Ray Jacobs of Harrington Park, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.


The Mercer Hotel: Still Trying, Even Harder, to Open
It was envisioned in the booming 1980's as SoHo's first hotel, a four-star, 78-room luxury establishment for artists, business people and tourists who needed to be, or insisted on being, downtown.
But nearly two years after its planned opening, the Mercer Hotel, at the corner of Prince and Mercer Streets, has yet to unroll the carpet for a single guest.
Its windows remain shuttered by plywood panels papered with old posters for jeans and concerts.
At the entrance, which developers had expected to be bustling by now with guests, sidewalk vendors peddle paintings and earrings.


Sarah Woodhall, Alexander Hoffert
Dr. and Mrs.
Jonathan A. Woodhall of Bethlehem, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sarah Elizabeth Woodhall to Alexander Steven Hoffert, a son of Mrs.
Paul M. Shupack of New York and Dr.
Marvin J. Hoffert of Boston.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Woodhall, 23, graduated from Manhattanville College.
She is a receptionist at Sotheby's International Realty in New York.
Her parents are the founders of the Woodhall School in Bethlehem.
The future bride's mother, Sally Campbell Woodhall, is the school's director, and her father its director of development.


Grandmother's Inflatable Man
To the Editor:
Emily Prager's article "The Model Companion" (Dec. 12) had me in stitches.
In the 60's, after my grandfather had died, my grandmother got an inflatable man to "keep away the hoodlums." When she drove at night, he sat beside her, hat on head, seatbelt fastened.
When she returned home, she sat him at the front window near the lamp so his shadow could be seen from the street.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Theater/1993; New York Turned Into a Heavy, But Shakespeare Was a Hero And a Healer, Too
It's a Nice Place to Visit, but . . . -- In "Marisol," "The Lights" and "The Treatment," New York City took a thrashing from the playwrights Jose Rivera, Howard Korder and Martin Crimp.
In the musical "The Goodbye Girl," it took a drubbing from the set designer Santo Loquasto.
The Welcome Mat -- Julie Andrews, absent from the New York theater for three decades, came back, grace and diction gloriously intact, for the Stephen Sondheim revue "Putting It Together."


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Classical Music/1993; Should Pianos Play Themselves? Presidents Lower Themselves? Orchestras Kill Themselves?
Leapin' Lemmings -- The American Symphony Orchestra League, in its mercy, suggested that ailing member orchestras execute a trendy, politically correct mass suicide.
The Rocky Horror Freischutz Show -- "The Black Rider," at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, found Tom Waits composing like a post-modern Kurt Weill, Robert Wilson directing like David Lynch in slow motion, and William S. Burroughs writing like himself.


Something for Every Man
The designers of Louis Vuitton's new Taiga luggage for men took pains to attract every imaginable market.
The "pouchette," a $465 zipper bag with a wrist handle, is aimed at Asian customers.
"American men would think of it as a purse," said a Vuitton spokeswoman.
"It's not something most American men would carry." The company says European men, mainly, will plunk down $180 for a palm-size coin purse.
So what about American men?
There's a pilot case for $1,660 that looks like a plump briefcase and can hold a laptop computer.
Taiga items come in dark green leather and, not surprisingly, display the famous LV initials -- but subtly.
TERRY TRUCCO


On Language; Views on Sensibilities
Synonymy -- the study of shadings of meaning, the fine distinctions between words that carry similar but not the same import -- is alive and well at the White House.
John B. Judis of The New Republic was interviewing Robert Rubin, the languid dynamo who is President Clinton's economic coordinator.
"When I asked Rubin where he got his political views," Mr.
Judis wrote, "he winced at the vagueness of the term views. Rubin is sensitive to words and phrases the way a sectarian is to creeds. . . . It's a kind of fussiness, but also part of his deadpan earnestness and exactitude."


Light Rail System Opens in St. Louis
Visitors to St.
Louis can now see many of the city's cultural and historic sites by means of a new light-rail system.
Among the train's 20 stops are the St.
Louis riverfront and Laclede's Landing, a historic area within a two-minute walk of the Gateway Arch and the Museum of Westward Expansion.
There is also a stop in Forest Park, site of the 1904 World's Fair; Busch Stadium, home field of the St.
Louis Cardinals; the University of Missouri at St.
Louis, and the Central West End neighborhood, an area near Forest Park known for its antique shops, galleries, bookstores and cafes.
Visitors can buy a one-day pass for $3 on the 18-mile route, which is called Metrolink and was inaugurated this summer.
There is also free travel between any of six downtown stations, on Monday through Friday, from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.


Deconstructing Sendak
To the Editor:
Just like the "dry valley" painting in "Dear Mili," the "bakery and orphanage" sequence in "Jack and Guy" incorporates Auschwitz imagery.
The gate tower of the camp, seen in the distance in the earlier book, is now made more prominent, looming over the boy as he is carted away.
The bakery building, with its pall of smoke, is clearly modeled on the crematorium of Auschwitz I. Inside, at the mercy of the profiteering rats -- now stand-ins for I.G.
Farben executives -- the abducted kittens, soon to be liberated by the avenging moon-cat, lie stacked on bunks like those in the prison blocks.


HAVING TO SAY YOU'RE SORRY
The Sunday feature "You Don't Miss Bridgeport Till the Well Runs Dry" concludes that "Republican Greenwich would never agree to socialized water," i.e. water from the abundant reserves held by the Bridgeport Hydraulic Company (Sunday, Nov. 28).
In fact, since 1989 Greenwich has received an average of 0.75 million gallons per day from a connection to Bridgeport's water supply.
JOHN B. MARGENOT JR.
First Selectman Greenwich, Conn.


Duck Breasts Fit Well on Festive New Year's Menu
NEW YEAR'S EVE looms.
A lovely intimate dinner, perhaps?
A big open house?
And what about New Year's Day?
Brunch?
An informal gathering with television tuned to bowl games?
There is still time to consider all this and, whether such plans have already been made, to think about what to serve.
Food for these occasions should be festive, flavorful and easy to prepare and serve.
Dishes that can be assembled in advance and wait for the guests to arrive or that can stand the test of time on a buffet table are best.


Rangers vs. Devils, Part 5
The Rangers might be missing Mark Messier, their captain and spiritual leader, when they play the Devils tonight at Madison Square Garden, but the way they have dominated the Devils this year, Messier's absence might not make any difference.
Why Messier might miss the game is another matter.
Rangers Coach Mike Keenan said Messier missed Thursday's shutout victory over Washington because of a sprained right wrist, but some teammates said he missed the game because of an ankle injury.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Bias Against Gay People: Hatred of a Special Kind
CLOSING a year of inglorious debate on homosexuals in the military, the Pentagon last week attempted to clarify its disputed "don't ask, don't tell" policy by spelling out precisely what service members are and are not allowed to do: going to a gay bar is acceptable, for example, but kissing or touching someone of the same sex is taboo.
Yet while the Defense Department sees these regulations as necessary to maintain a spirit of military cohesion, supporters of gay rights view the Pentagon's refusal to accept homosexuals without caveat as a piece of a more profound and chronic problem.


On Sunday; On Sunday After Prison, A New Life Through Allah
THE Halal diner next to the Al-Taqwa mosque on Brooklyn's Fulton Street is busy between prayer services with the discourse of young aspiring holy men seeking Allah's prescription for a society bedeviled by the gun.
The diner tableau has the earnest postures and gestures of other holy aspirants in another faith several neighborhoods away searching out Yahweh's will in the city.
Two weeks back from his latest prison stretch, Khalil Abdul Malik, a 21-year-old man at a critical turning, sits in a booth and listens casually as one speaker dismisses the latest tabloid utterances of Minister Farrakhan as more glib than Islamic.
His interlocutor in robe and winter jacket speaks learnedly of the riotous gun and Allah's will to "stop the killing in the neighborhoods." He nods toward the surrounding ghetto of Bedford-Stuyvesant, one of the most vibrant, striving parts of what Theodore Dreiser decided was "a cruel and brutal city by turns . . . but lyric, too."


Revenge Of the Un-Fun
To the Editor:
Regarding "Prive's Ploy" (Dec. 12): Is this America, or what?
I used to think that my money was just as good as anyone else's.
Not so!
Even my credit cards are useless.


Generation That Left Church Goes Back With Its Children
This is a season of spirituality and doubt -- at least for many of the baby boom generation who turned away from organized religion once they left their parents' homes.
But as they have become parents themselves, many have been forced to grapple anew with the place of religion in their lives.
Theirs is often a wrenching search.
They are torn between guilt, reluctance and nostalgia, between the sense that religion would be good for their children and their own lack of belief in some spiritual doctrines, as well as their discomfort with the way many religious institutions are run.
A Sense of Duty
In a society that seems more frightening and amoral than ever, many parents say they yearn for a moral safety net, a place that will reinforce the values they hope to teach at home.
Others feel they should at least expose children to religion, as a possible source of comfort and faith.
Still others conclude that religion is not the answer.


Deborah Kellner, Steven Lipman
May wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Bennett Kellner of Oyster Bay, L.I., for their daughter, Deborah Lynn Kellner, and Steven James Lipman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Lipman of Armonk, N.Y.
Ms.
Kellner, 28, graduated from American University.
She is a meetings and events assistant for Magazine Publishers of America, the trade organization, in New York.


DEC. 19-24: Professions of Innocence; Jackson Takes His Case To the Television Public
It was one of the more unusual, perhaps bizarre, moments in television.
Michael Jackson, the pop superstar, faced the cameras last week and delivered a four-minute speech defending himself from widely publicized child molestation charges.
"I am totally innocent of any wrongdoing," insisted the 35-year-old entertainer, who seemed on the edge of tears.
What made the comments riveting, if not a bit remarkable, was the fact that an entertainer was following in the footsteps of politicians who have sought to repair their battered images by making dramatic pleas directly to the television audience.
Richard M. Nixon and Edward M. Kennedy sat before the cameras and spoke to the people when their careers were in jeopardy.
It was inevitable that a hugely successful entertainer in serious trouble would follow their path.


Promised Holiday Truce Ignored in Bosnia


Ideas &amp; Trends; Forget the Apocalypse, Woodstock 2000 Is Coming
THERE is money to be made on the millennium.
Artists and entrepreneurs, strategic planners and computer programmers and not-for-profit do-gooders are betting that as 1999 ticks over to the year 2000, their bank accounts will tick over, too.
"Think of surfing," said Stephen O'Leary, an assistant professor of communication arts and sciences at the University of Southern California and author of "Arguing the Apocalypse" (Oxford University Press, 1993).
"Time is wavelike. And a lot of people are paddling out there and positioning themselves to use the general cultural excitement, and sometimes hysteria, to catch the millennial wave."


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
MY FATHER'S GURU: A Journey Through Spirituality and Disillusion By Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson.
Addison-Wesley, $10.95.
The author, famous for his attacks on Freud, challenges an authority figure from his own childhood: Paul Brunton, or P. B., a self-styled mystic and his parents' idol.
"All this is told with a mixture of humor and compassion," Robert Coles said here earlier this year.
THE CERTIFICATE By Isaac Bashevis Singer.
Translated by Leonard Wolf.
Plume, $10.
The hero of this novel is David Bendiger, a young Polish Jew in 1922 who is consumed by conflicts: he doesn't really identify with Zionism, Communism or his humble provincial roots, and yet women who seem to represent each of these influences are eager to tie their fortunes to his.
The reason?
David possesses an emigration certificate to Palestine.
Last year our reviewer, Lore Dickstein, said, "Singer is the most magical of writers, transforming reality into art with seemingly effortless sleight of hand." Questions of Jewish identity are also at the heart of A PERFECT PEACE, by Amos Oz, translated by Hillel Halkin (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $11.95).
Between 1965 and 1967, Yonatan Lifshitz, a young Israeli raised on a kibbutz, finds himself at odds with the pure idealism of his father's generation.
Mr.
Oz is a "master at making ordinary details unfamiliar," Grace Schulman said here in 1985.


'Cheap Cheese': Battle Cry of the Court St. Pizza Wars
For as along as anyone can remember, a slice of pizza has cost the same at every counter on Court Street in downtown Brooklyn.
But two weeks ago, Giorgio's, the newest pizzeria along the bustling commercial strip, slashed its menu price from $1.50 to 99 cents a slice as part of a grand opening splash.
That prompted an angry outburst from the owner of Nick and Joe's, a nearby competitor, and ignited a miniature pizza war.


SUNDAY, December 26, 1993; Leap of Faith
The metastasis of sports in America sometimes makes it hard to remember that people play games for reasons other than money, and that the impulse that drives athletes, whether it is foolish or noble, is certainly irrepressible.
In Soweto, South Africa, you would think that violence, poverty and oppression might have crushed the desire to play games.
Not so.
Organized and semiorganized sports are rampant in Soweto -- cricket, soccer, karate, golf, tennis, lawn bowling, even show jumping, known internationally as a sport of the upper classes.
Enos Mafokate started his riding career on a donkey but went on to become a champion show jumper.
Now a veterinarian, he uses a makeshift paddock behind the S.P.C.A. building to teach jumping techniques to 15 young equestrians.


Yosemite Moves to Stem Rising Tide of Visitors
YOSEMITE, the nation's most popular national park, is groaning under the burden of almost four million visitors each year.
They arrive either in private vehicles or in tour buses -- most coming to Yosemite Valley to gaze at El Capitan, Yosemite Falls and Half Dome -- and the Park Service is now gingerly looking for new ways to control the flood.


SUNDAY, December 26, 1993; Dollars That Make Sense
It's no secret that America's monetary policy is a mess.
Not the policy set by the Federal Reserve; the one made by the United States Mint.
The problem is the penny and the dollar.
Pennies are so unpopular that something like 6 billion, give or take a billion or two, disappear each year (last year, 9 billion were produced).
Presumably they run off to mate with lost socks.
The dollar bill is also getting tiresome (for people lucky enough to have them in bulk).
The Southern California Transit District sells crumpled dollars at 97 cents each to a subcontractor who unwrinkles them by hand.
Anti-dollar bill advocates claim that a dollar coin could save the Government $395 million or more a year.
The clean policy seems obvious: Ban the bill.
Drop the penny.
What's the problem?


Give Us Puzzles as Tough as Real Life
To the Editor:
For several weeks I have solved each and every one of your crossword puzzles (including Sundays) completely, correctly and with a hitherto unknown alacrity.


Remembering the Year's Memorable Meals
TODAY isn't Boxing Day as the English know it, but it is the day when this end-of-year column boxes its reminiscences of memorable places and meals past.
If there was any trend evident in 1993 (unlike the previous two years' Italomania), it was the lack of one.
Our four Excellent and 12 Very Good selections crisscrossed the culinary globe.
An underlying trend would be the reemergence of both French bistro and New American cooking, with an emphasis on regional ingredients and dishes.


BENEFITS
New Year's Ball  FRIDAY -- A New Year's Eve ball at the Lockwood-Mathews Mansion Museum, 295 West Avenue in Norwalk, Conn., will raise money for the national historic landmark's restoration and for its educational programs.
The ball, from 9 P.M. to 2 A.M., includes dessert, an open bar and dancing to Peter Duchin's orchestra.
It will be preceded by dinner parties beginning around 7 P.M. given by ball committee members and friends of the museum.
Black tie.
Tickets, $125, from (203) 838-9799.
A Place for Poetry  SATURDAY -- Larry Rivers, the painter and jazz musician, the poet Ron Padgett, the playwright Richard Foreman and the actress Judith Malina are among more than 120 performers who will read at the 20th annual poetry marathon at St.
Mark's Church, 131 East 10th Street at Second Avenue.
The event will benefit the Poetry Project, which sponsors readings, workshops and printings.
It begins at 2 P.M. and continues until midnight.
Refreshments will be sold.
Tickets, $15, at the door.
Information: (212) 674-0910.


A Call for In-Flight Tipping
To the Editor:
In view of the insecurity, stress and low pay to which flight attendants are subjected ("Just How Bad Is It for Airline Workers," Dec. 12), wouldn't it make sense to bolster their incomes at no cost to the airlines by encouraging passengers to tip?
Flight attendants' primary function is to make the flying public comfortable and serve drinks and food -- services that traditionally warrant tipping.
NORMA SACHS  Manhattan, Dec. 19


ABORTION DECISION SETS OFF DEBATE
A decision by the Clinton Administration to require states to pay for abortions for a small number of poor women is shaping up as a significant symbol, one that abortion opponents say they will use in the coming fight over the Administration's health care plan.
Bruce C. Vladeck, the Federal official in charge of Medicaid, the health insurance program for the poor, said on Friday that the Administration would issue regulations requiring states to pay for abortions for low-income women made pregnant by rape or incest as well as in cases when the life of the woman was threatened.
The directive, he said, would be issued by the end of the year.


If Politicians Cared Enough, Building Might Have Lived
To the Editor:
In regard to your photographic essay, "178th Street and Vyse Avenue, 1980-1993," Dec. 5, I passed by the building every day 52 years ago on my way to P.S. 6.
It was elegant, Art Deco, clean, stately.
It was destroyed by later tenants with fire, floods and vandalism.
The small homes now being built on the spot are like chicken coops compared to the strong materials used for the 64 sturdy apartments that housed nearly 300 people.
They could still be there if our city politicians had cared enough to preserve them.
NORA KELLY Queens


Mr. Giuliani's Mixed Start
Rudolph Giuliani says he wants to do things differently.
Fine: that's why he was elected.
But in building an administration, different does not have to mean inexperienced.
So far, inexperience is the unfortunate distinction shared by Mr.
Giuliani's designated deputies.
No fair New Yorker would ask Mr.
Giuliani to staff his administration with veterans who represent the old ways of doing things.
There are, however, professional, nonideological men and women whose knowledge could help guide a new government through the municipal morass.
Former mayors were not shy about borrowing talent from previous administrations, and the city benefited.


Crime
"You don't want to know me," warns Eddie Dain, the tormented antihero of Joe Gores's nerve-plucking crime novel DEAD MAN (Mysterious Press/Warner, $18.95).
"I'm bad news. Even my cat won't purr."
Before he turns himself into an implacable killing machine, Dain is a real sweetie pie.
Devoted to his wife and child, he loves rare books and a good game of chess, and is content to make an honest, if unexciting, living by using his formidable computer skills to track down criminal deadbeats for his lawyer clients in San Francisco.
But being young and cocky, Dain thinks he can get away with the same insouciant game-playing techniques to catch a professional killer, a mistake that costs the lives of his family and leaves him lusting for vengeance.


Sports of The Times; Postcards From an Odd Year: Here to There and Then Back Again
ODD-NUMBERED years are odd.
There's no World Cup, no Summer Games, no Winter Games to guarantee exotic places and exotic people. (Exotic. I said, exotic.) Yet the stories are always there.
Even with all the skullduggery and oafishness and brutality of big-time sports, there were events that were exciting, and people I was glad to cover, some of them even likable and admirable.
NEW ORLEANS, JAN. 1 All week long, the Alabama players have been taunted by the Miami players as "bumpkins" and "hayseeds." Tonight they gain revenge with a truly old-fashioned country stomping, 34-13, in the Sugar Bowl to win the national championship.


Resurrecting Old School As Art Center
A Hispanic cultural group is taking over the old Public School 160, a five-story, graffiti-scarred, neo-Gothic neighborhood landmark at 107 Suffolk Street, with the goal of creating an art center.
The city had leased the building, abandoned as a school, to Solidaridad Humana, a nonprofit agency, which has fallen on hard times.
People affiliated with a theater group, Teatro La Tea, which had been using the building, formed an association called the Clemente Soto Velez Cultural and Educational Center to take over the lease.


World Markets; Holiday Cheer for the Toronto Market
CANADA'S stock markets must know something the people don't.
In contrast to a general year-end mood of sullenness and pessimism, reflecting high joblessness, taxes and debt, the markets have never been more buoyant.
The Toronto Stock Exchange, which does 78 percent of all the trading in the land, has risen 25 percent this year, as measured by its leading index, outperforming Wall Street and many other markets abroad.
Volume has never been stronger.


Grand Restaurants Of the East Side
AUREOLE *** (212) 319-1660; 34 East 61st Street; $$$$; all major cards


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Arts/Artifacts/1993; Russian Spacesuits Went Stratospheric, A Calculator Totaled Up a Debit And an Old Line of Silver Has Its Cloud
Dietrich Bonanza -- Mementos of Marlene Dietrich -- 100,000 diaries, photographs and costumes -- were bought for $5 million by her native Berlin to form the core of a museum of film memorabilia, opening in 1998.
Royal Flush -- Hubert Givenchy's collection of 18th-century French and English furnishings was auctioned for $25 million by Christie's in Monte Carlo; one item -- a silver chandelier once owned by England's George II -- brought $3.4 million, a record for a piece of silver.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Architecture/1993; A Year More Remarkable For What (or Who) Was Destroyed Than for What Was Built
New World Disorder -- From the World Trade Center to the Mostar Bridge, images of exploding buildings dominated 1993, each hinting more graphically than the year's new buildings at some larger story that began with the end of the cold war and is still unfolding.
Stone, Brick and Savagery -- In Washington, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, designed by James Ingo Freed, rose to the excruciating challenge of making art out of the unspeakable.


Easing Violence, With Students' Help 7
Donnietta Rogers and her cousin Anita Barnes were about to come to blows last year in the Hillhouse High School cafeteria over gossip that each believed the other was spreading around the school.
"I didn't think there was any other way," said Ms.
Rogers, now a senior.
"We were both ready to go at it."
Ms.
Barnes, 17, said she pushed her cousin and expected things would quickly turn nasty.


Finding Niches and Other Places to Stow Odds and Ends
CLUTTER is an inevitable byproduct of home repair, as anyone who has hung a picture or oiled a hinge can attest.
Where to keep the extra picture wire?
The can of oil?
Manufacturers of storage products seem to know that, and abound with gadgets like boxes, bins, hooks, trays, magnetic strips and jars on revolving racks that are a kind of clutter by themselves.


Bomb Trial Transcripts of Phone Calls Add Pieces to Evidence Pile
There are ordinary yearnings -- a wish to get married, the desire for the smell of a hamburger cooking on the grill.
There are complaints of injustice, of "false accusations and lies," and there are frequent protestations of innocence.
At the same time, there are a few mentions of names.
Generally only first names are given, and they are all common Arabic names.
Among them are the same first names as some of those who are suspected of terrorist activities in the United States.
Nothing proves that the names are references to terrorism suspects, and it is not clear what effect this will all have on the listeners -- the jury in the World Trade Center bombing case.


Not Every Santa Wore a Red Suit


Local Troupe Makes Good
To the Editor:
Fortunately, there is opera in New York beyond Lincoln Center.
For decades, several small companies have kept contemporary opera alive and quite real for audiences.
One such company is the Encompass Music Theater, which will present the New York premiere of Robert Moran and John Michael LaChiusa's "Desert of Roses" in April.
"Desert of Roses" was widely praised at its 1992 debut at the Houston Grand Opera, and Encompass is fortunate to have been chosen for its second producton.
WADDY THOMPSON  New York The writer is a board member of the Encompass Music Theater.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
New Store on 57th Street Will Test Accessory Line Dana Buchman plans to open its first New York boutique in March on 57th Street between Park and Madison Avenues.
Meanwhile, the company is moving into a new industry showroom that gives it 70 percent more space.


Steering Around the New York City Campaign Finance Law
On paper, the intent of New York City's campaign finance law is crystal clear: candidates for Mayor who accept public money should spend no more than $8 million on the election.
Reality is much more complex.


Guide Offers Advice On Vaccinations
The 1993 edition of "Health Information for International Travel," the authoritative book on foreign countries' entry requirements and recommendations on inoculations from the Federal Centers for Disease Control, is available for $6.50.
The paperback book, edited by Rosamond Dewart, is a source for physicians but is written so lay people can understand it.
It is H.H.S. publication C.D.C. 93-8280, code 017-023-00192-2, from the Superintendent of Documents, Washington, D.C. 20402; (202) 782-3238.


With Patients' Help, Periodontist Turns Novelist
FOR more than 10 years, Dr.
Alan Winter, a periodontist who lives in West Orange, has been caring for his patients.
As it turned out, they have helped him too, in an unusual way.
Thanks in large part to their urging, he has had a novel published.
Dr.
Winter's fiction writing career started about 10 years ago, he said, when he innocently mentioned an idea he had to "a very dear patient." She suggested that he write the story, he said, and she would not let him say no (although he tried).


Topics of The Times; Reporter First Class
An old actor's adage holds that tragedy is easy, but comedy is hard.
In journalism, by the same token, war reporting is simpler, but covering labor disputes is hard.
The labor reporter confronts an eruption of passion, a fog of conflicting claims over arcane details, self-serving leaks from closed-door negotiations and real or perceived pressure from potent antagonists.
To write fairly and clearly about a bitter strike requires persistence and tact, analytical skill and a safecracker's nerves.
A.
H.
Raskin displayed those qualities during his many years as labor reporter for The New York Times.
Though invariably writing against deadlines, Mr.
Raskin, who died Wednesday at 82, rarely sinned against fact or fairness.
It was a feat that became his trademark, beginning with his coverage of the Great Depression in the 1930's and continuing until his final years as assistant editor of this page in the 1970's.


UNDER THEIR SKIN
I have worked in a methadone clinic in New York City and I've seen things that would, perhaps, make even Eugene Richards's camera squeamish.


A Look Back at '93: Some Notable Firsts
IT has been a difficult year for the arts, which are always the first to be hurt and the last to recover from cutbacks in government and corporate spending.
Among the sad departures in 1993 were the Fine Arts Symphony, which has given up all Westchester activity (while starting an intensive in-school program across the Hudson in Pearl River), and the Sleepy Hollow Concert Association, which quietly faded into county history a few months after celebrating its 45th anniversary.


SUNDAY, December 26, 1993; Bang! Who's Dead?
No doubt Santa was besieged by requests this year for goodies from Smith &amp; Wesson, Ruger and Colt.
Given recent news of shootings on the Long Island Rail Road and in Yonkers, and abductions and murders in St.
Louis and California, it's easy to imagine a fearful nation tearing through wrappings in hope of finding guns and ammo.
Anyone who got a gun, or has one already, might consider watching "Unforgiven" over the holidays instead of "Miracle on 34th Street" or "It's a Wonderful Life." One of the themes of "Unforgiven," a 1992 Clint Eastwood western available on tape, is how hard it is to shoot someone.
Depending on the circumstances, it may require character, determination, insanity or rage.
But it always requires a clarity of intent that decency can only interfere with.
Of all the shooters in the movie, Eastwood's character, a man named William Munny, is the most convincing and effective killer.
Nearly everyone else is troubled by empathy, uncertainty or hesitation.


Abigail Littman and Alan Spierer
Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Littman of West Orange, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Abigail Joan Littman, to Alan Spierer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sol Spierer of Tamarac, Fla.
A March wedding is planned.


N.F.L.'s Remote Control
Fox is Football and Football is Fox, and has been for at least two years; when "In Living Color" counterprogrammed the 1992 Super Bowl halftime show it became clear that the adolescent sensibility of the fourth network was a perfect fit with crunch time.
The halftime show is a window into the soul of football; need we be reminded that Michael Jackson starred in the last one?
At first, football may not be as popular on Fox as it has been on the traditional networks because football as cartoon entertainment is fading.
Real cartoon heroes like Bart Simpson make more sense than human cartoon heroes like steroidian linemen.
Real cartoon heroes require less maintenance, fewer drugs, no money and can be erased.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Battery Park City; A New Neighborhood Along the Hudson
ALTHOUGH still under development, Battery Park City, along the Hudson River in lower Manhattan, gives an impression of familiarity.
The architecturally diverse residential buildings, set along wide streets and sidewalks edged in cobblestone, are reminiscent of the Riverside Drive area of the Upper West Side.
A third of the 92 acres of Battery Park City consists of parks and open space, including a broad, 1.2-mile-long Esplanade.
With Victorian lights, hexagonal asphalt paving blocks and long green wooden benches, the Esplanade offers views of the Statue of Liberty, Ellis Island and the New Jersey shore.
South of the esplanade is a wooden boardwalk, often crowded with fishermen and lighted at night by cobalt-blue lanterns.


THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: Art &amp; Photography/1993; The Big Got Bigger, and Sometimes Even Got Better, The Whitney Bombed, the Uffizi Was Bombed
Miro, Miro -- With "The Century of Titian" in Paris, the "Broken Mirror" survey of contemporary painting in Vienna and memorable smaller exhibitions of Lucian Freud, Robert Ryman, Dubuffet and Tiepolo, the Miro blowout at the Modern had serious competition.
An Alternative Approach -- One of the fall's most compelling displays combined old and new African and African-American altars at the Museum for African Art's new SoHo home; the show smartly explored the issue of presenting sacred objects in a secular setting.


Works That Are Immune From Any Trends
THOUGH large enough to hold a sizable party, Aljira, the Center for Contemporary Art at 2 Washington Place here, can hardly contain the associations aroused by its two current shows.
One, "Latin Visions II," consists of works by 23 artists living in the Newark metropolitan area.
They were chosen by Alejandro Anreus, the Cuban-born painter who is a former curator at the Montclair Art Museum and is now serving the Jersey City Museum in the same capacity.


Confronting (or Not) the Puzzling Split Personality of Ravel
Across this desk not long ago came a recording of Ravel's "Tombeau de Couperin" so aberrant in style that it set one to wondering what younger pianists are thinking about an important body of French piano music.
The performance is part of an Arcadia CD, "Hommage to Couperin" (ARC 2000-2), which also includes 13 of the Baroque master's "Pieces de Clavecin." The pianist is Pavlina Dokovska.
The opening bars of the "Prelude" set off at an alarming speed: unrealistic to be sure, but there are at least five more tempos to come in this two-and-a-half-minute piece.
A couple of them are almost correct.


Louisville Players Back
A dispute over travel expenses that led to a walkout by several players of Louisville's Liberty Bowl-bound football team was resolved yesterday.
A dozen players, including two starting defensive players, ANTHONY BRIDGESand JOE JOHNSON , skipped the team's practice Friday.


The Remote Control Avenger
WHAT: Stop It! interferes with remote-control devices to prevent mindless (read male) channel surfing.
Let Naomi Wolf rattle on about female power.
Bob Thomas, an electrical engineer in Spokane, Wash., prefers action.
He has invented Stop It! for women who want to reassert control over the family television.
Think of it as "Star Wars" technology for the battle of the sexes.
HOW: The offended party points Stop It! at the television and presses a stop-sign shaped button.
The plastic device, which looks like a beeper, sends out infrared light of several frequencies to confuse the set, rendering the remote -- and, by extension, the channel surfer -- temporarily impotent.


A Baroque Holiday Concert
A benefit party for the Orchestra of St. Luke's. Steinway Hall, Dec. 16.


Mayor-Elect Was Wrong to Intervene With E.M.S. at Accident
To the Editor:
The assertion by New York City's Mayor-elect, Rudolph W. Giuliani, that he was right to intervene in the treatment of an injured boy by the Emergency Medical Service on East 86th Street at York Avenue is troublesome (news article, Dec. 16).
Though I do not want to drag out an already overplayed story, there is an important underlying issue here.


On the First Day of Kwanzaa


Holiday Festival to Start
St.
John's will take on Fairleigh Dickinson for the first time in seven seasons in the second game of tonight's 42d annual ECAC Holiday Festival at Madison Square Garden.
But the Redmen, who have yet to lose in 11 previous meetings with the Knights, cannot take this one for granted.
Fairleigh Dickinson (4-2) is much improved and coming off a 108-107 triple-overtime loss against visiting Long Beach State last Wednesday night.
The Knights defeated Rutgers and had their first loss of the season against tough Penn.
St.
John's (6-2) has won four straight games behind their 6-foot-11-inch, 250-pound senior Shawnelle Scott, who needs 9 points to reach 1,000 in his career.


Hard Choices Are Seen In Any New Viacom Bid
Sumner M. Redstone, the chairman of Viacom Inc., can increase the capital to raise his offer for Paramount Communications Inc., but if he does, he may face costly hurdles from both his equity partners and Paramount's board, media industry experts said yesterday.
"It's a tough call for Sumner," said David J. Londoner, a media analyst at Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, adding that even if Mr.
Redstone can get the money, he has to decide if Paramount is worth it.


The Commute May Be Routine but the Newsletter's Not
For most rail commuters the only paper they receive in exchange for the fare is the ticket.
But on Metro-North, they also get the railroad's bimonthly publication, filled with arcane rail history, service information and cultural goings-on.
What makes the publications so unusual is the writing style: acerbic, irreverent and chatty -- in other words, the antithesis of what one would expect from a faceless entity like the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Metro North Commuter Railroad's parent agency.


Clifton Comes Up Big, but Ends Up Feeling Small
Kyle Clifton could not remember the big pass-defense play he made in the third quarter.
He was sketchy when it came to describing the pass he intercepted.
The forced fumble was but a vague memory.
On an icy cold afternoon at Rich Stadium, Clifton had a performance that he should have cherished.
With 11 tackles, 6 assists, 1 interception, 1 forced fumble and 2 pass-defense plays, he had his best game of the season and was a standout on a Jet defense that did its job against the Bills.
After the game, though, Clifton was trying to forget about his accomplishments.


Nets Double Their Fun With Division-Leading Teams
The two best presents Chuck Daly could get for Christmas?
His Derrick Coleman-less Nets making a crucial defensive stop and Kenny Anderson in the open floor.
Merry night after, Coach Daly.


Killing of a Gay Resident Stirs Activism in an East Texas Town
These nights, few cars cruise Bergfield Park near downtown, a noted after-dark meeting place for homosexuals.
The fear and shadows that have long dominated gay life in this East Texas city deepened three weeks ago when a group of men abducted a 23-year-old homosexual named Nicholas West from the park, drove him down a rural road and shot him to death.
But in addition to instilling fear, the slaying has angered local homosexuals, who are now planning the first protest by gay men and women in the city, on Jan. 8.


Ted Turner Earns Top Sports Honor
Ted Turner, the chairman and president of Turner Broadcasting System Inc., who also owns the Atlanta Braves and Atlanta Hawks, has been named the most powerful person in sports in 1993 by The Sporting News.
In the publication's fourth annual list of the 100 most powerful people in sports, to appear in its Jan. 3 issue, Mr.
Turner rose to first place from third on the 1992 list.
Philip H. Knight, the chairman and chief executive of Nike Inc., a big advertiser who was No. 1 in 1992, dropped to ninth in 1993.


Accounts
*
Linett &amp; Harrison, Milburn, N.J., was awarded four accounts with combined billings estimated at $1.5 million: St.
Peter's College, Jersey City; Viva Office Systems, Hackensack, N.J.; Meritus Industries, Livingston, N.J., and Johnston Communications, Kearny, N.J.


Eric Estorick, 80, Dies; Dealer in Modern Art
Eric Estorick, a dealer in many varieties of modern art and a collector of 20th-century Italian paintings, died on Saturday at his home in London.
He was 80.
He had been suffering from a heart ailment, said his daughter, Isobel.


Leah A. Gittlitz, Robert Schiffman
Leah Ayn Gittlitz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Gittlitz of Spring Valley, N.Y., was married yesterday to Robert Marc Schiffman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Schiffman of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
Cantor David Rosenzweig officiated at the Richfield Regency, a catering establishment in Verona, N.J.
Mrs.
Schiffman, 25, is a medical student at New York University.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University.


Paper Says Experiment Exposed 19 Retarded Youths to Radiation
Nineteen mentally retarded boys who thought they were participating in a science club in the 1940's and 1950's were actually fed radioactive milk by scientists who wanted to learn about the digestive system, The Boston Sunday Globe reported.
The experiment is one of several radiation studies from that time that have come under ethical scrutiny this year.
The growing number of questionable experiments has led to a Federal investigation of radiation experiments done on people.


Funeral Is Held for Slain Israeli Army Colonel


Kerrey Backs New Abortion Rule
Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska said tonight that he did not consider the Clinton Administration's decision to require states to pay for some abortions for poor women to be a violation of assurances given to Congress.
Over the weekend, an abortion opponent, Douglas Johnson, the legislative director of National Right to Life, cited a letter by Senator Kerrey as proof that the Administration had gone back on its word that the states would maintain the right to keep abortion out of their Medicaid programs.


As Junk Bonds Thrive, Municipal Issues Drag
The junk bond and municipal bond markets have had a record year of new issues.
But the similarities end there.
While junk has thrived, municipals have not.
The flood of a record $290 billion in new municipal bonds has depressed municipal prices and made the market underperform the Treasury market through most of the year.
Only a sudden year-end rally is raising the market's prospects, and only in maturities of about 10 years and less.


The Weather Outside Was Frightful


China's Rulers Honor Mao, as Well as His Undoer
Commemorating the 100th anniversary of Mao's birth today, the Communist Party continued a political choreography that it hopes will insure a seamless transition of power for the next generation of rulers.
Speaking to 10,000 party members and guests in the Great Hall of the People on Tiananmen Square, and seeking to bond the histories of Mao and Deng Xiaoping, President Jiang Zemin said, "Comrade Deng Xiaoping combined the basic principles of Marxism with the reality of China and inherited and developed Mao Zedong thought."


Lintas Parts Ways With Van Heusen
The Van Heusen Company and Lintas New York have mutually decided to part ways after five years.
"It was a financial issue for us," Tony Miller, Lintas New York's chairman and chief executive, said last week.
"We've got ambitions in the fashion apparel category that we want to pursue and the account restricts us."


Blacks Join to Halt Deep South Waste Site
To the Editor:
A Dec. 13 news article reports that plans for a toxic dump site in Noxubee County, Mississippi, are pitting blacks against blacks.
The facts do not support the view that the struggle is one of poor blacks for hazardous waste against middle-class blacks opposed to hazardous waste.
I am the lawyer for African-American Noxubee County residents before the Environmental Protection Agency.


Guggenheim Presses Case on a Stolen Painting
In May 1967, Jules and Rachel Lubell paid $17,000 for a painting by Marc Chagall.
Except for two occasions when they lent it for gallery shows, it has hung, undisturbed, in their Fifth Avenue apartment.
That may soon change.
The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, claiming that the painting -- a gouache, or a kind of watercolor -- was stolen from it in the mid-1960's, has sued Mrs.
Lubell, now a widow in her early 70's, demanding that she either return it or pay the museum the $200,000 or more that the Guggenheim says it is worth.


We'll Need Those 'Excess' Hospital Beds; Let the Market Decide
To the Editor:
Yes, we have too many hospitals and too many hospital beds ("The Hospital Glut," Op-Ed, Dec. 13); but no, having Government buy up the surplus facilities is not the way to go.
The Federal deficit is already too big, and Government can't be trusted to carry out the program efficiently.


Bridge
The prevailing philosophy in almost all sports and games is: Fight fiercely, never give up, and never admit defeat.
That is not entirely true in bridge, even in rubber bridge or events with Imp scoring.
Suppose that you can take an even-money finesse that will bring home a game if it succeeds.
Finessing may seem obvious, but it is quite wrong if the penalty for failure is 1,100.
This situation is far more frequent in match-point or board-a-match games, as witness the diagramed deal from the Reisinger Board-a-match Team Championship at the Fall Nationals in Seattle last month.
The normal contract was three no-trump, and a club was led to the ace.
When the suit was returned, South finessed the ten, lost to the queen, and won the third round with the king.


Bronx Man Is Fatally Shot In a Tightly Guarded Co-op
The owner of a restaurant and a disco in Manhattan was fatally shot early yesterday in the hallway of his high-security, middle-income apartment complex in the Bronx, the police said.
In what appeared to be an attempted robbery, Leo Collins, 50, the owner of Mr.
Leo Southern Cuisine, a restaurant at 17 West 27th Street, and Club Elite, a disco at 208 West 23d Street, was found mortally wounded at 4:30 A.M. in his apartment in the Fordham Hill housing cooperative in Kingsbridge Heights.
He was pronounced dead at Jacobi Hospital about an hour later.
The police said they believed two men were involved, but could not give details.


INSIDE
Fight Over a Chagall Painting
The Guggenheim Museum is suing for the return of a 1912 Chagall painting, which it says was stolen from it in the mid-1960's.
Page B1.
Christmas Shopping Surge
A late surge in Christmas shopping is expected to produce modestly respectable sales gains for retailers, although there are considerable variations among stores.
Page D1.


No Stairway to Heaven
To the Editor:
Re "Block That Acronym" (Topics item, Dec. 14), on the dictionary acceptance of Nimby, or "not in my backyard": I dreamed that the Mayor announced an agreement had been reached with the Almighty to build a staircase to heaven.
When the site was announced, half the people said it would lead to gentrification, the other half said it would bring in the riffraff, and all agreed it would result in too much traffic.
KENNETH K. FISHER  Brooklyn, Dec. 16, 1993 The writer, a New York City Council member, heads its subcommittee on siting of public facilities.


Hogue Gives Islanders An Overtime Victory
At what point do the Islanders officially become not just warm, but hot -- as in take-notice-of-them hot?
Could it be right now, tonight, with their winning streak at six and their undefeated streak at seven and their season record finally at .500 and their sights set on the northern hemisphere of the Atlantic Division?
Tonight's victory, 4-3, over the Buffalo Sabres, before 13,153 festive fans at the Coliseum, was the kind a team gets when its confidence and luck are waxing.
Despite putting only 17 shots on net, the Islanders clinched it on Benoit Hogue's goal at 2 minutes 28 seconds of overtime.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Caps Get Their Back Up  The Washington Capitals ended an eight-game nonwinning streak against Pittsburgh last night, getting two goals from Randy Burridge in a 7-3 victory in Landover, Md.
N.B.A.
Price Leads Cavaliers  Mark Price scored 7 of his 21 points in overtime as the Cleveland Cavaliers beat the Indiana Pacers, 107-103, yesterday in Richfield, Ohio.
Price made only 2 of 11 shots through the first three quarters.
But at the end he was superb, sinking 4 of 5 attempts in the fourth quarter and overtime. (AP) Warriors 108, Trail Blazers 106: Latrell Sprewell scored a season-high 33 points and rookie Chris Webber had 5 of his 24 in overtime, helping Golden State break host Portland's four-game winning streak. (AP) HORSE RACING  Classi Envoy, Barely  Classi Envoy scored by a nose over Local Problem in the $75,000 added Alex M. Robb Stakes for New York-breds at Aqueduct yesterday.
Waco Connection was another length back in third in the field of seven.
Under Richard Migliore and carrying 120 pounds, Classi Envoy covered the mile and a sixteenth in 1:482/5 over the fast track. (AP) Diazo, Not Gilded Time: Bill Shoemaker and Laffit Pincay, the two leading jockeys in thoroughbred racing history, combined their talents as Diazo won the $109,700 Malibu Stakes on the opening day of Santa Anita's 57th meeting.
Trained by Shoemaker and ridden by Pincay, Diazo used a strong finish to beat Concept Win.
Gilded Time, the 4-5 favorite, led most of the seven-furlong race before fading to sixth. (AP)


Review/Dance; Jolly Old (12th-Century Old) St. Nick
The legend of St.
Nicholas makes a wonderful study of how radically perceptions can change over time.
Mention St.
Nicholas today and Santa Claus comes to mind.
But the rotund, white-bearded figure who rides in a reindeer-driven sleigh and slides down chimneys to deliver gifts bears little resemblance to the St.
Nicholas depicted in the Fleury Manuscript, the 12th-century collection on which the Ensemble for Early Music based its "Play of St. Nicholas." The ensemble presented its attractive production on Christmas night at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
To look farther back, the Fleury St.
Nicholas is a long way from the historical Nicholas of Myra, a fourth-century bishop who flourished in a town in what is now Turkey.
For centuries after his death in 343, mentions of St.
Nicholas in church literature were scarce.
But a biography ascribing miracles to him appeared in the early ninth century, and by the the 11th century a large St.
Nicholas cult flourished in Europe.


John P. McCormally; Newspaper Editor, 71
John P. McCormally, editor of The Hutchinson (Kan.) News when it won a Pulitzer Prize for meritorious public service in 1965, died on Wednesday at his home in Burlington, Iowa.
He was 71.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Donor Praises Effort to Swap Toys for Guns
The businessman who last week started a toys-for-guns exchange in a violence-wracked police precinct in Manhattan pronounced the program an astonishing success yesterday.
He said he would urge private corporations, civic leaders, public officials and government agencies to join an effort to expand it across the city and perhaps the nation.
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani and the Police Department gave qualified support to the idea.


William Jessup, Barbara J. Scanlon
Barbara Jean Scanlon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter R. Scanlon of Jupiter, Fla., was married yesterday to William Edgar Jessup, a son of Henry H. Jessup Jr. of Old Lyme, Conn., and Wilhelmina van Neyenhoff Kipp of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Florence Pert officiated at the Marble Collegiate Dutch Reformed Church in New York.
Mrs.
Jessup, 36, is a managing director of human resources at the Bankers Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from Le Moyne College and received a master's degree in organizational psychology from Columbia University.
Her father retired as the chief executive of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm, in New York.


As an Embargo Squeezes Yugoslavia, Trade Grows Brisk Over the Borders
Almost all the cars parked around the rundown central square here, dominated by a statue of a soldier huddled in a greatcoat from some past Balkan war, carry the white license plates of the former Yugoslavia.
The attraction is just around the corner: a makeshift market of a few stalls, folding tables and car trunks that presents a dizzying spectacle to Serbs hard-hit by international sanctions.
There are shoes from Greece, oranges, bananas, fresh eggs, coffee, even glistening tinsel and toys for the Serbian Orthodox Christmas early next month.


Claire Whitcomb, Howard Klein
Claire Elizabeth Whitcomb, a contributing editor at Victoria magazine, was married yesterday to Howard Klein, the creative director of Clarkson N. Potter, the book publisher.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
F.
Forrester Church, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the home of Dorothy R. Handelman, a friend of the couple, in New York.
Ms.
Whitcomb, who is keeping her name, graduated from Bucknell University.
She is the daughter of John and Helen Whitcomb of Berkeley Heights, N.J.


Spiritual Seekers Borrow Indians' Ways
In an ancient rite of American Indians, wisps of smoke rose from burning herbs in prayer to Mother Earth and Father Sky, as the pipe carrier intoned solemnly, "Creator, we come to you in a sacred manner."
There were Indian chants, a song about the return of the bison and some reverent words offered for "the red nation."


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Consumer Confidence . . .
December  Wednesday  Leading Indicators . . .
November  Thursday  New Home Sales and Prices . . .
November  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


Gartner Gets 600, Starts on Next 600
The Rangers on the bench jumped over the boards.
They skated toward Mike Gartner to join the celebration taking place in the slot in front of the Devils' goal last night at Madison Square Garden.
Gartner had just scored the 600th goal of his career -- the sixth player in the history of the National Hockey League to accomplish the feat.


Judge Is Said to Claim Mitterrand Took Payments
A judge investigating the affairs of a prominent French businessman who died in March 1989 while facing charges for insider trading has concluded that the man made regular cash payments to President Francois Mitterrand and his son, a weekly news magazine reports.
The weekly, Le Point, quoted extensively from a confidential report by the judge that said the businessman had paid 293,000 francs, or $50,500 at the current exchange rate, to Mr.
Mitterrand between 1972 and 1980, when he was an opposition leader.
A further 579,429 francs, or $99,900, went to his son, Gilbert, between 1981 and 1989, the article said.


Sales Promotion Unit Appoints an Officer
The Council of Sales Promotion  Agencies in Stamford, Conn., has named Vincent Sottosanti to the new position of executive vice president and chief operating officer.
His responsibilities at the association will include directing the administrative staff and membership recruitment.


Three Playoff Berths Are Open
A grand old name -- the Green Bay Packers -- returned to the pro football playoffs yesterday for the first time in 11 years, joining the Buffalo Bills, Kansas City Chiefs, Detroit Lions and Denver Broncos, all of whom also made it on the next-to-last Sunday of the regular season.
But it may come down to the midnight hour of Monday night's game next week -- the last ticks of the clock of a 16-game schedule spread over 18 weeks -- to determine who else is in.


Without Some Stars, the Lions Still Shine Brightly
For the Detroit Lions this afternoon at frigid Soldier Field, there was no Barry Sanders on offense and no Bennie Blades on defense.
Erik Kramer was making only his third start at quarterback this season.
Rookie running back Eric Lynch -- undrafted, fresh off the developmental squad, two years removed from Division II Grand Valley (Mich.) State -- was making his first pro start.
The Lions' defense had been roasted for 55 points by the San Francisco 49ers last week.


With McKie, Will Is the Way
Aaron McKie was sitting just outside of John Chaney's office, talking about life, basketball, growing up in Philadelphia and how he dreamed about someday playing for Temple University.
The senior guard is the cornerstone of a team that some experts have given the inside track to the Final Four.
The Owls are No. 4 in the latest Associated Press poll, with a 4-0 record that includes a season-opening victory at Kansas.
They play Georgia Tech on Monday in the opening game of the ECAC Holiday Festival at Madison Square Garden.
But Chaney claims Temple is not a Top 10 team, warning that the Owls are six deep and just an injury away from ruin.


Fed-Up Brazilians Want Political Change
To the Editor:
Regarding Brazil's corruption scandals, Roberto da Matta concludes that his country is experiencing the "final gasps of traditional politics" (Op-Ed, Dec. 13).


Fill It Up? Send a Fax? Have a Taco?
When the Shell Oil Company wanted to build a gas station in Pembroke Pines, Fla., residents of a retirement community balked.
They insisted that the huge new station could not go in unless Shell included a post office in the plans.
Three years later, the residents got their way.
Shell was not wild about the idea.
Indeed, in Houston, it is ripping out a post office from one of its new gas stations.
"People did not buy enough," explained William Heyd, Shell's national manager of marketing and advertising.
"We're taking the post office out and putting in fast food."


Economic Difficulties Blunt Nationalist Drive in Moldova
After a series of crises ranging from a civil war to the worst drought in 50 years, this small country on the southwestern edge of Russia has pushed its nationalist leaders aside, and the Government is trying to reform the economy.
But severe energy shortages and still troubled relations with Moscow, this former Soviet republic's main oil supplier, threaten the market-oriented Government's plans as winter sets in and February elections approach.


Treasury Just Selling Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the bill markets, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three-and six-month bills.
Traders said that by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.04 percent, and on the six-month bill it was 3.18 percent.


Lawrence A. Renehan; Steamship Line Chairman, 68
Capt.
Lawrence A. Renehan, chairman of the Gulf and Eastern Steamship and Chartering Corporation of Houston, died Tuesday at his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 68.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Ann.


Books of The Times; What Was Lost to Win the Cold War
The Devil We Knew  Americans and the Cold War  By H. W. Brands  243 pages.
Oxford University Press. $25.
Losing Our Souls  The American Experience in the Cold War  By Edward Pessen  255 pages.
Ivan R. Dee Inc. $24.95.
With the United States and the former Soviet Union now trying to bury their nuclear arms instead of each other, American historians are beginning to write more candidly about their own country's role in the cold war.
Instead of holding the common view, H. W. Brands, the author of "The Devil We Knew," and Edward Pessen, the author of "Losing Our Souls," appear to be saying (in Pogo's imperishable phrase), "The enemy is us." Independently, both agree that the United States shares a large measure of blame for nearly half a century of nuclear confrontation and that the cold war diminished Washington as the moral beacon for the world.


Man Shot to Death in Car
A man was shot and killed in Brooklyn yesterday afternoon as he sat behind the wheel of his parked car in his neighborhood, the police said.
The man, Michael Rivera, 23, was found by the police at 4 P.M. in the driver's seat of his 1989 BMW, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
He had been shot several times, Sergeant McCluskey said, by an unknown assailant.
Sergeant McCluskey said it was not clear why Mr.
Rivera was parked on Sheffield Avenue near Heyeman Avenue, in East New York, or what prompted the shooting.
Mr.
Rivera was pronounced dead at Brookdale Hospital.


Review/City Ballet; 'Nutcracker,' With a New Dewdrop
Monique Meunier's role debut as Dewdrop in George Balanchine's production of "The Nutcracker," performed on Wednesday at the New York State Theater, was an event eagerly awaited by those who have followed the career of this young ballerina in the making at the New York City Ballet.
Ms.
Meunier is a strong, confident technician with a golden glow and an enjoyably cheerful impudence reminiscent of Gloria Govrin, a former City Ballet dancer.
Dewdrop is a role that demands technical brilliance and aplomb; this was a performance that lived up to expectations.
Ms.
Meunier's physical control and relaxed musical phrasing drew deserved gasps of admiration.
She looked as if she could hold her big arabesques and continue spinning for as long as it suited her.
The only problem was that Ms.
Meunier made it look too easy.
One longed, at times, for the air of razzle-dazzle daring Heather Watts used to bring to the part.


Critic's Notebook; Colorful Works From an Operatic Black Hole
Operatic history is usually perceived as a nearly unbroken sweep from 1600 to modernity.
But there are black holes in this starry field, periods from which precious few operas survive in the repertory.
One such gap is between the death of Mozart in 1791 and the advent of bel canto in the late 1820's, with the first successes of Bellini and Donizetti.
Mavens will immediately think of exceptions: Beethoven's "Fidelio," the operas of Weber, Rossini's comic masterpieces.


Mammogram Debate Moving From Test's Merits to Its Cost
With the announcement this month that the National Cancer Institute, a powerful force in the health care debate, would no longer recommend that women in their 40's have regular mammograms, the emotional debate over such precautionary screenings for breast cancer is shifting from a purely medical question to one of cost.
Should insurance companies continue to pay for the tests in younger women, and should President Clinton's health plan hold fast to its proposal to refuse payments for routine mammograms in women under 50?


Mayor-Elect Was Wrong to Intervene With E.M.S. at Accident; What About Next Guy?
To the Editor:
As a transportation safety writer, I'm concerned at what you left out of your Dec. 16 news article on Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani's intervention with an Emergency Medical Service team.


We'll Need Those 'Excess' Hospital Beds; Amoral Cost Fixation
To the Editor:
I.
Donald Snook's proposal to close hospitals systematically by Government buyout and to reinvest the savings in community health needs has an ominously reminiscent ring, conjuring up images of the evicted mental patients lying on our streets who were also to be the "beneficiaries" of alternate community care ("The Hospital Glut," Op-Ed, Dec. 13).


China's Leaders Try to Capitalize on Mao's Legacy


Splashes and Growth at The American Spectator
The American Spectator made a publicity splash two years ago with an article entitled "The Real Anita Hill," in which it questioned the motives and character of Clarence Thomas's accuser.
Then it seemed to disappear, only to return with a vengeance last week with "His Cheatin' Heart," which contends that President Clinton used Arkansas state troopers to help him conduct what it called adulterous affairs while he was governor.
In fact, the aggressively conservative journal has enjoyed rapid growth in the last two years; it says its circulation has increased sevenfold since January 1992, to more than 200,000. 'What Is Really Going On'  "People are turning to us because they are living in a culture polluted with someone else's preferences, tastes and perspectives," R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr., the 50-year-old editor of The Spectator, said.
"The White House and the major editorial boards are trying to sell a vision of America that does not exist, and so people are turning to our magazine to learn what is really going on."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Is CBS ready for the industry's new playing field? A loss of football rights makes analysts wonder.
CBS certainly took a devastating hit this month when it lost the rights to National Football League games to the big-spending Fox network.
But to many industry analysts, the N.F.L. deal was only the latest in a string of negative developments for CBS, all of which can be traced, they say, to the company's lack of an aggressive, creative, forward-thinking strategy for a television landscape that is changing rapidly and radically.


CHRONICLE
SOL M. LINOWITZ has been a lawyer for 55 years, 25 of them with Coudert Brothers, so he figured it was time to step down.
Down but not out.
Mr.
Linowitz, who has also been chairman of Xerox and an international negotiator, refused to say "retire" when he discussed how his life was changing course the other day.


Analysis of Vote Yields Clues to Giuliani's Future
WHO lost Chinatown?
Questions and recriminations still reverberate with less than a week left in the administration of David N. Dinkins, whom personality, performance, perception ("I couldn't have lost without you," he told reporters recently) and politics doomed to be a one-termer -- a fate that seems to befall New York City's mayors about once every two decades.


Market Place; With an internal truce in place, Carl's Jr. seeks a new strategy to thrive in a weak economy.
NOW that Carl N. Karcher and the board of Carl Karcher Enterprises Inc. have resolved their differences, at least temporarily, the fast-food chain Mr.
Karcher founded 52 years ago must undergo radical changes if it is to thrive in a weak California economy.
The company, which is based in Anaheim, Calif., and operates the Carl's Jr. restaurants mainly in this state, has seen its fortunes decline lately as it has faced increased competition from leading fast-food chains like McDonald's and Burger King.


Where Is Optimism in Germany? Among the Bedraggled Easterners
In this 750-year-old village carved out of the dense forests of eastern Brandenburg, game is so plentiful that hunters can fill orders for deer and wild boar in a matter of hours.
The nearest city is Cottbus, 20 miles away, and Dresden is 40 miles to the south.
Life was very quiet here until the 1930's, when giant machines began tearing up the countryside to extract the high-quality coal that lies in thick deposits 30 to 80 yards beneath the surface.
During the Communist era, coal from this region stoked homes and factories throughout eastern Europe.
In Altdobern, a community of 3,800, two-thirds of the workers were connected to the coal industry.
But the collapse of the Communist alliance, and the access to more efficient western producers and alternative fuels, has meant slow death for the industry.


Late Sales Lift Results For Stores
When the nation's retailers locked their doors Friday evening after a 29-day holiday season that began the day after Thanksgiving, many were relieved that a late surge of shopping would produce modestly respectable sales figures.
"It was explosive the last few days before Christmas," said Walter F. Loeb, a consultant in New York who works with leading retailers.
"Customers were rushing to the stores."


Heart Bypass Less Risky Last Year, Albany Says
The risk of dying from heart bypass surgery in New York State continued to drop last year, and was lower than in any other region that collects similar information, according to the State Health Department.
Those were the conclusions of an annual study by the department, which has been conducted for the last three years.
The study calculates the risk of dying from bypass surgery in each hospital and at the hands of each cardiac surgeon who performs more than 200 operations a year.
The rating is adjusted to take into account that some institutions and doctors treat sicker patients, who are less likely to survive surgery regardless of its quality.
The result is a so-called risk-adjusted mortality rate.
Most Rates Similar
A vast majority of the 31 hospitals in the state licensed to do the surgery had rates statistically indistinguishable from one another.
Only New York University Medical Center, with a rate of 1.38 percent, was statistically significantly better than the other hospitals in the state.
Only St.
Peter's Hospital in Albany, with a rate of 5.78 percent, was significantly worse.


An Eviction Dispute and the Cardinal
The Cardinal unexpectedly telephoned the woman a week after Georgia Upshaw, desperate about receiving a sudden eviction notice from her charity shelter, had slipped him a prayerful note in a chance encounter.
"I never expected to hear from him, but he was extremely encouraging," said Ms.
Upshaw, who thought John Cardinal O'Connor would be too caught up in the executive echelons of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York to ever take note of a small, curious housing controversy in Chelsea.
But it involves the secular role of the church and some quiet single women fighting for their places in a historic Catholic residence and stunned at receiving summary eviction notices.


CHRONICLE
It was not the greatest Christmas for ANGELINA REAUX , a young soprano who concluded a four-night engagement with the New York Philharmonic a week ago, singing works of Alban Berg and Kurt Weill.
She lost three concert gowns.
She lost almost all her jewelry.
She lost the music scores for her coming performances.
Worst of all, she lost 39 Christmas presents she had bought for relatives.


Review/Music; Jaime Laredo and Strings Carry On a Tradition
For those who know only the concerts, it was hard to imagine, when Alexander Schneider died in February, that the New York String Orchestra would carry on without him.
Mr.
Schneider, who founded the orchestra in 1968, conducted every concert, at Carnegie Hall and at the Kennedy Center in Washington, for 24 years, and put his personal stamp on the interpretations.
But of course the concerts are merely the final result of an annual seminar for gifted students from 15 to 22 years old, and many hands have contributed behind the scenes over the years.
One is the violinist and conductor Jaime Laredo, who is said to have been Mr.
Schneider's choice to take over the helm.


Review/Television; Adultery With Contrition As Only Opera Can Do It
Even before its premiere in Trieste in 1850, Verdi's "Stiffelio" was having trouble with censors because of its depiction of a man of the cloth, in this case an evangelical Protestant minister, and his adulterous wife.
The exasperated composer finally shelved the work.
Using a new critical edition of the score, "Stiffelio" had its very first Metropolitan Opera presentation in October.
Taped in November, it can be seen tonight at 8 on PBS as part of "The Metropolitan Opera Presents" series.
There is a downside.
This is not major Verdi, although the work was composed at the beginning of a richly artistic period that would include "Rigoletto," "Il Trovatore" and "La Traviata." One insurmountable hurdle is the libretto by Francesco Maria Piave, which is not entirely his fault.


We'll Need Those 'Excess' Hospital Beds
To the Editor:
As the health reform debate continues, one point is clear: universal insurance, if enacted, will mean more demand for hospital beds, not less.


Essay; Helping Iran Arm
Something very strange is going on, behind closed doors, among the Governments of Israel, Germany, the Czech Republic and Iran.
Blinded again by the urge to recover hostages and the delusion of Iranian "moderates," Israel may unwittingly be providing the intelligence cover that could help Teheran acquire Western nuclear technology.
I have only fragments of the Skoda story, and may be putting them together mistakenly; but rather than exhort the Washington pursuers of Whitewatergate, let me lay out a few curious connections picked up last week in Central Europe.


U.S. COMPANIES USE AFFILIATES ABROAD TO SKIRT SANCTIONS
Seizing on porous laws and lax enforcement of United States sanctions, American corporations have used foreign subsidiaries to conduct business openly with Cuba and Libya, according to documents and interviews.
The rules governing sanctions are so loosely drawn that law enforcement officials have had to abandon or back away from several investigations of American companies suspected of doing illegal business abroad, an examination of some cases shows.


Patents; Using Microwave Technology to Remove Lead-based Paint May Be Safer and Cheaper than Scraping
RESEARCH over the last decade has shown that even low levels of lead in children can retard their development and lower their intelligence.
A common source of lead poisoning is lead-based paint, which was banned in 1978 but remains in 57 million American homes.
While children sometimes eat paint chips, they are more likely to get lead poisoning by inhaling or ingesting lead-paint dust, sent into the air, for example, during a renovation or as a painted window frame is opened and closed.


Former Inmate Is Aided By Neediest Cases Fund
Ever since he was a teen-ager, Darrell Evans has been an enterprising businessman.
While his friends were content to find odd jobs around their neighborhood in East New York, Brooklyn, Mr.
Evans yearned for a surer bet.
He began to check city ledgers to see where fire-hazard warnings had been issued because of debris around businesses.
Then he would present the owner with his card and a wide smile, and offer his cleaning services for a low fee.


Preventing 'Inferior' People in China
China's announcement last week of a new draft law to "avoid new births of inferior quality" explicitly refers to "more than 10 million disabled persons who could have been prevented through better controls." The language seems calculated to outrage Americans already upset over the forced abortions, prematurely induced labor and other cruelties associated with China's strict one-child-per-family policy.
But of course it is not.
The proposed legislation, which now only needs approval from the usually rubber-stamp National People's Congress, simply expresses, in extreme form, the Chinese Communist Government's philosophy on the issue: that population management is essential to China's economic development, and individual liberties must be subordinated to the goals of those in power.


Analysis of Vote Yields Clues to Giuliani's Future
WHO lost Chinatown?
Questions and recriminations still reverberate with less than a week left in the administration of David N. Dinkins, whom personality, performance, perception ("I couldn't have lost without you," he told reporters recently) and politics doomed to be a one-termer -- a fate that seems to befall New York City's mayors about once every two decades.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Does Wayne Gretzky really call collect? And other questions advertising never really answers.
"IT is not every question that deserves an answer," according to Publilius Syrus.
That, however, was during the first century B.C., before commercials.
Here, then, are 20 questions about advertising today:


A Women's Magazine For the Recently Wed
Married for five years and still undecided about having children, Kelly Good McGee just couldn't seem to find a magazine that spoke to her.
Ms.
McGee, a longtime editor and writer for New Woman, was no longer interested in Cosmopolitan, with its emphasis on relationships and single life styles, and not yet ready for Child or Parenting.
So she decided to start her own magazine and call it Married Woman.


Sao Paulo Journal; Lula's Progress: From Peasant Boy to President?
The youngest of nine children, Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva was born in a peasant farmhouse.
Seven years later, his family fled a drought, traveling 1,800 miles by truck to a Sao Paulo shantytown.
At age 11, he left school to work in a laundry.
In his first factory job, he lost a finger to a machine press.
He rose to the presidency of the metalworkers union, but was jailed by Brazil's military rulers for leading a strike.
Later, he founded the Workers Party, served in Congress, and ran for President.


Rebecca May and Charles Feldman
Rebecca May, a daughter of Dr.
Mark and Ida Ann May of Pittsburgh, was married there yesterday to Charles Thier Feldman, a son of Marvin and Frances Feldman of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Bernard A. Poupko officiated at the Westin William Penn Hotel.
The bride, 28, graduated from Yeshiva University, from which she also received master's degrees in modern Jewish history and biblical studies.
She is the corporate office manager for Conway Stores, a chain of department stores, in New York.
Her father, an otolaryngologist, has a practice in Pittsburgh, for which the bride's mother is the office manager.


Correction
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about the killing of an Israeli colonel, Meir Mintz, included a name out of place in some editions in citing the loyalties of the Fatah Hawks.
The group is loyal to Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, not to Colonel Mintz.


Jean Horowitz, Clive Sheldon
Jean Leah Horowitz, a daughter of Gloria and Sheldon Horowitz of Tuckahoe, N.Y., was married yesterday to Clive David Sheldon, a son of Jackie and Jack Sheldon of London.
Rabbi Herschel Cohen officiated at the Lincoln Square Synagogue in New York.
The bride, 27, is the coordinator of volunteer services at Dorot Inc., a nonprofit organization that aids the homeless and home-bound elderly in New York.
She graduated from Muhlenberg College and received her master's degree in education from the University of Pennsylvania.


A Needless Gift to the Pentagon
The numbers are obvious: If President Clinton hopes to fulfill his promise to reshape spending priorities, he will have to cut existing domestic and defense programs by at least $50 billion over the next five years.
Otherwise, he will not be able to hit Congress's deficit-reduction targets and pay for his economic strategy of investing in education, training, research and infrastructure.
Yet last week he made the budget hole $10 billion deeper by giving the Pentagon money to pay Congressionally mandated salary increases over the next five years.
And the Pentagon wants even more to cover inflation during a five-year period in which it already plans to spend a whopping $1.2 trillion.
That averages $240 billion a year -- about five times what Russia spends on defense and nearly as much as the rest of the world combined.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Basketball National Basketball Association
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Activated Larry Nance, forward. Waived Jay Guidinger, center.


World Economies


Cards Won It for Coach They Hope Stays Coach
The fans here still do not know how to spell their coach's name.
The Phoenix Cardinals players are rallying around Joe Bugel, trying to prevent the owner, Bill Bidwill, from dismissing him, but several signs at Sun Devil Stadium this afternoon read, "Keep Bugle."
Defeating the Giants today, 17-6, was a start.


Equity Issue This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offering is expected this week:
Interdigital Communications Corp., King of Prussia, Pa., an initial public offering of 1.8 million shares $25 convertible exchangeable preferred done as Seals (Security Enhanced After Market Liquidity Securities).
Prudential Securities.


'Mini-Super Bowl' Was Giants' Concern
The Phoenix Cardinals were trying to save their coach's job, but the Giants were content saving their legs.
Dallas's rout over Washington was plastered on the scoreboard here by halftime, and, from then on, not much registered on the Giants' urgency meter.
Phil Simms's reaction summed up the Giants' frame of mind: "So what, we lost."


New Choices in Care; New York Extends Health Benefits to Domestic Partners of City Employees
Vicki Richman, a 53-year-old freelance writer, could not afford health insurance and so she cut corners on medical care.
In the last three years, she says, she has gone without treatment for a computer-related injury, taken asthma medication that was not the best available and landed in a hospital emergency room where her sprained wrist was diagnosed as broken.
But after Jan. 1 Ms.
Richman will not have to make those kinds of choices.
That is when New York City extends health benefits to the domestic partners of city employees, meaning Ms.
Richman can be covered on the policy of her partner of 18 years, Eileen V. Casey, 44, a procurement manager in the city's Department of Sanitation.


Mexican Truck Maker Heads to New Destinations
Four years ago, the Government got rid of a state-controlled company that lost $25 million a year turning out smoky buses and trucks that could barely climb Mexico's mountains.
That same company, Consorcio Grupo Dina, is now operated by a team of businessmen and has an annual profit of $90 million on a new line of trucks and buses.
It is one of five Mexican companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange.


Washington Crosses the Delaware, Again


Analysis of Vote Yields Clues to Giuliani's Future
WHO lost Chinatown?
Questions and recriminations still reverberate with less than a week left in the administration of David N. Dinkins, whom personality, performance, perception ("I couldn't have lost without you," he told reporters recently) and politics doomed to be a one-termer -- a fate that seems to befall New York City's mayors about once every two decades.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10 THE VIEW FROM THE EAST
The unification of Germany has shaken up Altdobern, where jobs have been lost and the security of socialism has fallen away, but many people are adapting to the demands of a new country.
A1


Norman E. Frimer Is Dead at 77; Oversaw Students' Hillel Houses
Rabbi Norman E. Frimer, a retired administrator of campus organizations for Jewish students in the United States and elsewhere who was also a former Brooklyn College professor, died on Saturday at the Ganei Manhat nursing home in Jerusalem.
He was 77 and had lived in retirement in Israel for eight years.
The cause was heart failure, and he had suffered several minor strokes in recent years, said Seymour P. Lachman, a dean at the City University of New York.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS CRITICIZES GIULIANI OUTBURST
Responding to a question about Mayor-elect Giuliani's temperament, Mayor Dinkins called the Mayor-elect's behavior during a confrontation with an ambulance crew "inappropriate." The Mayor's remarks were his most direct criticism of Mr.
Giuliani's actions in a dispute with an Emergency Medical Services ambulance crew over which hospital a child hit by a taxi should be taken to.
B3.


MEDICARE TO STOP PUSHING PATIENTS TO ENTER H.M.O.'S
In a significant policy change, Clinton Administration officials say they will not prod Medicare patients to join health maintenance organizations, in part because they have discovered that the Government loses money on people enrolled in such private health plans.
Bruce C. Vladeck, head of the Federal Health Care Financing Administration, which runs Medicare, said he would not aggressively promote H.M.O.'s for beneficiaries until he could guarantee consistent high-quality care and had a better way of paying for it.
The Problem With H.M.O.'s
"Our payment methodology is so primitive that it doesn't save money," Mr.
Vladeck said in an interview.
"We are losing money on H.M.O. patients. Before we undertake aggressive promotion of H.M.O.'s for Medicare beneficiaries, we have to make progress on both issues: payment methodology and quality assurance."


The Arts
The number of people directly employed by the arts in New York City and its environs has increased 16.6 percent since 1982, according to a study of the region's $9.8 billion-a-year arts industry by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
The study credits the diversity and resourcefulness of the area's cultural institutions for the growth of the arts in tough economic times.
The overall number of jobs generated directly or indirectly by the arts nevertheless fell 8.2 percent in the same period.
Even though the arts have prospered, with the decline in manufacturing, the arts community tends to rely more on suppliers outside the region and its spending has less impact locally.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
American corporations have openly conducted business with Cuba and Libya through foreign subsidiaries, according to documents and interviews.
The rules governing sanctions are so loosely drawn that United States law enforcement officials have had to abandon or back away from several investigations of companies suspected of doing illegal business abroad, an examination of some cases shows.
The most striking example involves Cargill Inc., one of the world's largest agricultural companies.  [ Page A1. ]


Smoke Rises
Since 1965 the number of Americans who can't get through a conversation or a coffee break without a cigarette has shown a steady decrease.
No more.
According to a health survey conducted by Princeton Survey Research Associates for Prevention magazine, certain groups of people are lighting up again.


Abroad at Home; Secrecy and Cynicism
Anyone who remembers when Americans instinctively trusted their Government is by definition an antique.
Today the general assumption is that our officials deceive us.
President Clinton says that one of his striking impressions since coming to Washington has been the pervasive public cynicism about government.
The change in American attitudes has had one major cause, I believe: secrecy.
During the years of the cold war, opposing a conspiratorial adversary, the United States for the first time developed an enormous permanent national security apparatus -- and a culture of secrecy to match.
In the darkness Washington did things that destroyed the public's faith.


We'll Need Those 'Excess' Hospital Beds; Economic Gibberish
To the Editor:
"The Hospital Glut" (Op-Ed, Dec. 13) bears the subheading "Problem: too many beds. Solution: get rid of them." The article is evidently a contribution to the effort to develop an affordable health plan.
Yet it violates standard economic wisdom, which says that the larger the supply, the more competition there will be and the lower the price will drop.


As a Play Lies Fallow A Writer Moonlights
Wearing a work shirt and dungarees and smoking a Camel, Sam Shepard strode into New York looking like a cowboy who had just roped a wild horse.
Instead he was here performing a far more daunting task: trying to rope a new play into production.
The play got away.
"Simpatico," Mr.
Shepard's first full-length work since "A Lie of the Mind" in 1985, was to be his first on Broadway after about 50 plays in other, smaller venues, and to be his debut as a Broadway director.
But Broadway was canceled and a hurried attempt on the part of the producer, Lewis Allen, to shift it off Broadway proved futile.
As Mr.
Shepard characterized it, "The deep pockets didn't present themselves." The play is now tentatively scheduled for next season at the Public Theater.


Dinkins Faults Giuliani In Dispute With E.M.S.
Responding to a question about Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani's temperament, Mayor David N. Dinkins criticized the Mayor-elect's behavior during a confrontation earlier this month with an ambulance crew as "inappropriate."
The Mayor's remarks, made during a televison interview taped Dec. 16 but broadcast yesterday, were his most direct criticism of Mr.
Giuliani's actions in a dispute with a city Emergency Medical Services ambulance crew over which hospital to take a child hit by a taxi.


Intrepid Emanuel Ax Tests Waters Of a New-Found P. D. Q. Masterwork
So what is a celebrated pianist like Emanuel Ax doing on a program with a left-handed sewer flute and an Oscar Mayer wiener whistle?
In other words, on a program of P. D. Q. Bach, that "last and least" of J. S. Bach's sons, whose works keep getting unearthed by Prof.
Peter Schickele and exposed in public at Christmastime?
Reached by telephone in Stuttgart, Germany, where he was on tour, Mr.
Ax insisted that he had long hankered to appear in a P. D. Q. event.
He even reported looking forward with a sort of pleasant terror to playing the "Concerto for Two Pianos vs. Orchestra" with the professor during the concerts scheduled for tonight, tomorrow and Thursday at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.


A Reprieve At 11th Hour For School In Brooklyn
The end was just 24 hours away.
Disconsolate faculty members were taking St.
Patrick's School apart, stripping the maps from the walls, crating up the textbooks, and selling off the video machines.
And then word came that after weeks of tears and protests by parents -- and two timely endowments from wealthy alumni totaling $40,000 -- Brooklyn Diocese officials had been persuaded not to close the 125-year-old elementary school in Long Island City.


Many Estates Won't Get Prudential Payouts
The number of former clients of Prudential Securities who are likely to receive compensation for their fraud claims is continuing to shrink.
In Prudential's settlement of fraud charges with regulators, a $330 million fund was set up in October.
It will not pay many claims brought by the estates of investors who died after buying limited partnerships in the 1980's, according to lawyers and Prudential executives.


Convicted in '62, L.I. Man Fights Return to Alabama
This may be the last holiday season at home for James Harris, who has lived for nearly 30 years on Long Island after escaping as a teen-ager from a Montgomery, Ala., chain gang.
Barring a successful appeal to New York State's highest court, Mr.
Harris will soon be returned to Alabama to complete a 15-year prison sentence for a string of burglaries he says he was beaten into confessing as a 17-year-old in 1962.


Wars of Words, About Journalists
Some of the top editors in business journalism are really angry about what Dean Rotbart says.
Dean who?


Fewer Electronics Products Are Being Produced in Japan
Japan's production and exports of consumer electronics products are shrinking rapidly, a trade association reported Friday.
The new figures show that the nation is having difficulty retaining its manufacturing base for color televisions, compact disk players, videocassette recorders and other products for which Japan's industry is famous.
Even if giants like Sony and Panasonic continue to lead the world in such products, the "made in Japan" label is becoming harder to find as manufacturing shifts to countries with lower wages.


Weapons Provided by Nature Puts Them en Garde


Giants, With Nothing Much to Gain by Winning, Don't
For directness, quarterback Phil Simms is the one to talk to.
"I don't think emotionally we were 100 percent in the game," he said.
That about sums it up.
Phoenix 17, Giants 6.
The Dallas Cowboys scored a few points as well today.
And the Giants were so obsessed with them, they couldn't think straight.


Jets Lose on a Kick and Now May Be Wide of the Playoffs, Too
Somehow you knew with the recent history between the Jets and the Bills that the game would come down to the final play.
And you knew the outcome would be a heartbreaker.
Immediately after kicker Cary Blanchard missed a potential game-winning 42-yard field goal wide left with 53 seconds to play, the Bills erupted in jubilation and the Jets asked themselves one question: Why is it always us?
And it is always the Jets, who have now lost 12 of the last 13 against the Bills and always seem to be the opponent when the Bills clinch their division titles.


Sports of The Times; A Frozen Requiem: 'I Just Pulled All Three'
FOR the Jets, it was their coldest game ever.
And almost one of their proudest ever.
Almost.
Never before had the Jets played with the windchill factor at 28 degrees below zero, as it was at the kickoff, or even at 18 below zero, as it was when place-kicker Cary Blanchard trotted onto Rich Stadium's frozen green rug yesterday with 53 seconds remaining.


Moving Toward a Land-Mine Ban
Antipersonnel mines are like the dragon's teeth of classical mythology: they spring up as armed warriors, and kill or maim indiscriminately years after they have been sown.
Cheap, simple to deploy and hard to detect, they are the malignant legacy of wars in Asia, Central America and Africa.
Since their victims are invariably civilians and often children, these mines are "the coward's weapon of choice," in the biting words of Madeleine Albright, the U.S. representative at the United Nations.
High marks, then, to the Clinton Administration for taking the lead in a global campaign to curb the export of a cruelly destructive weapon.
Washington has asked the 40 countries that manufacture antipersonnel mines to join the United States in barring exports for at least three years.
Ms.
Albright persuaded 75 other nations to co-sponsor a General Assembly resolution, now adopted, that calls for a global moratorium on exporting these mines.


Job-Training Program Is Seen as U.S. Model
Wearing safety glasses and a white lab coat, Christian Kittrell uses tweezers to pick away grains of dirt until an exact gram of soil remains on the scale.
Next he will dry the sample in an oven, weigh it again and calculate its moisture content.
Then he will break the sample down looking for nitrates, sulfates and phosphates.
Christian is conducting an experiment in hazardous-waste analysis, and in a much larger sense an experiment in the future of American education.


Britt I. Lacher, Marcus C. Tauber
Britt Ilene Lacher, a daughter of Edward and Jacqueline Lacher of Somerset, N.J., was married yesterday to Marcus Coudert Tauber, a son of Yale and Sharon Tauber of New Canaan, Conn.
Rabbi Stephen Klein officiated at the Basking Ridge (N.J.) Country Club.
Mrs.
Tauber and her husband, both 24, graduated from Cornell University.
She is a third-year medical student at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.
Her father is a mathematician for the United States Army Armament Research and Development Command in Dover, N.J.
Her mother owns Party All the Time, a card and gift shop in Bridgewater, N.J.


Trouble in Foley Square
Many lament that litigation in America, particularly in the historic Federal court at Foley Square in Manhattan, is very different today from what it was in the 1950's.
What has brought about this change in the years since I was a boy, aspiring to practice here?


No Headline
This is the final phase of genocide.
First whites took the land and all that was physical.
Now they're going after what is intangible.
JOHN LAVELLE, who works to protect American Indian traditions.  [ A1:4. ]


Aimee Paret, Wolfgang Fink
Suzanne Aimee Paret, the daughter of Prof.
Peter and Dr.
Isabel Paret of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Wolfgang G. Fink, a son of the late Hermann and Luise Fink.
Judge Amy P. Chambers of New Jersey Superior Court in New Brunswick officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Paret, 28, is known as Aimee.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and is the manager of press and artist promotion at Teldec Classics International, a recording company in Hamburg, Germany.
Her father is a professor of history at Princeton University.
Her mother, a clinical psychologist in Princeton, is also a clinical associate professor at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in Piscataway, N.J.


New Jersey Agriculture Chief to Retain Post Under Whitman
Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman today endorsed the incumbent Secretary of Agriculture, Arthur R. Brown Jr. of Galloway Township, for another term.
At the same time Gov.
Jim Florio announced that he plans to appoint Col.
Justin J. Dintino, 65, the retiring Superintendent of the State Police, to the State Commission of Investigation.


Patterns
The MTV of Fashion
It looks as if the predictions about the death of the runway show were extremely premature.
In fact, there may soon be more pressure than ever on designers to heighten production standards, hire celebrity models and engage in all the theatrics that make fashion professionals wince.


Keith Group of Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Type of Body Fat That Fights Obesity
A HELPFUL kind of body fat has been found to fight obesity in mice and may play the same role in people, a researcher says.
The fat is unusual because it burns off more calories than it needs, said the researcher, Dr.
Bradford Lowell, an endocrinologist at Harvard Medical School.


Market Place; Home Software's Treasure Hunt
A decade after experts predicted that Americans would rush to buy personal computers for their homes, the promise of home computing -- families puttering away on everything from glitzy games to household budgets -- finally seems to be on its way to reality.
The relentless advance of personal computer technology, making ever-more powerful machines affordable, is part of the story.
But it is the software makers, not the hardware companies, that will once again probably get the real money and the price-earnings multiples.
And there are plenty of signs that the home software gold rush is well under way: the Microsoft Corporation, the big winner in the business software market, is making a push and hundreds of upstarts have entered the market.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association  ORLANDO MAGIC -- Activated Anthony Cook, forward, from the injured list.
Continental Basketball Association


Peters (J.M.) Co. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Germany's Top Rightist Looks Ahead
For many Germans, the specter of a right-wing rampage that haunts their country is personified by Franz Schonhuber, a 69-year-old former Waffen SS volunteer who heads the 23,000-member Republican Party.
Mr.
Schonhuber has held public office since voters in his hometown, Munich, elected him a member of the European Parliament here in Strasbourg four years ago.


Corrections
Because of a computer processing error, the weekly table of closed-end funds in Business Day yesterday carried outdated prices.
A corrected table, with prices from Dec. 23, appears today on page D4.


Russia's Zhirinovsky Must Be Paid Heed
To the Editor:
In "Panic Over Mr. Z" (column, Dec. 16), William Safire argues that Vladimir Zhirinovsky's surprise victory in the Russian parliamentary elections is not a cause for alarm.
On the contrary, Mr.
Zhirinovsky's showing in the election is a clear indication that the Russian political environment is extremely fragile and that the social costs of economic reform policies will increase that fragility.


Does Holiday Duty Fall Only to Mom?
To the Editor:
"When Holiday Styles Are Generations Apart" (front page, Dec. 21) asserts that mothers who work and their mothers, who mostly stayed at home, share a "deep ambivalence" about working motherhood's impact on the celebration of Christmas.


Alpine Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Television; When to See Isn't to Understand
John Alderson can see but usually cannot tell what he is seeing, which makes it impossible for him to get around the town where he has lived for 40 years and difficult for him to go from his bedroom to his bathroom.
Larry Finn can read, but he cannot recognize faces, even his own.
Each men has been found to have a rare brain condition, visual agnosia, which Mr.
Alderson translates as "I don't know what I'm looking at."


Books of The Times; How World War II Made The Movies Grow Up
Projections of War  Hollywood, American Culture and World War II  By Thomas Doherty  Illustrated. 364 pages.
Columbia University Press. $32.50.
The cynical Humphrey Bogart doing his part for the Allied effort by sending Ingrid Bergman off with Paul Henreid, the hero of the underground, at the end of "Casablanca" (1942).
Donald Duck exhorting audiences to sing "Heil!" in the Fuhrer's face in "A Nightmare in Nutziland" (1942).
Spencer Tracy dying during a heroic reconnaissance mission and returning as a guardian spirit to watch over his former girlfriend and her new lover in "A Guy Named Joe" (1943).
These were a few of the cinematic images consumed by American audiences during World War II.


Yonkers Officer Denies A Side Trip for Beating
Testifying in his defense, a Yonkers police officer told a Federal jury today that after arresting two immigrants from Northern Ireland following a 1991 christening party, he took them directly to central booking, not, as they contend, to a train station parking lot where he and another officer are accused of beating them.
The officer, Michael Buono, said that an early morning argument involving guests who had been at the party turned violent after he and the other officer tried to break up the dispute by arresting the two immigrants.
At one point, Officer Buono testified, one of the men, already handcuffed and under arrest, escaped from a patrol car and pinned Officer Buono to the ground, leaving him "fighting for my life."


For Trips to the Tropics, and Later
What are those bright-looking clothes in the stores near the tired, rumpled markdowns?
They are the advance guard of the warm weather styles that will dominate the racks for the next six months or so.
They are in light shades like alabaster and platinum or strong ones like orange and look refreshing after months of black dominating the fashion scene.
Officially, these clothes are for the resort season, when people with the time and the money flee snow and sleet for tropical islands and sun-kissed beaches.
Party clothes, bathing suits and play clothes are included.
Most are short and many are bare, but there are also suits and separates for travelers and those planning serious sightseeing.


Miscellany
*
Campbell Soup Co. has become the official sponsor of the annual "ball drop" at 1 Times Square on New Year's Eve.
The sponsorship, which begins a celebration of the company's 125th anniversary, will feature a tie-in with CARE, the hunger relief organization.


Bus Links Cuban Exiles in New York and Miami
Even before the gleaming bus rounded the corner and pulled to a stop, passengers were lining up on the street, surrounded by luggage and chattering excitedly.
Soon each seat was taken, and the 1,300-mile trip south to see loved ones in Miami was about to begin.


Valentina Brodsky Chagall, Artist's Widow, 88
Valentina Brodsky Chagall, the second wife of the artist Marc Chagall and heir to an extensive collection of his paintings, died on Wednesday at her home in St.-Paul-de-Vence in southern France.
She was 88.
She had been ill for a long time, her family said.


INSIDE
Optimism in Mideast Talks
As Israelis and Palestinians arrived in Cairo for more talks, there were expressions of optimism that obstacles could be overcome.
Page A3.
French Atlantic Beaches Shut
France closed beaches along its entire Atlantic coast, which has recently been polluted by explosives, acetone and pesticides.
Page A7.
Hints of Deep, Dark Life
Strange heat-loving microbes from inside the earth may be evidence of life as much as three miles below the surface.
Science Times, page C1.
Ex-Teamster Chief Dies at 99
Dave Beck, the tough-talking president of the teamsters' union who defied a Senate investigation but lost his job, died in Seattle.
Page D18.
A2  Arts


A New Commercial For Taster's Choice
A skeleton seems to jump out of the closet in the latest installment of the serial advertising campaign for Taster's Choice instant coffee created by McCann-Erickson New York.
The commercial is the eighth in the series, which has generated considerable publicity and helped increase sales of Taster's Choice.
It picks up after a spot in which the flirtatious coffee couple, portrayed by the actors Sharon Maughan and Anthony Head, met in Paris to share their first kiss.


Mollen Panel to Recommend Permanent Corruption Body
A mayoral panel on police corruption will recommend today the creation of a permanent independent agency to monitor police misconduct, New York City officials said yesterday.
The officials said the panel, known as the Mollen Commission, will recommend that the new body have subpoena power and the authority to conduct its own investigations of graft and misconduct in the city's 30,000-member Police Department.
The agency would act as an oversight body to scrutinize the department's internal methods for investigating and deterring graft and other abuses, according to the officials.


U.N. Chief Urges Patience on North Korean Crisis
The Secretary General of the United Nations, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, called today for patience in resolving the crisis over North Korea's nuclear weapons program and reported that he was convinced after meeting with the North Korean leader, Kim Il Sung, that the "political will" for a negotiated settlement still exists.
Speaking at a news conference here after arriving from North Korea on Sunday, Mr.
Boutros-Ghali reported no progress toward winning North Korea's agreement to allow the resumption of international monitoring of its nuclear installations.
His talks in North Korea coincided with a report that the United States Central Intelligence Agency has concluded that North Korea probably has built one or two nuclear weapons.


Review/Film; The Caped Crusader Returns, in 40's Noir Mode
"You're harder to kill than a cockroach on steroids," complains the Joker to Batman after a brutal clash from which the Caped Crusader emerges miraculously unscathed.
"Is my shirt too big or is my flesh crawling?" quips another character in "Batman: Mask of the Phantasm," the movie spinoff of the animated television series.


Churchill Downs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


New York Needs Its Consumer Affairs Agency
To the Editor:
It's ironic your Dec. 16 issue contained separate news articles of a New York City Consumer Affairs crackdown on businesses scalping tickets for Barney concerts and of Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani's considering abolishing the agency.


Davis Breaks Right Hand and Leaves Knicks Short
The Knicks' offensive woes continued to mount yesterday when they learned that Hubert Davis, their best pure perimeter shooter other than Patrick Ewing, will be sidelined six weeks with a fractured right hand.
Davis apparently suffered the injury, described by the team physician, Dr.
Norman Scott, as a non-displaced fracture of the fifth metacarpal (one of the long bones that runs from the wrist to a finger), late in the fourth quarter of the Knicks' 84-75 victory over the Atlanta Hawks last Thursday night at Madison Square Garden.


'50 Warning Cited In Radiation Tests
The Federal official who directed radiation experiments on humans was warned soon after the program began that the research would invite comparison to Nazi experiments on concentration camp inmates, a 1950 memorandum reveals.


Seoul Journal; A Korean Voice: Forceful, but Almost Inaudible
Not long ago a military officer here, a hard-liner when it comes to North Korea's nuclear bomb project, expressed some grudging admiration for how the negotiations with the North had been handled by South Korea's very unmilitary Foreign Minister, Han Sung Joo.
Mr.
Han, he said, is a brilliant man, the country's premier political scientist, probably a pretty crafty negotiator.
But he suffers a character flaw, the officer said: he is so soft-spoken, so calm, that "he makes me wonder if he is really Korean."


A Milestone and Many Pats on the Back
The Rangers' locker room was calm after their 8-3 trouncing of the Devils at Madison Square Garden Sunday night until Adam Graves came racing from the showers.
He went directly to Mike Gartner and embraced him harder than those crunching checks he delivers on the ice.


Specialty Retailers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


On My Mind; Law And Order
By legislation, court decisions and national consensus, all Americans have the right to attend public schools, restaurants and theaters, to use public parks and beaches, to shop at any store, bank at any bank, work, worship and vote, all without being stopped at any door or gate because of race, color, religion, sex, age or economic condition.
Now all we need is the legislation, court decisions and consensus that will allow us to use the public streets, roads and transit to get where we want to go to enjoy all those guaranteed rights, and then get home again without being shot, knifed, mugged and robbed or harassed and hustled to the point where we wish we had never left the house in the first place.


Silver King Commun Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


A Walk by Williams
The former Phillies reliever and World Series goat, MITCH WILLIAMS , -- known for walking opposing batters -- returned to the Philadelphia area Sunday for a walk down the aisle.
The 29-year-old left-hander, traded to the Houston Astros on Dec. 2, was married to IRENE IACONE , 23, of Cinnaminson, N.J., at Sacred Heart Church in Riverside, N.J.
Afterward, Williams and his roughly 190 guests headed to a reception at the Doubletree Hotel in downtown Philadelphia.


Officials Say Kelly Is to Teach at N.Y.U.
With only two weeks to go in a career that has lasted about 30 years, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly has decided on at least one new path for his life outside the Police Department.
He will become a teacher.
Mr.
Kelly will teach a course at the Wagner School of Public Management at New York University, officials familiar with the agreement between Mr.
Kelly and the school said yesterday.


Loss Gives Seminoles Winning Edge
They don't make teams of the century the way they used to.
Until the Seminoles of Florida State University were swept away by the wind, the emotion and the powerful precision of Notre Dame last month, they were building their credentials as a team for all time, compiling enormous records and competing against groups from the distant past as much as they were coping with people across the line of scrimmage.
Having forfeited its coronation following the defeat at South Bend, Florida State is just trying to extend a record streak of eight consecutive bowl victories and survive the process that selects a national championship.
As the Seminoles prepare for the Orange Bowl showdown against Nebraska on Saturday night, they have been freed of the burdens that were created by their perfection and reminded of the dangers that can result from thoughts of invulnerability.


Wall Street Journal Plans A Weekly Edition for Poles
In a telling sign of how far Poland's economy has come, The Wall Street Journal's European edition is planning a Polish version of the paper as a weekly supplement to Poland's biggest-circulation daily.
The supplement, if given final approval by The Journal, will appear every Monday inside issues of Gazeta Wyborcza, and will be aimed at Poland's growing number of business people who want to learn about European and global financial trends.
It would be the first version of The Wall Street Journal in a foreign language.


16 Are Injured In Cairo Attack On a Tourist Bus
Suspected Muslim militants shot at a tourist bus today, wounding eight Austrians and eight Egyptians and breaking a six-month lull in attacks aimed at Egypt's tourist industry, which is still reeling from a series of assaults that began last year.
The Interior Ministry said three unidentified men had ambushed the bus, which carried 18 Austrian tourists visiting ancient Cairo, a neighborhood that holds a vast complex of thousand-year-old Coptic churches.


Uncovered Short Sales on Nasdaq Set a New High
The shorts ganged up on Oracle Systems just as it was poised to tumble.
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the short position in Oracle, a computer software company, more than doubled in the month that ended Dec. 8, rising 2.9 million shares, to 5.2 million.
It was the largest gain for any stock.
During the period, the price of Oracle rose from $29.375 to $37.50.


Canadian Troops Report Ordeal in Serbian Hands
Bosnian Serb fighters captured 11 Canadians serving in the United Nations military force here last week, lined them up against a wall and opened fire just above their heads, Canadian officers and soldiers attached to the detainees' unit say.
The Canadians were released unharmed after a harrowing two-hour ordeal, but three of them "were pretty shaken up" and are under medical observation, said a Canadian officer who insisted on anonymity.


Not a Big Name, but a Big-Play Cowboy
The Giants know that in their clash with Dallas on Sunday they must create enough pressure up front to disrupt Troy Aikman's gallant passing rhythm.
They know they have to wrap Emmitt Smith tight.
They know they must keep several eyes on Michael Irvin and at least a pair on Alvin Harper, who hurt them badly in the first matchup.
Someone has to block Charles Haley.


Patricia Simon, Writer, 59
Patricia Simon, a freelance writer who collaborated on a 1972 cookbook, "Simca's Cuisine," that won high praise from food critics, died on Friday at her home in Philadelphia.
She was 59.
The cause was arteriosclerotic cardiovascular disease, the Philadelphia Medical Examiner's office said.


New Events Help Refocus the Focus on ESPN2
It's tune-up time at ESPN2, the 88-day-old, youth-skewing, attitude-raging spinoff of ESPN.
Earlier this month, SportsNight, the marquee studio program, starring Keith Olbermann and Suzy Kolber, was trimmed from 7:30-10:30 P.M. to 9-10:30 P.M., Friday, Saturday and Sunday.
"We always knew three hours were a lot, and we never thought anybody would watch all three," said Vince Doria, the managing editor of ESPN2.


Clinton's Specialist on Russia To Fill No. 2 State Dept. Post
Strobe Talbott, a longtime friend of President Clinton and a former journalist who was catapulted into policy-making prominence as the Clinton Administration's top Russia strategist, will be named the State Department's No. 2 official, senior Administration officials said today.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who is on vacation at his Santa Barbara home, will announce the appointment with Mr.
Talbott at his side in Los Angeles on Tuesday, the officials said.


Pentax Selects Carmichael Lynch
The Pentax Corporation, the camera and optical equipment manufacturer in Englewood, Colo., has selected Carmichael Lynch in Minneapolis to handle its account, previously in-house.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $7 million.


Prudential Says Fraud Fund Will Accept Estate Claims
Fraud claims from the estates of deceased clients of Prudential Securities that were looking uncertain have experienced a miraculous recovery.
Irving Pollack, the independent administrator for the $330 million fund established by regulators in the firm's October settlement of fraud charges, said yesterday that he would not allow Prudential to reject claims wholesale from estates of clients who had died since purchasing Prudential limited partnerships in the 1980's.


Texas-Size Challenges Are Ahead for the Giants and Jets; If Rest Works, Beating Oilers Is Still Tough
Remember two weeks ago when the Jets said they needed to win their last two games to make the playoffs?
Well, forget that scenario.
This week there's a new one; something about the cow jumping over the moon and the dish running away with the spoon.
With their final game of the season Sunday night in Houston against the Oilers, who have won 10 consecutive games, the Jets' hope there's more than a fairy-tale chance of reaching the playoffs.


New Campaigns
*
Norwegian Cruise Line, Coral Gables, Fla., is introducing a campaign that forgoes the cruise industry's traditional approach of sun and fun for a more sultry, elegant tone.
The advertising, by Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, San Francisco, carries the theme, "It's different out here." The television commercials, filmed in black and white, use a slowed-down version of the 1950's "doo-wop" song "You're Mine." One, in which an attractive young couple takes an outdoor shower together, is reminiscent of the sensual spot for Calvin Klein's Escape fragrance.


What Legalizing Drugs Would Really Mean
To the Editor:
When United States Surgeon General Dr.
Joycelyn Elders spoke about drug legalization (news article, Dec. 8), she was not advocating it; she simply suggested that the idea warranted further study and discussion.
Rarely, however, has debate on any policy issue been so quickly and effectively squelched.


Review/Television; Bearing Witness to the Culture of Personality
Are the stars out tonight? asks the song.
These days they're out every night, as 1993 ends in an avalanche of lists and ceremonies celebrating what the various media deem the year's most memorable moments and personalities.
From the seemingly permanent to the momentary, celebrities are put on parade.
Press agents everywhere are absolutely aquiver.
Two gatherings, each two hours long, dominate this week's star-squeezing festivities.
Tonight at 8, NBC has a new special called "Legend to Legend Night." Its concept and format clearly owe a huge debt to the annual "Kennedy Center Honors," which, as it happens, can be seen in its 16th glittering outing tomorrow at 9 on CBS.


Review/Dance; Dancing the Praises of the Ailey's Founder
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater glanced toward the future and celebrated its past at its Sunday performances at the City Center.
The evening program included "Frames," which Dwight Rhoden, a member of the company, choreographed last year.
It seemed cryptic at its premiere, and has not grown more intelligible.
Nevertheless, it was easy to understand why Judith Jamison, the troupe's artistic director, decided to take a chance on Mr.
Rhoden.
"Frames," which is dedicated to Ailey's memory, is compelling, as well as baffling.
Works of this kind are needed to provide the excitement of innovation in the seasons that lie ahead.


Reformers Appreciate Mr. Cuomo's Open Ear
To the Editor:
While we appreciate your coverage of our efforts to forge a coalition out of the wide variety of reform groups in New York State, we thought your Dec. 11 news article on our meeting seriously missed the point.


Does Holiday Duty Fall Only to Mom?
To the Editor:
Re "When Holiday Styles Are Generations Apart" (Dec. 21): If today's children are not receiving future memories of sleigh rides and hearthside bonding, neither are they traumatized by growing up in families where parents were forced into narrow definitions of adulthood according to gender.
NANCY GRONLUND  Chicago, Dec. 21, 1993


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press on Sunday about a contract agreement between Legal Services of New York and the union representing its lawyers misstated part of the terms.
The agreement includes an average raise of 2.5 percent in 1994; it does not put off the initial raise until 1995.


SPI Pharmaceuticals
SPI Pharmaceuticals shares continued their rise for a third session yesterday.
The company said last week that third-quarter earnings quintupled those of the second quarter.
It also raised its cash dividend by 1 cent, to 61.5 cents a share, and its stock dividend from 1.5 percent of the share value to 1.7 percent.


Patricia Simon, Writer, 59
Patricia Simon, a freelance writer who collaborated on a 1972 cookbook, "Simca's Cuisine," that won high praise from food critics, died on Friday at her home in Philadelphia.
She was 59.
The cause was arteriosclerotic cardiovascular disease, the Philadelphia Medical Examiner's office said.


New York's Puerto Ricans Split in Economic Success
Financial differences among Puerto Ricans in New York City are growing, as some join the economic mainstream and others remain mired in poverty, an analysis by the City Planning Department has concluded.
Over all, more Puerto Ricans left the city during the late 1980's than arrived, with many of the poorest returning to Puerto Rico and the middle class moving to the suburbs.
"The polarization is evident," said Angelo Falcon, president of the Institute for Puerto Rican Policy.


Taylor to Undergo Surgery
Brien Taylor, the Yankees' valuable minor league pitching prospect, will have diagnostic arthroscopic surgery on his dislocated left shoulder today after a second examination yesterday confirmed the seriousness of the injury.
Dr.
Frank Jobe, the renowned orthopedic surgeon who examined Taylor yesterday and offered a second opinion, will operate on the 22-year-old left-hander at Centinela Hospital Medical Center in Inglewood, Calif.
The Yankees said Jobe would inspect the shoulder and might have to repair it in some fashion, but that option would not be determined until the procedure occurs.
Dr.
Stuart Hershon, the Yankees' physican, examined Taylor last Wednesday and recommended possible surgery and a specialist's opinion.


New Refunds for Misled Met Life Customers
The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, its reputation tarnished by improper sales activities, said yesterday that it would offer refunds to customers who were misled in purchases of life insurance policies since 1990.
The company also said it had dismissed or forced into retirement seven executives, including its highest-paid salesman.
The company's problems resulted from sales literature that promoted some insurance policies as savings and investment plans instead of forthrightly labeling them as life insurance.
The company's office in Tampa, Fla., was the source of most of the misleading literature, but a few other offices around the country also became involved.


O'Neal and Scott Provide Spark In Magic Victory Over Kings
Magic 122, Kings 110
Shaquille O'Neal had 32 points and 17 rebounds and Dennis Scott scored 16 of his 20 points in the final nine minutes, sparking Orlando to a home-court 122-110 victory over Sacramento last night.


Blood Tests for Leaks From Implants Raise Questions and Hopes
A GROWING number of medical laboratories are offering diagnostic blood tests to women with silicone breast implants, promising that they can determine if the implants are leaking, posing serious health risks.
But many experts who study breast implants say the tests are extremely imprecise and do not prove that silicone gel is the cause of the women's complaints, which range from mild discomfort to life-threatening autoimmune diseases.


Can Nynex Still Profit on Viacom?
For the Nynex Corporation, the regional Bell company that has had little to cheer about lately, winding up on the losing side of the epic struggle for Paramount Communications would not necessarily be more bad news.
Nynex, through its investment in Viacom Inc., was handed an apparent setback last week when the Paramount board decided to reject Viacom's bid in favor of a $10.2 billion merger with QVC Network .
Although Viacom still has the option of submitting a higher bid by Jan. 7, it would need to overcome significant financial obstacles.


Congressman Touted as a Candidate for Governor
In the latest attempt to unite New York State's Conservative and Republican parties, several prominent Republicans have begun a campaign to draft United States Representative Gerald B.H.
Solomon, a Republican-Conservative from Glens Falls, as a candidate for governor.
Mr.
Solomon, 63, had not figured prominently in the gubernatorial calculus before today, and his emergence as the latest compromise candidate underscores fault lines within the two parties that have stalled formation of a united front against the Democrats.


Texas-Size Challenges Are Ahead for the Giants and Jets; Rough Drills Before Cowboys Will Arrive
This is the black-and-blue time of the football year, and it just extended to the Giants' practice field.
Coach Dan Reeves said today that, despite his team being battered, it will put on the heavy pads again when practice resumes on Wednesday.
Next Sunday, said the coach, "the playoffs begin."


Logibec Groupe reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Mazda Gives Ford Motor More Control
With its losses growing and its basic strategy gone awry, the Mazda Motor Corporation today made what would have been an unthinkable announcement for a major Japanese auto maker just a few years ago: It said it was ceding more control to its largest shareholder, the Ford Motor Company, and that it expected Ford to help shape its future.
Ford has owned nearly 25 percent of Mazda for 14 years, and the two have a number of ventures focusing on production of specific models, like the Ford Probe and Mazda pickup trucks.
But today's announcement, which caught analysts by surprise, appeared to go far beyond the old arrangement.


Israel-P.L.O. Talks Enter New Round
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization began a third round of talks here today in an effort to remove the remaining obstacles to an Israeli withdrawal from the occupied Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.
Officials said that tonight's session was preliminary, and that a full day of talks was scheduled for Tuesday.


A First for Gretzky: Leads All-Star Vote
He has been voted the league's most valuable player nine times and has won scoring titles nine times as well, but for the first time since fans got involved in the process in 1985, center WAYNE GRETZKY of the Los Angeles Kings is the leading vote-getter in the balloting for the National Hockey League All-Star Game.
According to the league yesterday, Gretzky, who will be playing in his 14th All-Star Game, received 236,578 votes as center for the Western Conference, just ahead of Toronto Maple Leafs' goalie FELIX POTVIN, who had 231,993.
Defenseman RAY BORQUE of the Boston Bruins, with 227,601 votes, led the Eastern Conference balloting announced last week.


1950 Note Warns About Radiation Test
The American Government official who directed radiation experiments on human subjects was warned soon after the program began that the research would invite public criticism and comparison to Nazi experiments on concentration camp inmates, a private memorandum declassified by the Government shows.
In a 1950 memorandum to Dr.
Shields Warren, a senior official of the Atomic Energy Commission, Dr.
Joseph G. Hamilton, a top radiation biologist who worked for the agency, warned that the medical experiments might have "a little of the Buchenwald touch." At the Buchenwald concentration camp near Weimar a number of human experiments were done, including one that killed about 600 people exposed to typhus bacteria.


Bridge
When the opening bidder has a singleton spade, he will often have a rebid problem if his partner responds in that suit.
Consider, for example, the difficulties that South faced on the diagramed deal, played in an Imp Pair game at the Honors Club, 42 East 74th Street in Manhattan.
The best plan is probably to open one diamond or one club and jump to two no-trump if the response is one spade.
If partner has spade length and four or five hearts he will show his second suit.
The second-best plan, as in the diagramed sequence, is to reverse, showing strength but implying greater length in the original suit.
The worst plan is to bid one diamond and rebid two clubs, which may end the bidding and did for one misguided expert.


Trading Guns for Toys
Turn in a gun to the 34th Precinct in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan and get a $100 gift certificate from the Toys "R" Us chain, no questions asked.
That was the offer made late last week by Fernando Mateo, a New York City businessman, at the suggestion of his 14-year-old son.
He expected five or six takers.
He got more than 300, inspiring other donors to put up additional cash.
The guns included submachine guns and semiautomatics along with more primitive models.
Three hundred is only a dent in a city estimated to have two million guns on its streets, but every little bit helps.
And it says something encouraging about human nature that the desire to buy Christmas toys can compete successfully with the desire to possess deadly hardware.


Sports of The Times; Giants, Cowboys, Alarm
LET us seek to put in perspective Sunday's football game between the Giants and the Cowboys, a game that will change the course of the world, or at least determine which team gets the home-field advantage in the playoffs.
"It's like a playoff game," Keith Hamilton, the Giants' defensive end, said yesterday in the locker room in Giants Stadium.
"And if any game is a big game, this game is everything,"


Uncovered Short Sales on Nasdaq Set a New High
The shorts ganged up on Oracle Systems just as it was poised to tumble.
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the short position in Oracle, a computer software company, more than doubled in the month that ended Dec. 8, rising 2.9 million shares, to 5.2 million.
It was the largest gain for any stock.
During the period, the price of Oracle rose from $29.375 to $37.50.


Frequency Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


President Is a Hunter, Too


Thriving on Difference; International High Students Speak Language of Learning
Abdul Samad, a 20-year-old from Afghanistan, went to school for the first time three years ago.
He said he did not know a word of English when he was admitted into the International High School in Queens.
He felt blind and deaf and panicky.
"I was very crazy," said the high school student, dressed in a black leather jacket and jeans.
"I wondered, 'How am I going to learn this language or study this? I've never been to school.' I didn't know how to write the alphabet."


Corrections
An article yesterday by The Associated Press about a synagogue at the State Correctional Institution in Graterford, Pa., misstated its place among prison ministries in the United States.
There are several synagogues behind prison walls; it is not the only one.
The article also referred incorrectly to a bar mitzvah for an inmate last year; it was not the first.
Many such ceremonies were performed before 1992, according to Rabbi Irving Koslowe, president of the American Jewish Correctional Chaplains Association.


Neediest Cases Helping To Tighten Family Ties
When Shirley Pruitt was promoted from a job in the city's Parking Violations Bureau to a better position in the payroll office of the Department of Transportation, she was elated.
The new job meant more responsibility and more money than she had ever made in her 20-year city career.
But it was not long before Ms.
Pruitt, a single mother raising two sons, realized she had a problem.


Brauns Fashions Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 27


Super Food Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 20


Kushner-Locke Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
CONVERGENT SOLUTIONS INC., Laurence Harbor, N.J., a software company, has signed a letter of intent to acquire KTI Environmental Group Inc.
GRANITE BROADCASTING, New York, said it had completed the acquisition of Queen City 3 L.P., the parent of WKBW-TV, an ABC affiliate in Buffalo.


QVC and Nasdaq Say U.S. Didn't Query Halt in Trading
Spokesmen for QVC Network Inc. and Nasdaq said yesterday that they had received no unusual inquiries from the Securities and Exchange Commission about the halt in trading in QVC stock on Dec. 22, just before Paramount Communications said its board had approved a merger with QVC.
A spokesman for the commission said the agency did not comment on such matters.


Even the Nation's Icebox Can't Stand It
An unwelcome holiday-season blanket of Arctic air continued to cover much of the Northeast and Midwest yesterday, bringing record cold that caused discomfort even in some areas long accustomed to sub-zero weather.
Homeless shelters were jammed across much of the nation's northern tier from the East Coast to the Rockies, and heavy snow shut down roads in parts of Ohio.
Forecasters said the frigid temperatures were likely to continue for much of the week, but no major new snowfall is expected for the several days.


Tech Bounces Temple; St. John's Routs F.D.U.
Prior to last night's game against Temple in the Chemical Bank ECAC Holiday Festival at Madison Square Garden, Bobby Cremins, the Georgia Tech coach, pulled Travis Best and James Forrest aside.
Although the season was young and the Yellow Jackets' two key players had logged a lot of minutes Cremins wanted to assure them that sometimes there's no rest for the weary.


G.O.P. in a Bind in Seeking An Inquiry on Clinton Deals
The hopes of Republicans for an independent inquiry into President Clinton's investment in a failed Arkansas land development company may depend on whether they reverse themselves and support legislation for court-appointed prosecutors.
House Republicans in particular have been demanding that Attorney General Janet Reno pick a special counsel to examine the case.
She has refused, saying that no one she appointed would be seen as independent.


Monarch Avalon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Discovered Sonatas May Be Faked Haydn
The set of six keyboard sonatas attributed to Franz Joseph Haydn and declared a monumental musicological find two weeks ago may turn out to be modern forgeries, several musicologists said over the weekend.
The question is still being debated, but the premiere performance and a symposium, which had been scheduled at Harvard University in Feburary, have been canceled.
"The initial consensus that the music was Haydn's seems to be falling apart," said James Webster, a Haydn scholar and professor of music at Cornell University.
"It is a great pity, because if it were genuine it would be of fundamental importance to our understanding of Haydn's development as a composer."


Olson Hoping the Fourth Time Around Proves a Charm
The poor fortune of being part of a talent-rich organization doomed Greg Olson's first three attempts at making a Mets team coming out of spring training.
More than half a decade later, Olson is back to try again, hoping, he said, "that the fourth time is a charm instead of the third time being a charm."


CHRONICLE
The grave of the film star Marlene Dietrich was vandalized late Saturday night or early Sunday morning, the Berlin police said.
Garbage was dumped on the grave site, and the tombstone was smeared with mud.
On it was scrawled "Pelzschlampe," an unusual German word meaning a woman who drapes herself in furs but is essentially dowdy or low-class.


Jeff Lukas Still in Coma
The thoroughbred trainer, JEFF LUKAS , remained in critical condition and in a coma at Huntington Memorial Hospital in Pasadena, Calif., yesterday, 12 days after being hit by a runaway horse at Santa Anita.
"There has been no change," said PEGGY YOST, business manager of D. Wayne Lukas Stables and spokeswoman for the Lukas family.
"The pneumonia is their main concern right now. He's been running a high fever and he still remains in a coma."


Uncovered Short Sales on Nasdaq Set a New High
The shorts ganged up on Oracle Systems just as it was poised to tumble.
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the short position in Oracle, a computer software company, more than doubled in the month that ended Dec. 8, rising 2.9 million shares, to 5.2 million.
It was the largest gain for any stock.
During the period, the price of Oracle rose from $29.375 to $37.50.


Drug Use and Workers' Rights
Les Guelde and 61 other former workers at a Campbell Soup Company plant in northwestern Ohio have an anniversary this month that is hardly cause to celebrate.
In the weeks before Christmas 1992, they were accused of using illegal drugs and alcohol on company property and were swiftly dismissed despite their denials and what they said was inconclusive evidence against them.
Campbell said its actions followed other employees' complaints that drug users and drinkers were jeopardizing safety at the plant at a time when some experts were warning that substance abuse in the workplace was rising.


Donations Prolong City's Toys-for-Guns Exchange
Taken by the surprising success of the toys-for-guns exchange in an upper Manhattan police precinct over a few days last week, police, civil rights, governmental, business and union officials promised yesterday to work to expand the program to the city and the nation.
Fernando Mateo, 35, a carpet store owner who got the idea to give $100 gift certificates from Toys 'R' Us before Christmas to anyone who turned in a gun at the 34th Precinct station house in Washington Heights, said yesterday that enough donations had come in to expand the program there until Jan. 6.


Sun City Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Business Digest
Companies
The insurance industry is changing the way it sells homeowner insurance after big losses from Hurricane Andrew.
Companies say they are using new techniques to measure risk better and to price coverage more appropriately, raising prices for higher-risk customers while reducing costs for those at less risk.  [ Page A1. ]


Kerrey Backs New Rule Requiring States to Pay for Some Abortions
Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, countering a statement by an anti-abortion group, says he does not believe that the Clinton Administration violated assurances to Congress when the White House decided to require states to pay for some abortions for poor women.
Over the weekend, an abortion opponent, Douglas Johnson, the legislative director of National Right to Life, pointed to a letter by Senator Kerrey as proof that the Administration had gone back on its word that the states would maintain the right to keep abortion out of their Medicaid programs.


Montclair Gains In Fila Tourney
After falling behind by 14 points in the first half, Montclair High School (3-0), led by the scoring of Robert Smith (15 points) and Gunnar Winston (14 points), rallied for a 60-48 victory over East Orange (2-1) yesterday in the first round of the Fila Christmas Classic at Orange High School in New Jersey.
In the second game, Duval Simmonds scored 25 points, grabbed 11 rebounds and blocked 3 shots as Orange (3-0) defeated Passiac (1-1) by 75-60.
Simmonds, who intends to attend St.
Joseph's College of Philadelphia, was one of four double-digit scorers for Orange.
Jamal Foster added 15 points and Jamal Koon and Gerald Williams had 12 apiece.
Passaic was paced by Cesar Robles and Sandy Carrasco, who had 17 and 15 points, respectively.


Fonar Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


10-Degree Chill Brings Out Hardy, and Foolhardy
Among the many acts of cold-induced dementia committed by frozen New Yorkers yesterday, Terry Mathurin's brief midtown escapade deserves a special place.
At 12:45 P.M., Mr.
Mathurin, a limousine driver from Queens, grabbed a huge fistful of snow barehanded from the roof of an out-of-state car at the Plaza Hotel and handed it to his giddy passengers, children from a wealthy Houston family who had never seen it before.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; For its latest golden age, radio has recast itself to advertisers as the home of niche markets.
AFTER having fallen from favor among national advertisers enamored with the huge audiences drawn to television, the radio industry is now experiencing what some executives say is its second renaissance since the 1950's.
Radio stations and networks should tally a record $9.4 billion in advertising revenue for 1993, according to estimates by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
That would be a 9 percent growth rate -- outpacing estimated increases of about 3 percent each for television and newspapers, both media that face threats from rival new technologies.
And the faster growth for radio is expected to continue at least through 1997, according to an industry forecast by Veronis, Suhler &amp; Associates, a media consulting company, which expects radio revenue to break $10 billion in 1995.


Chess
You might expect the winner of a $52,550 first prize in one of the most prestigious tournaments of the year to be filled with such a glow that criticism of the system of play used would be the farthest thing from his mind.
Yet Anatoly Karpov of Russia did not let his triumph in the 17th Interpolis Tournament, which ended early this month in Tilburg, the Netherlands, prevent him from protesting about how it was run.
Karpov does not like to play under the knockout system, whether it require one or a few games against one opponent.
The rule that the loser is dropped out of the competition means, for him, that too much depends on a small number of games rather than on the overall result, as in round-robin play.


Watercolor Not Stolen, Lawyer Says
Despite the assertion of officials at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, a Chagall painting that disappeared nearly three decades ago was not stolen, a lawyer said yesterday as the trial began in a complicated dispute over the ownership of the work.
"The museum had a pattern of removing certain items from its inventory without going through proper procedures with its board of directors," said the lawyer, Richard J. Pilson, who represents an art dealer who once had the painting and is a defendant in the lawsuit.
That practice alone, he said, raises serious questions about the claim of theft.
He asserted that the Chagall was not stolen and that it left the museum "by other means," but he did not elaborate.


People
*
Jeff Berry was named creative director at the Evans Group, Portland, Ore., succeeding John Ellis, who continues as president and chief executive.
Mr.
Berry was previously a vice president and creative director at Gerber Advertising, Portland.
Also joining the Evans Group from Gerber were David Helfrey, senior art director, and James Cheung, copywriter.


Tibor de Nagy, 85, Gallery Owner Who Helped Cultivate 50's Artists
Tibor de Nagy, a courtly Hungarian whose Manhattan art gallery introduced some of the most prominent American artists of the 1950's, died on Saturday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 85 years old and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer of the stomach, said his daughter, Dr.
Marianne Buchenhorner of Manhattan.


Bethlehem Is Selling Some Mills
Veritas Capital Inc., a start-up New York merchant banking firm, said yesterday that it had signed agreements with the Bethlehem Steel Corporation and the United Steelworkers of America to buy and reopen several closed Bethlehem mills in Johnstown, Pa., and a plant at its sprawling Lackawanna, N.Y., complex near Buffalo.
The privately held Veritas, which was started last year by Robert B. McKeon, a former merchant banker at Wasserstein Perella, is paying about $25 million for the mills, people close to the deal said.
They said Veritas expected to arrange more than $70 million in public and private financing for new steelmaking equipment.
The purchase is to close late next month.


Aspin Says Spy Tried to Pass On Data in Prison
Jonathan J. Pollard, the American convicted of spying for Israel, has tried to slip classified information into 14 of his letters from prison, Defense Secretary Les Aspin has told the White House.
In one of his final acts in office, Mr.
Aspin told President Clinton in a confidential letter last week that Mr.
Pollard should not be given leniency, as some American Jewish groups and the Israeli Government have requested, because the Pentagon still considers him to be a security risk and because of the severity of his offense.


John R. Fernbach, 73, A Theatrical Lawyer
John R. Fernbach, a New York lawyer specializing in theater and intellectual property cases, died on Saturday at Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital.
He was 73 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Loretta McCarthy.


No Headline
"I looked around me and all I saw were bundles of clothes with hot breath steaming out and more than one passenger with a full-face ski mask on. If you didn't know any better, you would have thought that it was the Terrorist Express." -- PETER NICHOLS, who commutes by bus from New Jersey to Manhattan.  [ D19:3. ]


Some Get Champagne
To the Editor:
When Marla Maples and Donald Trump have a baby out of wedlock and then decide to get married a couple of months later, New York's Mayor signs their marriage license and toasts the couple with champagne (front page, Dec. 18).
In New Jersey, if a woman on "welfare assistance" has a baby, she doesn't even get additional aid.
JOAN LANG  New York, Dec. 18, 1993


What Legalizing Drugs Would Really Mean; Controlled Dispensing
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 15 Op-Ed page Dialogue on Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders's proposal to "legalize" drugs exposes a fundamental weakness in all the discussions I have read: No one is bothering to define "legalize."


Corrections
A headline yesterday about a decision by the Brooklyn Diocese against closing a Catholic elementary school misstated the location of the school, St.
Patrick's, in some editions.
It is in Queens, not Brooklyn.


Jeff Morrow, Actor, 86
Jeff Morrow, a stage, film and television actor, died on Sunday at a nursing home in Canoga Park, Calif., after a long illness.
He was 86.
Mr.
Morrow was born in New York City.
After serving in the Army during World War II, he played the title role in the "Dick Tracy" radio series.
He appeared in many Broadway productions, notably "Billy Budd," the Maurice Evans production of "Macbeth" and Katharine Cornell's production of "Romeo and Juliet."


Does Holiday Duty Fall Only to Mom?
To the Editor:
Re "When Holiday Styles Are Generations Apart" (Dec. 21): If today's children are not receiving future memories of sleigh rides and hearthside bonding, neither are they traumatized by growing up in families where parents were forced into narrow definitions of adulthood according to gender.
NANCY GRONLUND  Chicago, Dec. 21, 1993


2 Clues Back Idea That Birds Arose From Dinosaurs
FROM the jaw of an ancient bird unearthed in a German slate quarry and from fossil leg bones of baby dinosaurs found in Montana, two groups of scientists have turned up striking new evidence that birds are closely related to dinosaurs.
For more than a century, paleontologists have noticed similarities between the fossils of many dinosaurs and the skeletal structure of modern birds, and many scientists say they believe that birds evolved directly from dinosaurs.
Some ornithologists, on the other hand, argue that these similarities are coincidental, resulting from parallel but independent development of birds and dinosaurs.
The debate remains far from settled.


Clinton Hunts, Making Point on Guns
Setting out to prove that there is no inherent conflict between hunters who treasure their guns and politicians who seek to curb their sale, President Clinton bought a $41 Maryland hunting license in Annapolis today and spent two hours lying in wait for mallard ducks.
Responding to an invitation extended several weeks ago by Representative Bill Brewster, an Oklahoma Democrat who is a board member of the National Rifle Association, Mr.
Clinton rose well before dawn to renew his sportsman's credentials at the Fruit Hill Farm hunting lodge on Taylor's Island, Md.


Despite Clinton, Hollywood Is Still Trading in Violence
Within hours of President Clinton's highly publicized speech here imploring entertainment industry leaders to curb depictions of murder and mayhem in movies and television, a number of studio executives who praised Mr.
Clinton for what they called his inspiring words were in a bidding war for a movie script in which 11 people are killed in the first seven pages.
"A studio has a genuine responsibility in this issue," said Peter Chernin, the chairman of 20th Century Fox, referring to violence in the movies, "but we'd be a pretty impoverished society if we were to also say that in all of the arts we must remove violence." Mr.
Chernin's studio eventually landed the script, titled "Overkill," for a price that may run as high as $1 million.


Windows, The Tome: Even Mom Turns Up
"CD-MOM: THE MOTHER OF ALL WINDOWS BOOKS" is a 1,072-page computer tome that is actually readable at such a length.
Even its subtitle is long: "Being a compendium of incantations, imprecations, supplications, and mollifications known to appease the daemons within Windows."
Woody Leonhard and Barry Simon, the authors, succumb to cuteness occasionally or almost all the time, depending on the reader's taste and tolerance.
Three characters, Mom, Mao and Igor, frequently butt in with helpful or coy remarks.
Early on, Mom sends Mr.
Gates a report card on Little Windows ("she has been a lot less unruly since she passed her 3.1st birthday") on which Igor ("how come Windows is a she?") and Mao ("elementary, it is MS Windows after all") comment.


CHRONICLE
Washington a low-profile place?
Evidently the PRINCESS OF WALES thinks so.
The Princess arrived in the capital on Sunday for her first trip out of England since she announced earlier this month that she intended to curtail her public appearances.
She is staying at the Brazilian Embassy with Ambassador PAULO TARSO FLECHA DE LIMA and his wife, LUCIA TARSO FLECHA DE LIMA.
The Princess went on a shopping expedition yesterday in Chevy Chase, Md., The Associated Press reported.


InterVoice Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


METRO DIGEST
COLD BRINGS OUT HARDY AND FOOLHARDY
The streets of New York City remained thick with activity and overt foolhardiness in the midst of a cold spell that seemed to have startled the metropolitan area after a lulling holiday weekend.
Temperatures dropped to a low of 10 degrees in Central Park and rose to only 20, immobilizing cars and penetrating both expensive parkas and makeshift cardboard shelters.
A1.


John Aler in a Recital
The tenor John Aler is to give a recital of French songs on Jan. 19 at 8 P.M. at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
The concert will be part of the hall's Celebration of Song series, which explores three centuries of French vocal repertory.
The program will include works by Faure, Duparc, Saint-Saens, Bizet, D'Indy, Hahn and Dupont.
The pianist Jeff Cohen is to accompany the singer and play two solo works, by Bizet and D'Indy.
Tickets are $20.
Information: (212) 362-8719.


Too Cold to Play? No. Too Cold to Watch.
Who suffers most from freezing weather?
Sometimes the passers, occasionally the runners, but, as Sunday in the Northeast and Midwestshowed, almost always the spectators.
Many stayed home.
The New England Patriots drew 26,571 spectators in a stadium seating 60,000 and the Cincinnati Bengals 27,014 in a stadium seating 55,000.
The Patriots were 3-11 and the Bengals 2-12, so that explains some of it.
But the Chicago Bears, fighting for a playoff berth, drew only 43,443 in a stadium seating 67,000.


BUDGET GAP GROWS BEYOND $2 BILLION FOR NEW YORK CITY
The chief fiscal adviser to Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that New York City was facing a budget gap for next year even larger than the $2 billion projected a month ago by a special committee formed by Mayor David N. Dinkins.
The adviser, Abraham M. Lackman, said the gap in the budget for the fiscal year that begins in July -- the first Mr.
Giuliani will have to prepare -- had grown by at least $250 million because of a significant decline in the assessed value of the city's real estate.


Toni Morrison's Manuscripts Spared in Christmas Fire
A Christmas Day fire gutted a Hudson River home owned by the Nobel Prize-winning author Toni Morrison, but a portion of her original manuscripts and other papers in a basement study were not badly damaged, a friend of the author who is the head of a Harlem-based research center said yesterday.
"The house was almost totally destroyed, but indications are that the major part of the manuscripts and other material in the basement were not severely damaged," Howard Dodson, chief of the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, a unit of the New York Public Library, said in an interview.


For Hevesi And Green, No Shortage Of Resumes
While the appointments and pronouncements of the Giuliani transition are drawing intense public scrutiny, another round of citywide appointments -- with a decidedly more Democratic slant -- is being made by the incoming Comptroller and Public Advocate.
In the weeks since the election, both Mark J. Green, who will become the Public Advocate, and the incoming Comptroller, Alan G. Hevesi, have been working in relative obscurity, forming their own staffs and setting goals for their respective offices.
And while they, like Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani, are far from completing their appointments, certain patterns are beginning to take shape.


George Hickman, 89, Ex-Army Legal Chief
Maj.
Gen.
George W. Hickman Jr., a former Judge Advocate General of the Army, died last Tuesday at his home in Maryville, Tenn.
He was 89.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Daly's Plan For the Nets: Rebounds, Rebounds
You don't have to be flashy to play for Chuck Daly.
Crash the boards, play tough defense, and he will find the minutes for you.
It is a lesson that Jayson Williams and P. J. Brown seem to have taken to heart.
"Chuck doesn't verbalize," Williams said after a scaled-down Nets practice here today.
"But you don't have to be Einstein to figure out that if you go out and rebound, you will get some playing time."


Sidewalk Collision Leads to Stabbing
A 26-year-old Bronxville man was stabbed with a hunting knife in midtown Manhattan at noon yesterday, the police said.
The victim, Brian Hewett, was taken to Bellevue Hospital with wounds in the chest, right arm and lower thigh, and was listed in serious condition, said Officer Peter Friscia, a police spokesman.
The injuries were not life-threatening, said a Bellevue spokeswoman, Vicki Ciampa.


U.S.-Japan Chip Fight Worsens
Trade relations between the United States and Japan took a turn for the worse today as the two countries announced another drop in the foreign share of Japan's computer chip market, the leading barometer of trans-Pacific trade.
In response, the United States ordered emergency talks with Japan, a step that could eventually lead to trade sanctions.


If North Korea Has Bombs
Just as diplomacy was coaxing North Korea into allowing nuclear inspections to resume, some U.S. intelligence agencies concluded that there was a "better than even" chance that the North already has two atomic bombs.
State Department analysts are not so sure.
But there is only one way to find out: Persuade the North to open all its nuclear facilities to international inspections.
Inspections will reveal how much plutonium North Korea may have produced in its two nuclear reactors.
Inspections can also discourage further bomb-making.


School Board Shenanigans -- Again
Two school boards in the Bronx insist they have education-related reasons for not rehiring their superintendents.
But anyone who has followed the shady dealings in these districts over the years knows that the game is politics as usual.
The board members may have been emboldened by Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines's earlier failure to stand up to them.
Now he needs to get tough and, if necessary, overrule them.


Barfield Comes Home
The 1993 Japan baseball champion Yakult Swallows have given up trying to sign JESSE BARFIELD for next season, respecting his desire to play major league baseball in the United States.
Barfield, who batted .215 with 26 home runs in 104 games for Japan's Yomiuri Giants in 1993, was reported to have signed with the Houston Astros.
The Swallows president, KIYOTO SAKAI , said yesterday that he had received a letter of apology from Barfield, 34, and had decided not to pursue legal action. (AP)


Not All of Winter's Tasks Are Painful


Moorco International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Improving Antennas
With financial assistance from Mexico and technical help from a leading Australian astronomer, scientists at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory's Very Large Array radio telescope in New Mexico hope to soon begin making images of new planetary systems in formation.
To make this possible, a major upgrade of the observatory's V.L.A. radio telescope array at Socorro, N.M., has received a $1 million grant from the Mexican Government, said David Finley, a spokesman for the observatory.
The observatory is financed by the National Science Foundation, an agency of the Federal Government, and the Mexican contribution is a landmark in foreign support of science in the United States.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
2.97
3.27
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.04
3.22
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.21
3.18
3.38
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.22
5.22
6.06
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.23
6.21
7.40
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.23
7.23
8.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.52
5.53
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Juries Ponder: Did 2 Brothers Kill Rather Than Be Killed?
As jurors showed up for another week of deliberations today in the murder trial of Lyle and Erik Menendez, the two panels appeared to be struggling with the trial's central issue: whether the brothers told the truth when they said they killed their parents out of fear for their lives.
The separate juries arrived at court this morning after a three-day Christmas break in a trial that has lasted five months.
But the panel deliberating Lyle Menendez's case was sent home early because a member was ill.
Lyle's jury of five men and seven women has deliberated nine days; Erik's jury of six men and six women was in its seventh day of deliberations.


Mark IV Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Talk Is Cheap, and Getting Cheaper
TO avoid becoming roadkill on the digital highway, get a faster modem.
With the increasing popularity of on-line information services like Compuserve, Prodigy, America On-Line and the mother matrix of them all, the Internet, many personal computer users are discovering that a fast modem is at least as important as a fast computer.


Beckenbauer Returns
FRANZ BECKENBAUER, who coached Germany to the World Cup title in 1990, is back with the club that helped him start his brilliant career, Bayern Munich.
Beckenbauer yesterday was named manager of the team in Munich, Germany.
He replaced ERICH RIBBECK, the embattled Bayern coach who quit yesterday. (AP)


Saudis Pay $225 Million To Settle a B.C.C.I. Case
A member of Saudi Arabia's principal banking family and an associate have paid $225 million to settle New York and Federal charges that they looted $300 million from the depositors of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
The settlement of charges against Sheik Khalid bin Mahfouz, announced yesterday in New York by Manhattan District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau, ends an episode that at one point strained Washington's relationship with its most important ally in the Persian Gulf.


DEADLY FLOTSAM ON FRENCH SHORES
The long Atlantic coastline of France has been polluted in recent days by a macabre array of explosives, acetone and pesticides, bringing angry calls for tighter controls over ocean-going vessels.
Fearful of accidents, the Government has banned fishermen, strollers and shellfish gatherers from beaches all the way from its border with Belgium down to Spain, and this weekend soldiers, police officers and fire fighters scoured the shore for explosives that had washed ashore, often entangled in seaweed.


CHRONICLE
It was a bit of a return engagement for PRESIDENT AND MRS.
CLINTON and their daughter, CHELSEA, when they went to see "The Will Rogers Follies" on Christmas night.
MAC DAVIS, who plays the American humorist Will Rogers, and a bevy of scantily clad chorus girls performed a number from the musical as part of the entertainment during the Democratic National Convention in July 1992.
A month ago, LISE DAVIS, Mr.
Davis's wife, invited the President and his family to see the show in its entirety at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.


Hawkins Chemical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Dave Beck, 99, Teamsters Chief, Convicted of Corruption, Is Dead
Dave Beck, one of the most powerful and outspoken labor leaders spanning the middle of this century and the first of a series of teamster presidents to go to prison in the 1960's, died on Sunday in Northwest Hospital in Seattle.
He was 99 and lived in Seattle.
Mr.
Beck was the president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters from 1952 to 1957, when he defied a United States Senate hearing on union corruption by invoking the Fifth Amendment protection against self-incrimination 117 times.


The UnShula Dolphins: A 4th Straight Defeat
The Miami Dolphins, without a victory since the Leon Lett game, are beginning to look like a David Shula team.
Last-second bomb passes work against them, 245-pound running backs barrel through them and the playoffs may now pass by them.
Miami Coach Don Shula spent November consoling his son, David -- whose Bengals started 0-11 -- but now who is consoling whom?
The Dolphins were trounced, 45-20, by the San Diego Chargers tonight at Jack Murphy Stadium, and, with four straight losses and a 9-6 record, Miami's post-season possibilities can be counted on only two fingers.


Washington at Work; Bentsen, Beltway Insider, Now Fights The Notion That He's Out of the Loop
The last thing people would expect Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen to be is insecure, but nowadays the silver-haired Texan often comes across that way as he pursues a surprising mission: convincing the world that he is in the loop.
That was not a mission Mr.
Bentsen expected last year when Bill Clinton, as President-elect, offered him the Treasury post to cap a distinguished 22-year Senate career, which included leadership of its Finance Committee and a much-praised stint as the Democratic Vice-Presidential candidate in 1988.


Carlesimo, Capstraw, Seton Hall, Wagner
It was a homecoming for one coach, a home highlight for the other and no day at the office for either.
Seton Hall beat Wagner, 74-62, on the Seahawks' Staten Island campus last night in a coaching matchup that was a reunion for P. J. Carlesimo of the Pirates and one of his former Wagner players, Tim Capstraw.
It was supposed to be a holiday workout for Seton Hall, a pit stop from their Big East Conference schedule.
Instead, it was a road test.


Studies Unmask Protein Culprit Behind Allergy to Shrimp
RESEARCHERS in India and at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases have identified two regions of a protein that set off allergic reactions to shrimp and closely related shellfish.
The discovery makes shrimp one of a few allergenic foods for which the actual allergen has been purified and identified.
This may one day lead to a means of desensitizing people who are allergic to seafoods, an allergy that can be dangerous.


Strange New Microbes Hint at a Vast Subterranean World
NEW forms of microbial life are being discovered in such abundance deep inside the Earth that some scientists are beginning to suspect that the planet has a hidden biosphere extending miles down whose total mass may rival or exceed that of all surface life.
If a deep biosphere does exist, scientists say, its discovery will rewrite textbooks while shedding new light on the mystery of life's origins.
Even skeptics say the thesis is intriguing enough to warrant new studies of the subterranean realm.


Panhandle Royalty Co. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Q&amp;A
Gnashing the Teeth
Q.  Why do some people grind their teeth when they are asleep?


Corrections
An article yesterday about the exploitation of American Indian rituals by adherents of the New Age movement carried an incorrect byline in some editions.
The writer was Dirk Johnson.


What Legalizing Drugs Would Really Mean; A Failed 'War'
To the Editor:
Joseph A. Califano Jr.'s Dec. 15 Op-Ed article on Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders's suggestion that we should at least consider the possibility of an alternative to the futile war on drugs is entitled "No, Fight Harder." It actually succeeds, however, in establishing the contrary.


Prices Mixed for Treasury Issues
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, as the Government held its weekly sale of three- and six-month bills.
Trading was extremely slow, and market participants were reluctant to draw conclusions from the price movements.
The average rate at auction for the three-month issue was 3.06 percent, unchanged for a third consecutive week, while the average rate for the six-month maturity was 3.21 percent, down from 3.25 percent last week.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-7  RUSSIA ENVOY TO BE PROMOTED  Strobe Talbott, a friend of President Clinton and his top Russia strategist, will be named Deputy Secretary of State, officials said.
A1


H.D. Vest reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


By Design; Beige Is Back
In terms of color, fashion was in a somber mood in 1993, with black, black and more black.
But things are looking brighter for 1994.
The spring shows practically banished black in favor of white and off-white shades, pale gray, beige and sand tones, and even a few shots of real color.
How many shades of beige are there?
Just look at the clothes of Calvin Klein, Richard Tyler and Donna Karan.
Neutrality reigns.


Dow Jumps 35.21 to Another Record
Blue-chip stocks surged ahead yesterday, pushing the Dow Jones industrial average to another new high.
The Dow jumped 35.21 points to close at 3,792.93, topping the previous record of 3,764.43 set on Dec. 13.


A Year After Hurricane Andrew, Insurers Maneuver to Lower Risk
After decades during which homeowners insurance was both relatively cheap and readily available, the insurance industry, rocked by losses from Hurricane Andrew, is changing the way it sells that insurance.
The hurricane, which hit Florida last year and cost insurance companies a record $16.5 billion, opened their eyes to the possibility of far larger losses if a storm of equal ferocity directly hit Miami or the New York area.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Yzerman Returns  Sergei Fedorov had two goals and two assists and Steve Yzerman made a successful return to the ice last night in Dallas as the streaking Detroit Red Wings beat the Dallas Stars, 6-0.
Yzerman, who had missed 26 games while recuperating from a back injury, celebrated his return with a third-period shorthanded goal that helped Detroit to its eight victory in its last nine games. (AP)


Patricia Simon, Writer, 59
Patricia Simon, a freelance writer who collaborated on a 1972 cookbook, "Simca's Cuisine," that won high praise from food critics, died on Friday at her home in Philadelphia.
She was 59.
The cause was arteriosclerotic cardiovascular disease, the Philadelphia Medical Examiner's office said.


Accounts
*
Adirondack Beverages, Scotia, N.Y., has named five finalists to compete for its estimated $2 million account, previously handled in-house.
They are Houston, Effler &amp; Partners, Boston, and four New York-based agencies: Berenter Greenhouse &amp; Webster, Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners, Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss and Weiss, Whitten, Stagliano.
A final decision is expected in February.


INSIDE
Ethics Case Is Delayed
A judge told prosecutors to amend an indictment against Senator Kay Hutchison of Texas to give a clearer explanation of the charges.
Page A8.
An End to Ironing?
Japanese and American companies seem on the verge of a technological breakthrough: cotton shirts that require little or no ironing.
Page D1.
Life After Gracie Mansion
In a last session with reporters, Mayor Dinkins said he had no regrets and looked forward to a new life.
Page B5.


Market Place; Analysts say Kent Electronics can endure any economic phase.
SETTING recent buoyant economic news aside, many large investors recommend looking for stocks than can appreciate in almost any phase of the economy's cycle.
One that seems to fit the profile, some Wall Street professionals say, is the Kent Electronics Corporation, a Houston-based distributor of electronics components.
"Economic phases wax and wane, but Kent keeps chugging along," Mark Plummer, an analyst with Stephens Inc., said.
Indeed, the company has reported 30 consecutive quarters of increased sales and earnings since its initial public offering in June 1986.


Scott Is Holding His Cheers Until Season Comes to End
Although he had matched a career-high effort with 26 points, James Scott was subdued Monday night after St.
John's 83-59 victory over Fairleigh Dickinson in the first round of the Chemical Bank ECAC Holiday Festival.
It's not that he wasn't pleased; it's just that Scott, who transferred to St.
John's from Spartanburg (S. C.) Methodist Junior College, is looking at success over the long haul, and his adjustments so far this season have been a succession of peaks but many valleys.


Preferring the Cold Shelter of the Streets
In the gloomy underworld of pavement and loading docks that is Lower Wacker Drive, Carmelo Vargas was cruising through the frigid winter darkness early today on what he knew in his heart was likely to be a failed mission of mercy.
It was 12:15 A.M. on one of the coldest and most dangerous nights of the young winter here and across much of the Midwest.
Mr.
Vargas, director of emergency services for the Chicago Department of Human Services, had been driving around for hours.
He was trying with sweet talk and a dwindling supply of cigarettes to get the homeless out of their cardboard homes and potential coffins and into shelters already nearly filled to capacity with men, women, children and despair.


Messier Skips Rangers Trip
The Rangers' captain, Mark Messier, who was expected to return for New York's game against the Blues on Wednesday, did not practice with the team this morning at Rye Playland and did not join the team on its flight to St.
Louis.
Messier, who is suffering from a sprained right wrist, will miss two games, against the Blues and the Sabres in Buffalo on Friday.
He will rejoin the lineup on Monday at the earliest.
After sitting out Sunday's Rangers-Devils game as a precautionary measure and after practicing with the team on Monday, Messier had planned to make the two-game trip with the Rangers.


A House Is Destroyed by Fire on Staten Island


A New President at a Times Co. Unit
The New York Times Company announced yesterday the promotion of Stephen Golden, corporate vice president for forest products operations, to president and general manager of the company's forest products group, effective next Monday.
Mr.
Golden, 46, joined the forest products group in 1984, helping to oversee the purchase of paper and ink for the Times Company's newspapers and magazines.
The company's raw material purchase requirements exceed $300 million annually.
He became vice president for forest products operations in 1990.
He assumed corporate responsibility for health and environmental matters in 1992.


Holyfield Stands on Principle
Evander Holyfield, the widely regarded heavyweight champion, yesterday put principle ahead of a $20 million offer to meet Riddick Bowe in a rematch.
If he accepted the deal, he would have to give up the titles bestowed on him by two sanctioning bodies.
The offer was made Monday night to Hammer, the rap star who has become a Holyfield confidant, by Bowe's manager, Rock Newman.


Consumer Confidence in Economy Is Perking Up
Cheered by better job prospects and rising incomes, consumers are feeling much more confident about the economy than they have in a long while.
The Conference Board confidence index jumped to 80.2 this month, from 71.9 in November, the business research organization reported yesterday.
That followed a similar report by the University of Michigan, which told its clients privately earlier this month that its measure surged to 88.2 in the first half of December, from 81.2 in November.
The Federal Government uses the Michigan figures in its forecasts of economic growth.


A Dream Unfolds for Cotton Shirts
It may not be one of the world's most pressing problems, but Japanese and American companies seem on the verge of a technological breakthrough: cotton shirts that require little or no ironing.
Without so much as a collar touch-up, the shirts are "O.K. to wear even for a formal occasion," said Shizuo Watanabe, an executive at a Japanese company with a popular no-iron process.


Frontier Natural Gas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
ETHAN ALLEN INC., Danbury, Conn., said it was offering customers a credit card that would give them lower interest rates if they exceeded certain spending levels on furniture or home decorations at the company's stores.
HONDO OIL AND GAS CO., Roswell, N.M., said an Amoco Corp. unit would become the operator of its lone drilling project in Colombia by early 1994.


Chinese Couple Hijack Plane to Taiwan
A Chinese couple accompanied by their 11-year-old son today carried off the 10th hijacking this year of a jetliner from China to Taiwan.
A second attempted hijacking from the mainland was foiled in the air by the flight crew, a report on Taiwan state radio said, but Chinese authorities did not confirm that attempt.
The wave of air piracy, the worst in Chinese history, is deeply embarrassing to Beijing's leaders and threatens to undermine the image of stability they are seeking to project to foreign investors.
Aside from the record number of hijackings, five crashes have killed 76 passengers this year.
At least 276 people died in crashes in 1992.


Budget Items Are Vetoed By O'Rourke
In a continuing battle with the county legislature, the Westchester County Executive, Andrew O'Rourke, has vetoed many of the programs that legislators added to his proposed 1994 budget last week.
The vetoes trim $6.3 million from the $948.6 million budget and would reduce the size of any county tax increase.


Music Notes; The Minnesota's Unexpected Choice
Orchestras searching for new music directors sometimes look in unusual corners and occasionally make surprising appointments.
But the Minnesota Orchestra's selection of Eiji Oue, the music director of the Erie (Pa.) Philharmonic, to succeed Edo de Waart has many people in the music world scratching their heads and asking, "Eiji who?" Even Mr.
Oue (his name is pronounced A-jee OO-way) said in a statement issued by the orchestra that he was "absolutely astonished."
Mr.
Oue, a Japanese conductor in his late 30's -- he refuses to give his age, but his Green Card lists him as 37 -- is a protege of Seiji Ozawa and Leonard Bernstein and has by all accounts done great things in Erie since 1991, including tripling the orchestra's audience.
But Minnesota is one of the top dozen American orchestras and was expected to do what major orchestras always do: engage a director with a substantial career and a recognizable name.


Corrections
A brief report by Reuters in some editions of Business Day on Dec. 20, about a French legal decision regarding Yves Saint Laurent's plan to name a perfume Champagne, misstated the action to be taken by Elf Sanofi, which owns Yves Saint Laurent.
Elf Sanofi said the perfume would continue to be sold in France, but without a name; it is not being withdrawn from the French market.


An Immigrant Is Helped by the Neediest Cases Fund
When Ana Marin first set foot on American soil, she could barely see her new country.
It was the middle of the night and she had just carried her infant daughter and young son for miles through the hills that descend into the small towns south of San Diego.
Along with dozens of other Mexicans and Central Americans that night in late 1981, she followed a "coyote," or immigrant smuggler, across the border.
The members of the crossing party, called "pollos," or chickens, by the smugglers, were given no guarantee that the several hundred dollars they had each paid would guarantee their safe passage.


General Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


System Is Likely to Conceal, Study Says
Following are excerpts from the interim report on police corruption released yesterday by the Mollen Commission.
The reluctance to uncover and effectively investigate corruption infected the entire anti-corruption apparatus, from training, supervision and command accountability to investigations and intelligence gathering.
Our investigation revealed an anti-corruption system that was more likely to conceal corruption than uncover it and a department often more interested in the appearance of integrity than its reality.
Oversight of anti-corruption efforts was virtually nonexistent; intelligence-gathering efforts were negligible; corruption investigations were often deliberately limited and prematurely closed and integrity control officers and supervisors were denied the tools needed to uncover corruption and, in practice, played virtually no role in corruption-control efforts.


Scientists Find Ways to Reset Biological Clocks in Dim Winer
THE shroud of darkness that precipitates the winter blues is gradually being lifted by scientists who have found aberrations in the biological clocks and brain chemistry of people who become depressed and lethargic when the days grow short.
The findings have yielded a better understanding of how the brain responds to light and dark, along with new and simpler treatments for winter depression, or seasonal affective disorder.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section on Monday, showing the impact of the arts on the region's economy in 1992, misstated the amount of money represented by the dollar signs.
Each sign represented $50 million, not $50 billion.


Dinkins Looks Forward to a New Life


A Warning From Ryan: 'We're the Best Defense'
Houston quarterback Warren Moon, who has a cracked rib, probably won't play against the Jets at the Astrodome on Sunday.
Anyone who thinks that Moon's injury will translate into a painless victory for the Jets isn't aware of Houston defensive coordinator Buddy Ryan's handiwork.
Ryan's unit will be on hand to assure that any Jet victory will come the hard way, the black-and-blue variety.
Consider that Houston is coming off a 10-7 victory over San Francisco.
The 49ers didn't score until there were 3 minutes 33 seconds left in the third quarter and quarterback Steve Young had been benched in favor of Steve Bono.
Also consider that San Francisco was coming off a 55-17 drubbing of Detroit.


Personal Health
"WINTER is icumen in, Lhude sing Goddamm . . ." Ezra Pound's lament is about more than a mere annoyance with cold, ice and excess clothing for about 10 million Americans who suffer from SAD, the psychiatric syndrome with the all-too-apt acronym that stands for seasonal affective disorder.
For them, the dark days of winter spell months of emotional gloom and doom often accompanied by lethargy and an uncontrollable craving for carbohydrates, resulting in weight gain that makes them feel even worse.
For those with SAD, there is both good news and bad news.
The good news is that the winter solstice has now come and gone, and with each passing day come more minutes of daylight.
The bad news is that January and February are the worst months for people with SAD; although the days are gradually getting longer, these are especially cloudy months.


Surgery Finishes Yankees' Taylor for 1994 Season
Brien Taylor had his potential date with destiny in a Yankee uniform officially interrupted yesterday when the Yankees announced that the marquee pitcher in their farm system had undergone reconstructive surgery on his left shoulder and would miss the 1994 season.
Instead of pitching for Class AAA Columbus this summer, one phone call away from the Yankees, Taylor will be forbidden from even throwing a baseball and will be immersed in rehabilitating his pitching shoulder.


Islanders Shut Out By Disney On Ice
The game was one ignoble advertisement for themselves.
With Nassau Coliseum stuffed full of fans expecting some festive entertainment, with the starless Anaheim Mighty Ducks expansion squad in town and a six-game winning streak at stake, the Islanders wound up looking like sitting ducks on the wrong end of a 3-0 shutout tonight on their home ice.


Jack E. Specter; Publicist, 95
Jack E. Specter, a retired travel publicist in Manhattan and a founder of the American Legion, died on Dec. 20 at the Pasadena Manor Nursing Home in South Pasadena, Fla.
He was 95.
He died of natural causes, said a grand-nephew, Michael Spekter of Chevy Chase, Md.
Mr.
Specter, an ambulance driver during World War I, remained in France after the war and worked as a cameraman and film distributor for Universal Studios in Europe.
He was among the men who gathered in Paris in 1919 and worked to form the American Legion.


Patrick Arrested
Pittsburgh Penguins General Manager CRAIG PATRICK was arrested on drunken driving charges early yesterday.
The police said Patrick was clocked traveling at 63 miles per hour in a 35 m.p.h. zone on Pittsburgh's North Side.
Patrick's blood-alcohol level measured 0.196 percent, Officer JOHN CARLSON said.
The legal limit in Pennsylvania is 0.10 percent.
Patrick was charged with drunken driving and speeding.


Lawrence Eckenfelder; Financial Analyst, 41
Lawrence Eckenfelder, a financial-services analyst working in the San Francisco office of Prudential Securities, died on Saturday at his home in Oakland.
He was 41 years old.
The cause was a heart attack, the company said in New York.


Those Accused in School Elections Report Still Have Rights
To the Editor:
Those who care about New York's public education system are dismayed by the Stancik report, "From Chaos to Corruption: An Investigation Into the 1993 Community School Board Elections." As the report makes clear, the system of voting for school boards in decentralized districts does not work, is liable to corruption and should be changed.


Berlin Journal; Wanted: A Home for 2 Watchtowers, w/History
An ugly two-story border tower from which East German agents surveyed and controlled the tense Checkpoint Charlie crossing, a building that once stood at the very center of world politics, is now on the collector's market.
What's more, it's free to the right bidder.
As recently as five years ago, this tower posed the final barrier for anyone seeking to come west through Checkpoint Charlie, Berlin's best-known crossing.


Dreams of Actress and Environmentalists Collide
The regal Atalaya Mountain, a fresh dusting of snow on its ponderosas and pinons, has remained unscathed by the kinds of mansions that line Beverly Hills and Aspen, though for how long no one knows.
Santa Fe's fathers and mothers could decide that in a week.
For the moment, however, one thing is clear: Atalaya's crown will not become the home of Shirley MacLaine.


Mussels and Duck on the Same Table
THIS month, I am cooking some of my family's favorite foods: mussels, which are readily available and well priced, and duck, which can always be found frozen.
I cook the duck on top of the stove in a simple recipe that my wife says produces the best duck she has ever tasted.
The mussels for the salad are first cooked in a little wine.
Then, they're removed from their shells, combined with a warm potato salad seasoned with a Dijon vinaigrette, and served on salad greens.
The liquid from the mussels is reserved and can be frozen for later use in soups like the classic Billi Bi (a combination of mussel broth, cream and chives that is usually served cold), or the savory mussel and tomato soup in our menu today.
The soup can be served as a first course and the mussel and potato salad kept for another day, or vice versa.


Food Notes
Nonalcoholic Wine  Ariel Vineyards in Napa, Calif., has introduced Celebration, a nonalcoholic sparkling wine made in a softly effervescent style.
Ariel Celebration is rounded and fruity, with a taste of ripe pears, making it suitable both as an aperitif and with desserts of restrained sweetness.
It is around $5 a bottle and is sold in wine shops and fancy food shops.
Napa Valley Olive Oil  Harrison Vineyards in St.
Helena, Calif., in the Napa Valley, has introduced Olio d'Oro, an olive oil made from a blend of mission, manzanillo, lucca, arbequena and frantoio olives cultivated at the vineyard and by other growers in the area.
The olives are cold-pressed in traditional fashion at the winery and packed in slender numbered bottles.
The gold label depicts a gnarled olive tree.
The bright chartreuse oil has a mild, fruity, mellow flavor with hardly any pepper in the aftertaste.
In New York it is sold in a 375-milliliter size (about nine ounces) at Grace's Marketplace, 1237 Third Avenue, at 71st Street, for $13.95; at Mad. 61, 10 East 61st Street, for $15; at Hadleigh's, 1900 Broadway, at 64th Street, for $13.99, and at Fairway Market, 2127 Broadway, at 74th Street, for $10.95.
Gotham Wine Classes  Scott Carney, the manager of the Gotham Bar and Grill and one of only 35 wine experts worldwide to hold the title of master sommelier from the Court of the Master Sommeliers in London, will conduct a series of wine classes at the restaurant, 12 East 12th Street.
Each class, from 1 to 3 P.M. on Jan. 8 and 29 and Feb. 19 and 26, will be open to 35 participants.
Mr.
Carney will talk about choosing and storing wines and will conduct a tasting of wines paired with dishes prepared by the restaurant.
The series is sponsored by Remy Martin cognac.
Each class is $90; for reservations: (212) 620-4020.
Sweeter Lemons  Meyer lemons, the sweeter-tasting, juicier lemons preferred by many pastry chefs on the West Coast, are now being grown for commercial production in California's Central Valley.
Before last year they were mainly a home-gardener's crop.
And now some are arriving in markets in the East.
The season will run for the next six weeks.
The lemons, which are a darker-gold color than regular lemons and have shinier, thinner, less pebbly skins, are $4.95 a pound (about 6 to the pound) at Dean &amp; DeLuca, 560 Broadway, at Prince Street; Balducci's, 424 Avenue of the Americas, at Ninth Street, $2.98 a pound, and $2.75 a pound at Agata &amp; Valentina, 1505 First Avenue, at 79th Street.
Fairway Market, 1214 Anderson Avenue, Fort Lee, N.J., has them for $2.89 a pound.
The lemons are named for Frank Meyer, who worked for the United States Department of Agriculture around the turn of the century.
He found the lemons -- thought to be a cross between a lemon and an orange -- growing near Beijing, and introduced them to California in 1908.
Even though they are less sensitive to cold than other lemons, they were not grown commercially until a new hybrid was developed that was not prone to carry a virus harmful to other citrus.
And they are highly perishable, making them less appealing to commercial growers and shippers than regular lemons.
If you call a store asking about them, the answer might well be, Meyer who?
Ask for the produce manager, who may have a better answer.
Kosher Cooking School  The Institute of Kosher Culinary Arts is a new cooking school featuring demonstrations, lectures and workshops in a range of subjects, including French bistro, Chinese, spa, pasta, pastry, Italian and vegetarian.
It is sponsored by Jem-Prestige, a Kosher caterer.
Classes will be held, beginning in February, at the company's newly redesigned headquarters at the Woodbury Jewish Center, 200 South Woods Road, Woodbury, L.I.
For information about classes and schedules: (516) 942-2005.
Kitchen Slushing  A quick way to make slushy fruit drinks, cocktails and granites is with a new gadget called the Hawaiice shaver.
The plastic unit is operated with a hand-crank that forces the block of frozen juice or fruit puree against the steel blade.
The blade is adjustable for fine to coarse textures.
Ingredients for the slush can be frozen in the plastic mold that is part of the gadget.
One mold makes about four servings.
To make a granite, coarsely shaved slush must be refrozen.
The Hawaiice shaver is $49.95 and is available from the Front Gate catalogue: (800) 626-6488.


It's Done (Cheaply): Giuliani Is Sworn In
Before all the pomp and puffery, before the solemn speeches on the steps of the bunting-draped City Hall and the inaugural bash that follows, Rudolph W. Giuliani took the official oath of office yesterday as the 107th Mayor of New York City -- effective at midnight on New Year's Eve.
And it cost him 15 cents.


Judge Orders Texas Prosecutors To Clarify Indictment of Senator
The Texas prosecutors who have accused Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison of violating ethics laws while she was State Treasurer were told today that they must come up with a clearer explanation of what they say she did wrong.
John F. Onion Jr., a retired appellate judge who is presiding over Mrs.
Hutchison's case, ruled today that four of the five counts in the indictment were so vaguely worded that Mrs.
Hutchinson could not defend herself against them.
He gave prosecutors 10 days to amend the charges, which involve accusations of using state workers and computers for political purposes.


Energy Official Seeks to Assist Victims of Tests
Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary called on the Government yesterday to compensate Americans who were exposed to radiation from human medical experiments that the United States conducted for decades after World War II.
Mrs.
O'Leary said her appeal on behalf of people who were used as subjects in the medical testing was prompted by the Government's long resistance to providing compensation to thousands of people in the Southwest known as "downwinders" -- people who said they or members of their families were harmed by radioactive fallout from open-air testing of atomic bombs in the 1950's and early 1960's.


Review/Film: In the Name of the Father; The Sins of a Son Are Visited on His Father
Anatomy of a riot: early in "In the Name of the Father," the feckless antics of Gerry Conlon (Daniel Day-Lewis), a young Belfast ne'er-do-well in the early 1970's, are seen triggering a serious military confrontation.
As Gerry horses around on a rooftop, stealing scrap metal and wielding a stick guitar-style, English soldiers mistake him for a sniper.
Gerry begins a mad dash away from these authorities, and as he runs through streets and houses, panic erupts everywhere.
Instantly roused for combat, Belfast's citizenry sounds the call to arms.
Women bang trash-can lids on cobblestones; English soldiers in riot gear roll up in armored vehicles; the Irish Republican Army vents its fury at Gerry's sheer stupidity.
Even after the crisis is resolved peacefully, nerves are jittery all around.
In the wake of the kind of incident that has preceded this riot -- the film's quick depiction of an I.R.A. pub bombing in Guildford, England -- such skittishness is painfully easy to understand.


Review/Film; 'Shadowlands,' a Story Of a Spring of Romance In the Autumn of 2 Lives
"Shadowlands" is the most soothing film of the Christmas season, even though it happens to be about tragic loss.
That's because it has been directed, in ripely sentimental fashion, by Richard Attenborough, an uncommonly reliable film maker on subjects both large and small.
Most of Mr.
Attenborough's subjects ("Gandhi," "Chaplin," "Young Winston") are more grandiose than this one, yet all of his films can be counted on for the same homey predictability.
When a painting of an English valley is revealed in "Shadowlands" to be a relic left over from a lonely boyhood, rest easy: of course the real valley will be visited before the film is over.
As the autumnal romance that coaxes Anthony Hopkins out of his genteel shell, inviting the audience to join him in a spectacularly good cry, "Shadowlands" actually has lots of old-fashioned virtues to recommend it.
Here is Mr.
Hopkins giving an amazingly versatile and moving performance, shifting the light in those knowing blue eyes to reveal endless shadings between delight and sorrow.
Here is Debra Winger, dying bravely in one more movie yet managing gracefully to avoid maudlin histrionics.
Here is Oxford, filmed on a sizable budget, most of which has been spent on tweeds.
Here is a screenplay in which Mr.
Hopkins gets to say both "beastly" and "balderdash," though not in the same scene.


No Headline
We find as shocking the incompetence and the inadequacies of the department to police itself. -- MILTON MOLLEN, chairman of a commission that issued a harshly critical report of the New York Police Department.  [ A1:6. ]


Review/Film; The Fish Tell No Tales In This Lost Continent
The French director Luc Besson is best known in the United States for "La Femme Nikita," the fast, stylish 1990 film about a punk murderer turned glamorous government assassin.
But it's time to remember that he also made "The Big Blue," a hit in France and nowhere else, which told the muddled story of a diver whose love for a dolphin surpassed his attraction to Rosanna Arquette.
"Atlantis," which opens today at Film Forum, comes from the man who thought that diver made the right choice.
The nearly wordless film is 75 minutes of underwater photography: no dialogue, no drama, no humans, only fish after fish after fish.
Some of them, filmed over two and a half years and two world tours from the Galapagos to the North Pole, are spectacular and rare.
There is a large, elegant sea snake with black-and-white stripes from New Caledonia.
A giant manta ray glides through the Pacific and across the screen looking like a flat spaceship with wings.
Sea lions from the Galapagos do loop the loops.
"Atlantis" suggests a peaceable kingdom beneath the sea, until the end.
Then some ominous scenes hint otherwise as the camera stares into sharks' open mouths and along rows of killer teeth.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a panel investigating corruption in the New York City Police Department misstated the position of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association in the recent mayoral campaign.
Although individual union officials supported Rudolph W. Giuliani, the union did not endorse either candidate.
The article also referred incorrectly to advertisements placed by the union.
They criticized Mayor David N. Dinkins, but did not express support for Mr.
Giuliani.


Review/Music; More From the Black Sheep of the Bach Family
As Peter Schickele's scholarship enters its mature phase, his annual concerts of P. D. Q. Bach's newly discovered and unfortunately remembered works have become more and more grand in scope.
On Monday night in Carnegie Hall, Mr.
Schickele (a k a Professor Schickele) sampled works from each part of that justly neglected composer's life: the Initial Plunge Period, the Soused or "Brown Bag" Period ("more like a coma than a period") and the Contrition Period ("By then it was too late").
By now too, Mr.
Schickele, who moonlights as a "musicolological" professor at "the U. of S.N.D. at H." (the University of Southern North Dakota at Hoople), has an almost magisterial perspective on the life of his sorry specialty.
He is able to learnedly digress on everything from P. D. Q.'s technique of "unintentional modulation" (in which the composer "accidentally" slips from one key to another) to the origins of his habitual quotation of works by his betters ("P. D. Q. Bach was the only major composer who worked on tracing paper").


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about the effect of hurricane damage on insurance companies' handling of homeowner policies misstated the first name of the Florida Insurance Commissioner in some editions.
He is Tom Gallagher, not Ted.


Dow and S.&amp; P. Edge Up to New Records
Stocks inched higher yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average and the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index both touching new highs for a second day.
But in contrast to the situation on Monday, the records set yesterday were modest achievements.
The Dow closed at 3,793.77, up 84-hundredths of a point, while the S.&amp; P. 500 index closed at 470.94, up four-tenths of a point.


NATO Issue: Rightist Vote Helps Russia
The sizable vote for an ultranationalist in Russia's parliamentary elections two weeks ago is providing the Government with a further weapon in its campaign against the extension of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to Central and Eastern Europe.
An eastward extension of NATO would be just the sort of humiliation that would drive wounded Russian pride further toward the far rightists led by Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, says the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev.


CHRONICLE
Bye, bye Betsy: More than 300 of BETSY GOTBAUM'S friends and colleagues at New York City's Department of Parks and Recreation, who are known as "parkies," will gather tonight at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park to bid her farewell the department's Commissioner.
The party was originally planned to celebrate Ms.
Gotbaum's four years on the job, said STEWART DESMOND, a Parks Department spokesman, "but there was some thought it might turn into a farewell."


Suit Over Chagall Watercolor Is Settled Day After Trial Starts
Just a day after it began, the trial over ownership of a Chagall painting ended yesterday in a victory of sorts for the Solomon R. Guggenheim museum.
The collector who has the work will keep it, but she and two art dealers will compensate the museum for the work, a person involved in the case said.
All parties to the settlement insisted on keeping the precise conditions confidential, but in a deal struck hours earlier, the museum was to be paid $212,000.
That deal fell through when the lawyers who were trying the case in State Supreme Court in Manhattan discovered that reporters had learned the terms.s


A Versatile Medley For Holiday Leftovers
A VERSATILE recipe calling for pasta, beans and assorted vegetables is the perfect place to stash the remains of a smoked turkey from the holidays.
And even if you didn't happen to receive a smoked turkey as a gift, smoked turkey breast is readily available at the supermarket.
If you prefer smoked chicken, smoked ham or smoked almost anything else, it will marry well with the rest of the ingredients.


Politics of Identity
To the Editor:
Edmund White says in "The Politics of Identity" (Op-Ed., Dec. 21) that he heard "an African-American lesbian" writing student say that "she heard Ishmael Reed say that black women didn't have the right to write about black men."


India Booming as a Leader In Software for Computers
Staring at his computer, his thumb drumming on his desk, Mohan Kumar tapped characters onto a screen to produce bits of the outline of the program for a vast global satellite telephone system being built by Motorola to change the face of mobile communications.
"India has a lot of talented engineers, but they aren't always doing the most advanced work," Mr.
Kumar said.
"Here we are on the cutting edge."


Matt Williams Reaches No. 7 on the Salary List
The San Francisco Giants can't blame Will Clark if he feels they have made him feel left out.
The Giants reached agreement yesterday on a five-year, $30.75 million contract with Matt Williams, who becomes baseball's seventh highest-paid player based on a $6.1 million yearly average.
Williams, the Giants' third baseman, could have been a free agent after next season.
Six weeks ago, they re-signed their free-agent second baseman, Robby Thompson, to a three-year, $12 million contract.


Nominee at State Dept.: An Upbeat 'Friend of Bill'
Friends of Strobe Talbott like to recall a moment last April in an Oregon hotel, a few minutes after the Senate overwhelmingly confirmed him as Ambassador at Large to the countries that once formed the Soviet Union.
While the Vice President, the White House chief of staff and the national security adviser looked on in surprise, the 47-year-old former journalist triumphantly embraced two of his fellow Rhodes scholars from Oxford University -- the Secretary of Labor, Robert B. Reich, and the President of the United States, Bill Clinton.
It was a moment full of self-congratulation, perhaps even self-satisfaction.


Osborne Won't Let Specter of Losses Past Dim His Teams' Glory
Tom Osborne smiled a thin smile when the word "obsession" entered the conversation.
Bobby Bowden, the coach of the Florida State Seminoles, can stand, and laugh, and admit he has become obsessed with the notion of a first national championship as his team prepares to meet Nebraska in the Orange Bowl.
Osborne, the Nebraska coach, said he did not share those thoughts, apparently because of practicality more than defiance.


Executive Changes
ALZA CORP., Palo Alto, Calif., a maker of patches that deliver drugs through the skin, named Bruce Cozadd chief financial officer and Adrian Gerber executive vice president of commercial development.
CONTINENTAL RISK MANAGEMENT SERVICES, New York, a unit of Continental Insurance, named E. Randall Clouser executive vice president in charge of sales and marketing.


Intel
Shares of Intel, the semiconductor manufacturer, rose again yesterday following a rating upgrade by Goldman, Sachs based on Intel's plan to ship more than six million of its next-generation Pentium computer chips next year.
The company also said last week that it expected to cut prices on its chips by up to 18 percent in the second quarter of 1994.


Refugee Convoy Renews Effort to Escape Sarajevo


Ex-Burnett Official Moving to Y.&amp; R.
John C. (Jack) Kraft, former vice chairman and chief operating officer of the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago, has been named executive vice president and chief administrative officer of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York.
At Y.&amp; R., Mr.
Kraft, 52, will assume some responsibilities that were held by Alan Sheldon, who was executive vice president and general manager until he moved to London to become chief financial officer there.
Mr.
Kraft will report to Alex Kroll, Y.&amp; R.'s chairman, and Peter Georgescu, its president and chief executive, overseeing business, fiscal and management policies, and operations.


Wine Talk
There is a fish store at 17 Place de la Madeleine that may be the most luxurious one in the world.
The store, Caviar Kaspia, opened for business in 1922, just in time to serve the first wave of White Russians fleeing west to escape the terrors of the Marxist revolution.
Those were the days in Paris when Romanovs drove taxicabs.
But not all the emigres were impoverished by the revolution; Swiss bank accounts are not a recent phenomenon.
Many of the old czarist elite continued to live well in exile.
And what, for those displaced nobles, could recall the old days, even better than tremulous balalaikas, than the noblest of Russian dishes, caviar.


Woman Is Charged In Abuse of Children
A woman was arrested on child abuse charges last night after a fire broke out at her apartment in Union City, N.J., and the police discovered her six young children left alone.
The fire began in the second floor apartment of the six-family building about 4 P.M. and was brought under control about 6:30 P.M., said Detective Sgt.
Brian Barrett of the Union City Police.
None of the children and none of the neighbors were injured.


U.S. Court Says Amtrak Isn't Obliged To Show Art
A Federal appeals court ruled yesterday that Amtrak could not be forced to display a photo montage in Pennsylvania Station that criticizes a beer company's support for conservative causes.
In a 2-1 decision, the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit overturned a lower court ruling that ordered Amtrak to accommodate a Manhattan artist who wanted to rent billboard space in the station to display the panoramic artwork.
The appellate court held that Amtrak is a private rather than governmental entity and thus is not subject to First Amendment strictures that bar the Government from limiting free speech.


Florio Rejects Bill Limiting Sex Education
Gov.
Jim Florio today rejected a bill that would require school districts to teach sexual abstinence as the only reliable way to prevent pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS, calling it a "political intrusion" on local school decisions.
Mr.
Florio did not veto the bill outright but recommended amendments that would remove the mandate to stress abstinence.
The effect of the Governor's action, called a conditional veto, would allow local schools, with the input of parents, to continue to design the curriculum for the family life courses and those dealing with AIDS prevention.


Top Prizes Are Shared In Dual-Piano Contest
Two piano duos were awarded the top prize in the 1993 Murray Dranoff International Two-Piano Competition held this month in Miami.
Irina and Julia Elkina, twin sisters from St.
Petersburg, Russia, and Noriko Ishikawa of Japan and Manfred Kratzer of Germany shared the combined first and second prizes of $10,000 and $5,000.
The $2,500 third prize went to Elizabeth Laich of Canada and Marcel Bergmann of Germany.
The Elkina duo also won a $1,000 award for the best performance of a work commissioned for the competition, Paul Schoenfield's "Taschyag."


Oxboro Medical International reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7 SOLUTION SOUGHT IN THE MIDEAST  Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization struggled to resolve their conflicting proposals in an effort to solve an impasse and enable Israel to withdraw from the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
A1  INDIA'S SILICON VALLEY  In the Bangalore area of India, American companies are taking advantage of the availability of well-trained but low-paid Indian computer engineers.
A1  THE AGE AND PREGNANCY DEBATE  Three days after a 59-year-old woman gave birth to twins in London, the debate over the ethics of whether there should be an age limit on pregnancy has heated up.
A1  WEIGHTY ROLE AT STATE  A sense of destiny and of triumph bigger than the job itself accompany the elevation of Strobe Talbott, an old friend of President Clinton's, to Deputy Secretary of State.
A6  INDEFATIGABLE BALKAN MEDIATOR  Lord Owen, the longtime mediator in the Balkan crisis on behalf of the European Community, has been indefatigable in his efforts, though recently he has shown the strain of some discouraging moments.
A3  RUSSIA PRESSES NATO STANCE  The strong showing of a Russian nationalist in parliamentary elections has given the Government a weapon in its fight against expanding the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the east.
A6  Saudi Arabia's first representative council will meet.
A5  A Chinese couple and their child hijacked a plane to Taiwan.
A7  Berlin Journal: Communist guardhouses need a new home.
A4  Latin America awaits the creation of a free-trade hemisphere.
D2 National A8, 12, D24 PAYING RADIATION VICTIMS  Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary urged compensation for Americans who were exposed to radiation from experiments on humans conducted by the Government during the cold war.
A1  AN ACTRESS RETREATS  Having raised the ire of New Mexico politicians, environmentalists, hikers, bikers and American Indians, Shirley MacLaine dropped plans to build a house atop a regal mountain just outside Santa Fe.
A8  SENATOR'S INDICTMENT  A judge told the prosecutors who have accused Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson of violating ethics laws while she was Texas's treasurer to amend an indictment to give a clearer explanation for the charges.
A8  U.S.
SUES FOR DISABLED  The Justice Department filed what it said was the first lawsuit ever brought by the United States against a municipal or state government under the 1990 Americans With Disabilities Act.
The case concerns pensions for police officers and firefighters in Aurora, Ill.
A8  MILESTONE IN SPENDING  The Commerce Department said health care spending in the United States would, for the first time, exceed $1 trillion next year and account for a record 15 percent of the nation's total output of goods and services.A12  CAJOLING IN VAIN  On a bitterly cold night, Carmelo Vargas cruises the hiding places of downtown Chicago trying to persuade the homeless into the city's shelters.
But he knows his effort is likely to be a failed mission of mercy.
D24  Education B6  Piano teachers try computers to keep their students interested.
Metro Digest B1 REPORT SCOLDS POLICE  In a harshly critical report, a mayoral panel asserted that the New York City Police Department had failed at every level to uproot corruption and had instead tolerated a culture that fostered misconduct and concealed lawlessness by police officers.
A1  6 ARE KILLED IN BOMBINGS  A series of bombs exploded in four towns in western New York State last night, killing at least six people and injuring several others in what appeared to be an attack on members of an extended family, law enforcement officials said.
A1  GIULIANI ARTS POLICY  Describing the arts as important to New York's economic future, the incoming Giuliani administration plans to offer more support to the premier cultural institutions, possibly by cutting aid to less-established arts groups.
A1  UNSPOILED ISLAND PURCHASED  Robins Island, 445 unspoiled acres in the Great Peconic Bay, was purchased for $11 million by a Wall Street trader who says he plans to use it as a family compound.
For years, Suffolk County has been considering purchasing the land.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-22  A surprising choice to head the Minnesota Orchestra.
C11  Film: "In the Name of the Father," with Daniel Day-Lewis.
C11  "Shadowlands." C11  "Atlantis." C19  Music: P. D. Q. Bach.
C19  Dance: Condensed "Nutcracker." C18  Books: The Band's story, as told by Levon Helm.
C22  Television: A New Year's Eve party on Sesame Street.
C22  The Living Section C1-8  Enjoying caviar: Knowing when to stop . . . and what to look for.
C1  Health Page C10  Scientists get a better understanding of seasonal affective disorder.
Sports B7-12  Baseball: Yankees' Taylor to miss 1994 season.
B7  Basketball: Nets upset Knicks.
B7  Columns: Vecsey on Brien Taylor B7  Football: Three Giants named to Pro Bowl team.
B7  Obituaries D18-19  William L. Shirer, author and journalist during World War II.
D18  Editorials/Op-Ed A10-11  Editorials  Unfinished bank reform.
Still out to change Japan.
New Yorkers: cooling their heels.
End blackball power in Trenton.
Letters  Boyden Gray: When currencies collapse.
Stephen Donaldson: The rape crisis behind bars.
Clinton Bailey: The Bedouins' eviction notice.
Neediest Cases B2  Chronicle B2 Bridge C18 Crossword C22


Executive Buys $11-Million Island Haven
Roughly 15 years ago, Louis Moore Bacon was a hired hand on a charter fishing boat out of Montauk.
As he passed Robins Island, 445 unspoiled acres of forest and bluffs in the Great Peconic Bay, he could only dream about what it was like.
Today, Mr.
Bacon, 37, and now an immensely successful trader on Wall Street, bought the island for $11 million, ending a long-running dispute between Suffolk County, private developers and the previous owners over the fate of one of the most valuable undeveloped islands on the Eastern Seaboard.


Paris Business Forms Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Why Owen, the Balkan Peacemaker, Soldiers On
Those who know him say that when Lord Owen, the indefatigable mediator in the Bosnian war, stepped in front of the cameras in Brussels last week to announce yet another recess in the peace talks and yet another cease-fire that was being broken even as he spoke, there was a hint of frustration, even gloom, in his demeanor.
"Frankly, we're unconvinced this cease-fire is serious," he said forlornly, ticking off the complications so far that day: fighting in central Bosnia, heavy shelling of Sarajevo, and the hijacking of an armored personnel carrier with its crew of three British soldiers (later released).
He appealed to "the political leaders" not to let this cease-fire become "a joke" like all the others.


Housekeeper Doesn't Matter at Pentagon
To the Editor:
The public outrage over Zoe Baird's failure to pay taxes for an illegal alien housekeeper was relevant to the position for which Ms.
Baird was nominated.
As Attorney General, she would have overseen immigration legislation.
The average American should be able to assume the person taking this office knows the relevant laws.
If Zoe Baird was unfamiliar with the legislation, we should question her qualifications.
If she knowingly broke this law, she should not oversee immigration laws.


Sailor Comes Ashore
JOHN QUINN, lost overboard for five hours in his 13th Sydney-to-Hobart Australian yacht race, was brought into the small fishing port of Eden, Australia, yesterday.
He was aboard the yacht that picked him up after he spent a night treading water in waves of up to 23 feet, which were whipped by 92 mile-per-hour winds.
"I got a bit desperate toward the end," said Quinn, 49.


Louis Soutendijk, Dutch Economist And Diplomat, 83
Louis R. W. Soutendijk, a retired Wall Street banker and former financial counselor to the Dutch Embassy in Washington, died on Dec. 21 in Hale Hospital in Haverhill, Mass.
He was 83 and had lived in Haverhill since moving from Larchmont, N.Y., about five years ago.
The cause was pneumonia following complications from a stroke, his family said.


Sun Television &amp; Appliances Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


...And Knowing What to Look For
"THERE are some real caviar connoisseurs in New York City," said Rod Mitchell, a seafood and caviar dealer in Portland, Me.
His company, Browne Trading, sells mostly to restaurants, but he was talking about discerning private clients who order generous tins of caviar week in and week out.
They do not wait for New Year's Eve to splurge and eat a bit of caviar.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; NBC is charging $30,000 a second for Super Bowl ads, and they're nearly all sold out.
"ONE Mississippi." To say those two words, or anything else that takes up one second of commercial time, during NBC's broadcast of Super Bowl XXVIII will cost an advertiser $30,000.
Could any 30-second commercial be worth a record $900,000, the equivalent of 30 people's annual salary?


Divided by a Diatribe; College Speech Ignites Furor Over Race
A student-sponsored speech by a Nation of Islam minister that attacked whites, homosexuals and Jews in mocking and often cruel ways has ignited a bitter debate at Kean College, a state school struggling to achieve racial diversity and multicultural scholarship.
The speech on campus last month has led to deepening tensions between black and Jewish faculty members and an exchange of recriminations between the college president, Dr.
Elsa Gomez, and the New Jersey Chancellor for Higher Education, Dr.
Edward D. Goldberg.


Sports of The Times; Brien Taylor Should Study Koufax
THEY were so patient with him, too.
That is the joke.
Brien Taylor is not even a footnote in the Baseball Encyclopedia because the Yankees have been uncharacteristically professional.
They gave him the $1.55 million while George Steinbrenner was sitting out a two-year suspension, so for a few years there was a semblance of professionalism to the Yankees.
Let the kid develop.
Give him time.
Don't expose him to the fans and the press.
And keep him away from Molitor and Olerud and Griffey and Ripken, too.


Review/Dance; 'The Nutcracker' in Condensed but Classical Form
Little Clara bops the Mouse King on the head with a pillow in the condensed version of "The Nutcracker" that the New York Theater Ballet, a chamber company, is presenting through Friday.
The season's first performance, at Gould Hall (55 East 59th Street, Manhattan) on Sunday afternoon, looked somewhat under-rehearsed.
But the originality of this production, choreographed 10 years ago by Keith Michael, managed to shine through.


Metropolitan Diary
I MUST RETURN YOUR GIFT  Thank you very much sir,  But I must return your gift.
Per my town's collection schedule  I can't get rid of it.
This particular partridge in a pear tree  I do not reject in haste,  But the partridge will be garbage,  While the tree will be yard waste.
Garbage goes out on Tuesday nights,  Yard waste, the night before,  And the partridge and the pear tree  Must be disassembled on the floor.
The batteries stored until the town's O.K.,  The box de-styrofoamed,  So if you want my affections,  Please, dear sir,  Do keep your gift at home.
MARILYN A. GELMAN Dear Diary:
It's Tuesday, Dec. 21.
Tonight I'm going to a Christmas party.
This morning I bought a disposable camera -- 27 pictures -- and all day long I've been shooting my colleagues.
I'll save some film for tonight's party, especially since I heard that Lauren Bacall might be there.
Last year she went to the same party and sang a song.
What a treat.
I can actually be photographed with the woman who taught a whole generation how to whistle.
Bogie's love!
Gracious, the excitement is building.
Party starts at 6.
I plan to take some more pictures there but I'm careful to make sure there's at least one left for Lauren.
Now it's 7:40 and I say: "Forget it. I'm leaving." Indeed, I have only one picture left.
Two acquaintances, John and Connie, catch me on the way out and say, "George, take our picture." What the heck.
Lauren is a no-show.
I take the picture and on my way out, in walks Lauren.
So now my Kodak moment of Lauren Bacall is a pictue of John and Connie.
GEORGE T. MARENTIS Sign, spotted by Jim Fragale, in an apartment elevator on West 72d Street:
FOUND IN ELEVATOR  ONE UGLY EARRING  Call Don at this number . . .
IN RESPONSE TO A GREETING CARD FROM OUR STATEN ISLAND NEWSPAPER CARRIER  As long as we count on you  To drive by at the dawn,  Bring our blue-bagged newspaper  and toss it on the lawn.
Or underneath the hedge, perhaps,  Or way outside the gate.  (We found one in the ivy  bearing news six months too late.)  So thanks, Marcella, for your card.
It's nice to learn your name.
I hope the gift that I enclose  Will help improve your aim.
Your customer, SUZANNE BERNSTEIN
The scene: The Vivian Beaumont Theater, Lincoln Center.
Time: First-act intermission of "Abe Lincoln in Illinois."
The ladies' room line is long and slow moving.
When the second-act bell rings it has barely progressed.
"Aren't you upset that we'll miss some of Act 2?" a woman asks Phyllis Myslik.
Ms. Myslik smiles. "No," she says. "I know how it will all turn out."
"You've seen this play before?" the woman asks.
The time is morning; the place a Madison Avenue bus, which Robert Clark, a freelance writer in town from Eastchester, N.Y., boards at 44th Street.
Even before he deposits the required coins and the driver wishes him a Merry Christmas, Mr.
Clark senses that this is not your usual city bus.
Indeed!
Garlands of glistening red, white and green tinsel and silvery icicles are wrapped around the poles.
Christmas cards and Santa posters are everywhere, great care obviously taken to make certain they do not block the familiar ads for cigarettes, hemorrhoid remedies and the like.
Crepe paper bells -- the kind that open up -- are everywhere, swinging to and fro with the rhythm of the traffic.
Something is stranger still: none of the passengers seem to notice!
Not the decorations nor the carols coming from a transistor radio.
The passengers are simply staring into space.
No one says a word.
As for Mr.
Clark, he is awestruck and finds the Christmas bus more fun than F.A.O.
Schwarz.
He tells the driver so on his way out.
"Thank you," the driver says.
"You're the first passenger to say anything." They wish each other happy holidays; the doors close and the bus goes on its way up Madison Avenue.


Gertrude Blom, 92, Long a Chronicler Of Mayan Cultures
Gertrude Blom, a Swiss-born sociologist and photographer who spent five decades documenting the Mayan cultures of southern Mexico, died on Thursday in San Cristobal de las Casas, Mexico.
She was 92.
An associate of Mrs.
Blom told Reuters the cause was pneumonia, secondary to heart disease.


Using New Tools to Jazz Up Piano Lessons
When Marguerite Miller was learning to play the piano in the 1930's, her weekly lessons were as rigid and predictable as a metronome.
She plunked out scales, chords and tedious exercises in music theory while an unsmiling teacher stood nearby.
It was enough to make a budding pianist abandon the instrument before she mastered Beethoven's "Fur Elise."


Jefferson Savings &amp; Loan Assn. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giuliani May Shift Arts Financing To New York's Larger Institutions
Describing the arts as an important element in New York's economic future, the incoming Giuliani administration plans to offer more support to the city's premier cultural institutions, possibly by cutting city aid to other less-established arts groups.
John S. Dyson, Rudolph W. Giuliani's deputy mayor for economic development and finance, said he would review the current roster of more than 431 arts groups that are getting $87.3 million this year in city assistance, to see how the administration might channel more aid to the more renowned institutions that attract tourist revenues.





Fighting Reservoir Geese and Gulls With Sound
Flash!
Boom!
The New York City navy swung into action, and the enemy literally flew out of sight.
The navy is 10 boats with outboard motors and one Hovercraft, deployed on the 30-billion-gallon Kensico Reservoir here, the crucial nexus of the city's water supply system.
The enemy is thousands of Canada geese and ring-billed gulls that, in the last few years, have made the reservoir their winter home.


Ireland Sees Nothing Heroic About the I.R.A.; On Giving It Back
To the Editor:
There seems an accepted truth pervading your newspaper that Northern Ireland represents a British colony on foreign soil.
Fair enough.
But Americans ought to be consistent.
Alaska is part of Canada, right?
Give it back.
Who cares what the population thinks.
GORDON STEWART  Guilford, Conn., Dec. 17, 1993


When Currencies Collapse
The big trade agreements of the past few months have prompted rejoicing in the United States, Latin America, Western Europe and Asia.
But they will be of little value to the former Soviet republics and Eastern Europe, where the growing economic disparity with the rest of the world will sow the seeds of enormous regional violence if it is not corrected soon.
The key to the economic plight of these nations is all too easy to overlook: the terrible instability of their currencies and the great difficulty of converting them to other currencies.
Yet if the U.S. and the rest of world ignore the currency problems of the old Soviet bloc, we will be repeating the very mistakes that led to World War II -- and forgetting the lessons of the 1940's, which not only corrected these mistakes but also laid the basis for a world trading system and for the collapse of the Soviet empire.


Perrine G. Rockafellow; Tennis Coach, 92
Perrine G. (Perry) Rockafellow, a longtime coach of tennis at Colgate University and a national indoor doubles champion in 1928 and 1930, died last Thursday at the Falmouth Nursing Home in Maine.
He was 92.


Hondo Oil &amp; Gas Co.  reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


I.R.S. Raises Its Estimate of Tax Cheating
Americans cheat the Government out of about $150 billion a year in taxes -- enough to cover three-fifths of the Federal budget deficit -- the Internal Revenue Service said today.
This is far more than it estimated as recently as last month.
In an appearance before Congress in November, Margaret Milner Richardson, the I.R.S.
Commissioner appointed by President Clinton, put the "tax gap" at some $119 billion.
But now that the agency has widened its net beyond income taxes -- mainly adding payroll levies and excise levies on items like gasoline, guns, luxury cars and fishing rods -- it has come up with the higher figure.


Tranzonic Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Review/Television; Monsters and Children Welcome at This Bash
Wanting to give children their own New Year's Eve bash, Children's Television Workshop has collaborated with several international partners on a special hourlong edition of "Sesame Street" that ends with a countdown -- learn those numbers, kids -- to midnight.
But WNET/Channel 13, its programming decisions increasingly askew, will be showing "Sesame Street Stays Up Late! A Monster New Year's Eve Party" tonight at 8.
Parents who wish to spare their children pointless confusion can wait until the real New Year's Eve, when WNYC/Channel 31 will broadcast the program at 8 p.m.
Youngsters already have enough problems with television.
Pushing as many multicultural buttons as possible, this "Sesame Street" project travels, via the Monster News Network with Elmo the Muppet as anchor, to Mexico, Portugal, Israel, Germany and Norway, countries that produce their own versions of "Sesame Street," and to Japan, where the American show is used to teach English.
Each country's holiday customs are on display -- pinatas in Mexico, for instance, and Portugal's 12 grapes carrying 12 wishes.
In Israel, of course, it's noted that the Jewish New Year was three months ago.


Ireland Sees Nothing Heroic About the I.R.A.; Real Concerns
To the Editor:
Although Sean Cronin's Dec. 17 letter contains information that would be common knowledge to anyone who has studied the history of "Ulster," it lacks some important information.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Michigan
The Wolverines, the nation's top team with a 16-1-1 record, will be aiming for their sixth straight Great Lakes Invitational championship when that tournament opens tonight in Detroit's Joe Louis Arena.
The opponent will be Notre Dame (7-7-2), whom Michigan trounced by 13-2 on Oct. 30.
In the second game, Michigan State (9-5-3) will meet Michigan Tech (5-10-4), with victors and losers playing again tomorrow night.


Books of The Times; A Member of the Band Recalls Its Glory Days
This Wheel's on Fire Levon Helm and the Story of the Band  By Levon Helm with Stephen Davis  Illustrated. 320 pages.
William Morrow &amp; Company. $22.
The tale of the Band is a counterculture version of the classic show-business tale in which gritty, earnest nobodies, driven by the need to sing or play or dance or act, work valiantly year after year until one day an all-powerful producer spots them, plucks them out of the small-time and sets them on the road to fame.
That the tale, as told by Levon Helm in "This Wheel's on Fire," is still worth hearing has a lot to do with the fact that Mr.
Helm wanted to make good rock-and-roll more than he wanted to be a solo-driven rock superstar.


Michael Callen, Singer and Expert On Coping With AIDS, Dies at 38
Michael Callen, a writer and singer who embodied for a dozen years the possibility of long-term survival with AIDS, died of the disease Monday night at Midway Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 38 years old and lived in West Hollywood, Calif.
Mr.
Callen was the author of "Surviving AIDS" (HarperCollins, 1990), a founder of the People With AIDS Coalition and the Community Research Initiative in New York, and a member of the Flirtations, an a cappella group to which he contributed what The Los Angeles Times called "an upper register that Joan Sutherland would surely envy."


The Nets Go Over the River and Into the Victory Column
John Starks tried to be a hero. He ended up feeling like a heel.
Starks missed two ill-advised 3-point shots during the final 70 seconds of last night's game, and the Knicks lost a 5-point lead in the final minute and were stunned by the Nets, 97-95, at Madison Square Garden.


Corrections
A dance review yesterday about a performance by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater at City Center on Sunday misidentified the dancer in the solo "Love Songs." He was Andre Tyson, not Desmond Richardson.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
American International Group, which provided insurance for Prudential in its largest limited partnerships, is said to be investigating whether to contest payment of any proceeds to the firm for insurance claims arising from settlements of fraud actions brought by partnership investors.  [ Page D1. ]


Fire in Long Island Kills 29 Horses


Mossette Keyzer-Andre, 90, Philanthropist
Mossette Keyzer-Andre, a benefactor of hospitals and the arts, died on Saturday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
A former resident of West Hartford, Conn., she was 90 and lived in Palm Beach.
A native of Philadelphia, Mrs.
Keyzer-Andre graduated from the Columbia University School of Optometry in 1923 and was licensed to practice in New York State.
In 1928 she married Louis Morganstern and lived with him in West Hartford until his death in 1972.


60-Minute Gourmet: Reminiscences And a Goodbye
IT may be difficult for some readers to remember, but back in November 1976, when the 60-Minute Gourmet appeared in the first Living Section of The New York Times, the notion of preparing an entire home-cooked meal in less than an hour was formidable.
Today, with so much time-saving equipment available and the predilection of Americans for simpler, lighter fare, meals in half that time are almost routine.
This column is the final installment of a 17-year journey for me, one that has seen my style of cooking -- and that of America's -- change in ways that I never imagined back then.
The early 60-Minute Gourmet recipes were decidedly French in style; in recent years they were just as likely to be Italian, Greek, Moroccan, American or some hybrid.


End Blackball Power in Trenton
The veto power of New Jersey state senators over gubernatorial appointees has now survived a challenge in the State Supreme Court.
That was not surprising; judges rarely rule on legislative procedure.
But the procedure in question -- "senatorial courtesy" -- is nonetheless inexcusable.
New Jersey governors have extraordinary appointive power, subject to Senate approval of each nominee.
But a single senator -- from the nominee's home county -- can kill the appointment and, what's more, do it secretly.
That is what "senatorial courtesy" is all about.
Home-county senators simply withhold approval and, if they choose, tell no one and explain nothing.
Without their approval, the Senate drops the appointment and it dies.


DF&amp;R Restaurants (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


AT LUNCH WITH Ron Silver; Lights, Camera, Action! Ideas, Activism, Democracy!
RON SILVER sits in the vaulting Bauhaus splendor of the Four Seasons, his warm and intelligent eyes engaging a lunch partner but darting every so often to the table nearby where Henry A. Kissinger is dining.
Mr.
Silver, the actor, union leader and public policy poster boy, will be part of a panel discussion on foreign policy at the Council on Foreign Relations the next night, and he can't help wondering whether the former Secretary of State will be there.
"He's leaving," Ron the S. says suddenly, acknowledging what seems to be a wave in his direction from Henry the K., smoothing his soft brown hair and half rising from his seat for an anticipated greeting.
But Mr.
Kissinger leaves without stopping, and Mr.
Silver sits down disappointed and a bit sheepish, like the earnest Chinese studies graduate student he once was and seems determined to remain.


Still Out to Change Japan
After five bruising months in office, Japan's charismatic new Prime Minister, Morihiro Hosokawa, has lost some of his initial sparkle.
But it is too soon to count him out.
Japanese hopes for more democratic, less corrupt and more consumer-oriented politics still ride on his shoulders.
So do America's hopes for easier relations with its most important economic partner and chief Asian ally.


Eggs of the Century
To the Editor:
The argument about the proper ending of the 20th century also took place at its beginning.
Mary Emma Woolley began her tenure as president of Mount Holyoke College on Jan. 1, 1901.
That, she insisted, was the first day of a new century, not Jan. 1, 1900.
Prof.
Henrietta Hooker, who agreed, presented her with two new-laid eggs for her breakfast and a note that said, "Some 19th-century eggs for a 20th-century breakfast."


Canada Backs Its U.N. Role In Bosnia Despite Incident
Canada's Defense Ministry said today that it deplored an episode in Bosnia last week in which 11 Canadian members of a United Nations force were taken hostage, kicked and shot at, but the Ministry said Canada's support for the United Nations operation remains firm.
Defense Minister David Collenette said in an interview with Canadian Press that he was "most concerned" about what happened in the episode on Dec. 22 in which Canadian forces were disarmed and held for nearly an hour by Bosnian Serb forces.


Beta Well Service Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


William L. Shirer, Author, Is Dead at 89
William L. Shirer, the author of "The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich" and a foreign correspondent whose pioneering live trans-Atlantic radio broadcasts on the eve of World War II helped inform Americans about Nazi Germany, died yesterday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 89 years old and lived in Lenox, Mass.
His daughter Inga Dean of Lenox said he had been hospitalized since Dec. 5 with heart ailments, The Associated Press reported.


What If Almost Anybody Could Be on Television?
THERE may be some people who find the time between Christmas and New Year's delightful, but then there are no doubt some people who look forward to bunions.
In the inter-revel period, people work but they don't really work; they play but they don't really play.
Mostly they wait for the ball to come down.
Mostly they wait for amnesty.
If you have to get the flu, this is the best time to get it.
You will miss nothing.
But what if you stay healthy?
What's to be done?


Suspected in 3 Deaths, Cold Strains Shelters
Winter's first cold snap in New York City continued for a fourth day yesterday, stretching the city's shelter system nearly to capacity and flooding the main housing agency with calls from shivering tenants seeking help in having heat or hot water restored.
The frigid temperatures may also have caused the deaths of three men who were exposed to the cold, the authorities said yesterday.
A moderate rise in temperatures -- up to 28 degrees by 2 P.M. yesterday -- provided some relief, but the below-freezing temperatures caused or contributed to the deaths of three men in the city since Monday, two in Manhattan and one in Brooklyn, said Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the Medical Examiner's office.


Woman Held In Slayings Of Children
Last Thursday, when the police discovered Darlene Hoyt's 4-year-old son and 6-year old stepdaughter strangled in their apartment in a Brooklyn housing project, Ms.
Hoyt was found seriously wounded, with stab wounds in her neck and chest, on a living room couch.
After investigating the killings, the police determined that Ms.
Hoyt's wounds were self-inflicted to cover up her role.
She was arrested on Monday and charged with two counts of murder by housing police detectives at Kings County Hospital, where she is recovering from six stab wounds.


Bonilla-Orioles Trade Is Denied by Mets
The Mets denied a report today that a trade in which Bobby Bonilla would be traded to the Orioles for outfielder Mike Devereaux, first baseman David Sequi and reliever Brad Pennington was imminent.
The Baltimore Sun reported in today's editions that a deal was close to be being reached between the two clubs.


Simms Is Selected for Pro Bowl, but Giants' Defense Is Shut Out
Phil Simms, at 38, is the third-oldest quarterback in the National Football League, and as many already knew, he is still one of the best.
That was reflected yesterday when it was announced that Simms was one of three Giants players named to represent the National Football Conference in the Pro Bowl.
Simms earned a $50,000 bonus for his second Pro Bowl selection, this time as the third quarterback, behind Dallas's Troy Aikman and San Francisco's Steve Young.


Reynolds Resigns As G.M. of Kings
JERRY REYNOLDS, his team holding the National Basketball Association's second-worst record and shaken by the car crash that nearly killed the rookie BOBBY HURLEY, resigned yesterday as general manager of the Sacramento Kings.
Reynolds, 49, had two coaching stints with the team.
He said he would remain with the club until a new general manager is hired.
The Kings are 6-19 and have lost 14 of their past 16 games.
Only the Dallas Mavericks (2-23) have a worse record.
Sacramento next plays at Washington tonight.


A Lull to Make August Look Thrilling
Anyone who has ever read "Gashlycrumb Tinies," the children's book by Edward Gorey, knows that "N is for Neville who died of ennui."
But Neville has nothing on the capital during the holiday season.


Bridge
A player who does something tricky at the bridge table, and then finds that he has been brilliant for a totally unpredictable reason, faces an interesting ethical problem.
Should he claim that he knew exactly what would happen?
Should he admit that it was all a surprise to him?
Or should he take the Fifth Amendment, refusing to commit himself?
An example is the diagramed deal, which was the last in the open semifinal at the playoffs in Memphis in June to determine the American teams for the 1993 world championships.
It was described then in this department in a different context.


Ireland Sees Nothing Heroic About the I.R.A.; An Economic Struggle
To the Editor
This is a postscript to "Ulster and Nationalism," Sean Cronin's Dec. 17 letter, in which he observes that the conflict in the six counties of the North of Ireland still attached to Britain is not religious at all, that it is about nationality.
A good point.
I should like to add that the struggle is also about power and control, such mundane things as housing and jobs.


Spieker Properties Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hilcoast Development Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Ambitious Bank in Spain Stumbles and Is Taken Over
Spain's third-largest bank was taken over by central bankers today amid growing indications that its financial health was deteriorating.
The Bank of Spain took over management of Banco Espanol de Credito, known as Banesto, and replaced its flamboyant chairman, Mario Conde, with a provisional board made up of representatives of five other private banks.


Cuomo Recommends a Crime-Fighting Program for East New York
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed yesterday that a program in which citizens and the police coordinate efforts to fight drugs be extended to the 75th Precinct in East New York, Brooklyn, one of the most crime-ridden communities in the city.
The program, called Combat -- for Coordinated Omnibus Municipally Based Anti-Drug Teams -- asks residents to cooperate with local police by passing on information about drug activity.
The police, in turn, would use the information to increase surveillance and arrests on a targeted street or in a building.


Tongue-Lashing Brings Out the Swagger in Cowboys
If the Dallas Cowboys beat the Giants Sunday for their division title and home-field advantage throughout the playoffs, and then if the Cowboys win the Super Bowl again for the second straight year, they can look back to an unlikely moment three weeks ago when their season turned around.
The timing was unlikely because the Cowboys were rolling along with a 9-4 record.
After frustrating losses to the Atlanta Falcons and the Miami Dolphins, they had just beaten the Philadelphia Eagles and the Minnesota Vikings.


In Search of the Elusive Rosado
IN Spain, Ernest Hemingway couldn't find enough of it.
Randall Grahm of Bonny Doon Vineyard regrets that in California he can't find any of it.
Raynold von Samson, a co-owner of Marichu, a Basque restaurant in Bronxville, N.Y., calls it an "undervalued find" that in deep winter washes down filet mignon with red roasted peppers perfectly.
Rosado -- Spanish rose -- is a wine for all seasons.
Oddly enough, it is mostly a vicarious pleasure for American wine aficionados.
They lap it up only in travel accounts of cafe life in Pamplona, the capital of Navarra province, when the bulls run.
In wine books, it is an asterisk.
For some, it may be an acquired taste.


Ireland Sees Nothing Heroic About the I.R.A.
To the Editor:
In "Why Should We Believe Britain on Irish Peace?" (letter, Dec. 17), Martin Galvin claims that peace in Northern Ireland has been jeopardized because of British intransigence.
He implies that the Irish Republican Army is on a quest for peace and has been rebuffed by a self-interested government in London, which is to be held accountable for further violence.
This is outrageous.
The I.R.A. and only the I.R.A. is responsible for the death and trouble it perpetrates in Northern Ireland.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Chris Hoiles, catcher, and Barry Manuel, pitcher, on one-year contracts.


Nets' Stars vs. Knicks' Black Holes
It has always been a game decided by stars. Basketball always will be.
When it counted most last night, the Nets' stars were bigger than the Knicks'.
Derrick Coleman, the Nets' best big man, hit a clutch 3-point shot, dead on from behind the key.
He blocked Patrick Ewing's turnaround jump shot in the lane.
He made two free throws he had to make.


Cuomo Signs Bill
Aqueduct will be kept open this winter with a reduced daily schedule and more wagering on out-of-state races under a bill signed into law yesterday by Gov.
MARIO M. CUOMO.


With a View of One Hemisphere, Latin America Is Freeing Its Own Trade
The North American Free Trade Agreement takes effect on Jan. 1, and that event is being seen in many Latin American countries as a first step toward the day when the pact expands south from Mexico, creating a free-trade hemisphere.
Overshadowed by the debate in the United States over job gains and losses from the North American accord, the economies of Latin America, a region long gripped by protectionism, have experienced a free-trade transformation of their own.


Prudential And A.I.G. In Dispute
The fight over fraud charges in Prudential Securities' sale of limited partnerships, which for years has mainly been confined to skirmishes between small investors and the firm, is on the verge of becoming a battle of corporate titans.
American International Group Inc., which provided insurance for Prudential in its largest limited partnerships, is investigating whether to contest payment of any proceeds to the firm for insurance claims arising from settlements of fraud actions brought by partnership investors, people involved in the situation said yesterday.
The two companies have been in talks as recently as this week.


Birth to 59-Year-Old Briton Raises Ethical Storm
Three days after a 59-year-old woman gave birth to twins in a London hospital, doctors and politicians have become snarled in a thickening ethical debate: should governments and doctors limit the age at which a woman may become pregnant through fertility treatments?
The London woman, who has not been identified but is described as wealthy, gave birth after eggs donated by a younger woman and fertilized by the older woman's husband were implanted in her at a private fertility clinic in Rome.
Doctors in London had earlier refused to perform the procedure because they believed she was too old to face the emotional stress.


Battle Over Discrimination Against Disabled Is Opened
Opening a campaign against employment discrimination by local governments, the Justice Department today sued the State of Illinois and the City of Aurora, charging that they violated a 1990 Federal law by illegally denying pension benefits to police officers and firefighters with disabilities.
Administration officials said the lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in Chicago, was the first ever brought by the Justice Department against a municipal or state government under the 1990 law, the Americans With Disabilities Act.


Interactive Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Matthews Studio Equipment Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton Is Down-Home for the Holiday
After a day of duck hunting, card playing and pizza eating, Bill Clinton still had not had enough.
He finished off his second dessert at Rocky's Corner, a favorite family haunt in nearby Hot Springs, then turned to his boyhood friend David Leopoulos and asked, "What do you all want to do?"


Jets Moan Pro Bowl Blues
It has become an annual snub.
For the fourth consecutive year, the Jets failed to have a player voted to the American Football Conference Pro Bowl team.
"We think we had some players who are deserving," Jets Coach Bruce Coslet said yesterday in a statement.
"But they won't let us vote for our own players."


NEW YORK'S POLICE ALLOW CORRUPTION, MOLLEN PANEL SAYS
In a harshly critical report, a special mayoral panel asserted yesterday that the New York City Police Department had failed at every level to uproot corruption and had instead tolerated a culture that fostered misconduct and concealed lawlessness by police officers.
The panel, called the Mollen Commission, agreed with police officials who contend that corruption was not systemic, but rather isolated to small groups of rogue officers.
But the commission warned that if corruption itself was not systemwide, the department's failure to address it was.


Cheap Oil Fails to Energize Bonds
Treasury securities were mixed yesterday in another day of subdued trading.
The market was supported to some degree by lower oil and other commodity prices, which lessened fears of any imminent resurgence of inflation.


Blockbuster Move Fuels Viacom Speculation
Lenders to the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation have agreed to triple the size of the company's existing credit agreement to $1 billion, according to documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
But several people close to Blockbuster said yesterday that the credit agreement was not related to speculation that the video-rental company would invest more money in Viacom Inc.'s battle with QVC Network Inc. for Paramount Communications Inc.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.11
2.74
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.06
3.17
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.21
3.33
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.20
5.22
6.02
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.23
6.23
7.36
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.23
7.23
8.38
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.52
5.52
6.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Park Electrochemical Corp.  reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 28


New Technology Helps Texaco in the North Sea
Texaco Inc. said yesterday that it had brought a new North Sea oil and gas field into production using emerging deep-water technology and an unusual partnership with the Chevron Corporation.
It said the development of the Strathspey field, about 300 miles northeast of Aberdeen, Scotland, was an example of how new technology and agreements with other oil companies could enable oil companies to bring into production North Sea fields that would have been considered too expensive in the past.


William L. Shirer Dies


Israel and the P.L.O. Wrestle With the Border Control Issue
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization struggled today to resolve their conflicting proposals for security arrangements in the Gaza Strip and Jericho, including an Israeli suggestion for joint patrols and a Palestinian suggestion for electronic surveillance by Israelis.
On the second day of the latest round of talks, Palestinian, Egyptian and Israeli officials said they were discussing what one called "several scenarios" to resolve the disagreements over who will control access to the areas once Israel pulls back its troops and who will guard the borders to Egypt and Jordan.


6 Are Killed in Bombing Attacks, Apparently Aimed at One Family
A series of bombs exploded in four towns in western New York State last night, killing at least six people and injuring several others in what appeared to be an attack on members of an extended family, law-enforcement officials said.
The bombings appeared to be connected, all exploding at around 6:30 P.M., but it was not immediately clear who was behind it or why, said Thomas A. Constantine, superintendent of the New York State Police.


Ann Ronell; Songwriter, 85
Ann Ronell, a songwriter whose credits include "Willow, Weep for Me" and the lyrics for "Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf?" died on Saturday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
She was 85.
The cause was heart and lung failure after surgery for a hernia, said her niece, Lali Ray.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE FOOTBALL  Louisville Triumphs  Jeff Brohm hit Reggie Ferguson with a 25-yard touchdown pass with 12 minutes 5 seconds left, helping lift No. 25 Louisville over Michigan State, 18-7, last night in the Liberty Bowl in Memphis.
The Cardinals added a safety and another touchdown in clinching their first victory over a Big Ten school.
Louisville (9-3) entered the game with an 0-5-1 mark against Big Ten teams.


MacLean Makes Mark in Winning Style
John MacLean has scored many spectacular goals during his 11-year career in the National Hockey League.
None was bigger than the one he scored in overtime on the last day of the 1987-88 season because it put the Devils in the playoffs for the first time.
MacLean made club history at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight when he scored the winning goal in the Devils' 4-2 triumph over the Hartford Whalers.
Although it wasn't spectacular, it set a record for most points scored by a Devil.


New Yorkers: Cooling Their Heels
The kind of cold weather New Yorkers know is not the kind that would raise an eyebrow in Alaska.
Or North Dakota.
Or Minnesota.
Even so, there are days -- and these are among them -- when New York seems chillier than a stay in a meat locker.
It's partly the wind, which sweeps across the city from one or another river and creates furious little eddies at street corners.
It's partly the air, which is damp as a used towel.
Mostly, though, it's that New Yorkers -- not known as an especially nature-oriented group -- have to spend an inordinate amount of time outdoors.


Ireland Sees Nothing Heroic About the I.R.A.; Flawed Declaration
To the Editor:
In "Tears Enough in Northern Ireland" (editorial, Dec. 18), you write of the Dec. 15 British-Irish declaration, "Its principles are not new, but in proposing a framework for peace, the declaration breaks fresh ground."


On Campus; Free Expression Debate Had Other Flash Points
While campuses across the country may not have been hotbeds of student activism in the fall semester, several others besides Kean College in New Jersey have had heated political debates about the content of college newspapers and lectures.
College newspapers on at least 16 campuses were seized, according to the Student Press Law Center in Washington.
Some were stolen by students trying to suppress unfavorable articles about themselves.
But in at least six cases, at public and private colleges from California to North Carolina, newspapers were stolen by groups that disagreed with printed articles or advertisements, said Michael Hiestand, a lawyer with the center, which offers free legal advice to student journalists.


Harding Associates Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Unfinished Bank Reform
Two years ago, in the aftermath of the $500 billion savings and loan bailout, Congress passed two-thirds of a bank reform.
It poured money into a near-empty deposit insurance fund.
And it vastly improved procedures by which regulators could close a bank before it tumbled into bankruptcy and required a costly infusion of taxpayer money to pay off insured depositors.
But what the 1991 bill didn't do is correct the cause of many bank failures: antiquated laws that prohibit banks from investing outside their own states and selling new products.


The Secret to Enjoying Caviar: Knowing When to Stop . . .
THERE are those who feel about caviar the way the writer Colette felt about truffles: they'd rather have no caviar at all than have less than too much.
Hence the traditional predilection for huge tins of caviar, mounted on a heap of shaved ice, accompanied by chopped egg and minced red onion or by creme fraiche, with mother-of-pearl spoons for shoveling and vodka or Champagne for refreshing.
But ghosts of decadent czars, European aristocrats and Diamond Jim Brady haunt such displays.
Those who have eaten their fill of caviar know the essential truth of the salted and aged sturgeon egg: no spoonful is ever as superb as the first.
In short order, the palate is rendered insensitive to the fragile burst of the egg and, as the salt accumulates in the mouth, numbed to caviar's briny essence.


CHRONICLE
Hello Donna: For DONNA HANOVER GIULIANI, it was full steam ahead as she prepared for her husband's inauguration as Mayor this weekend and her family's move into Gracie Mansion.
"It's been a busy week for Donna," JOANNIE DANIELIDES, her press secretary, said yesterday.
"She's been busy packing. She had lunch with Peter Flanigan, a trustee of the Manhattan Institute's Center for Educational Innovation, to discuss educational issues. She's been being a mom and trying to find time to take the kids to the movies." The children are Andrew, 7, and Caroline, 4.


METRO DIGEST
POLICE ALLOW CORRUPTION, PANEL SAYS
In a harshly critical report, a special mayoral panel asserted that the New York City Police Department failed at every level to uproot corruption and instead tolerated a culture that fostered misconduct and concealed lawlessness by police officers.
A1.
Excerpts from the report. B2.


Ever Wary, Dinkins Clears His Desk
The walls of his office were bare, the photographs of friends and family that once filled the windowsills to overflowing had been packed away and the movers were busy taking his personal belongings from Gracie Mansion to his new apartment on East 68th Street.
But when Mayor David N. Dinkins met with reporters in his City Hall office for the last time, he insisted that he was feeling fine, had no regrets and was looking forward to a new life as a college professor.


Treasury Prices Slip in Light Trading
Treasury securities prices weakened slightly yesterday in sluggish trading ahead of the New Year's holiday.
The market exhibited little reaction to the release of economic data showing a rise in the Government's chief forecasting index and an increase in the sales of existing homes.
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond dropped 5/32 , to 1003/32 , while the yield, which moves in the opposite direction, rose to 6.24 percent, up from 6.23 percent on Tuesday.


Touring Homes Where Muses Were
I BEGAN visiting writers' houses when I began writing during the 1970's.
Writing is a discipline with not a few personal habits attached to it, and what I was looking for was the key in the daily life that made the art possible.
Because I had just read Sarah Orne Jewett's 1896 novel, "The Country of the Pointed Firs," a series of sketches about Maine coastal villages, I began with her house in South Berwick, Me.
The big white house on Main Street had belonged to her father, who was a doctor, and she gathered most of her stories listening to people talk in his waiting room.


Ever So Humble or Ever So Proud, There's No Place Like Home For Framing Castles in the Sky
"I AM thrilled to the spine . . . and I feel as if I were going to get married -- to the right man at last!" Edith Wharton wrote to a friend about her delight in renovating a ruined fortress above the Mediterranean at Hyeres, France.
And indeed she was to have her most prolific period in the 1920's -- while dividing her time between this Mediterranean retreat and a grand house, Pavillon Colombe, outside Paris.
Both houses were more than just dwellings.
They were constructions that mirrored some inner geography and had the power to release her creativity.
From "The Age of Innocence" (1920) to "The Writing of Fiction" (1925) to "A Backward Glance" (1934), these settings provoked a torrent of fiction, criticism and memoir.
Wharton's quest for the perfect house -- from Pencraig, her parents' "cottage" in Newport, R.I., to her own house, the Mount, in Lenox, Mass., to those two French locations where she spent the prolific years of her 50's and 60's -- is a reminder that writers' houses are hardly roofs against rain.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Dec. 14, about the appointment of Temerlin McClain as the pro bono agency for the United Way of America, misstated the charity's relationship with Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York.
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi created only one commercial for the United Way; it was not the group's previous agency.


$89 Million Awarded Family Who Sued H.M.O.
In a sign of surging conflict over medical cost containment, a California jury has awarded $89.3 million to the family of a woman whose health maintenance organization refused to pay for a costly, experimental procedure to treat the breast cancer that ultimately killed her.
The award, by far the largest in a case involving the denial of medical benefits, has sent nervous tremors through the health insurance industry, which is struggling to define limits on the coverage of therapies that are experimental or have only a slight chance of success.


Dow Creeps Up a Fraction to a New High
A late push in the stock market helped the Dow Jones industrial average to edge up to a new closing high yesterday.
The Dow closed at 3,794.33, up 56-hundredths of a point.
The gain was even smaller than the fractional gain recorded on Tuesday, yet it brought the index a step closer to 3,800, a psychologically significant level.
And while the close marked the third consecutive gain this week, it was off the day's high.
At one point, the Dow traded at 3,799.64.


Justice Serves M.I.T. and Needy Students
The Justice Department's recent decision to drop its antitrust action against the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is a sensible move that puts to rest a misguided case.
The case involved the widespread practice of pooling information about applicants for financial aid.
The nation's brightest high school seniors often apply to several elite colleges.
To prevent a bidding war, with colleges "buying" the best students with big aid packages, some institutions share information about their applicants, agreeing to limit their offers to the students' financial need.


Giuliani Picks 2 New Aides
Adding to his core staff, the Mayor-elect named two prominent campaign supporters to newly created posts as advisers.
Page B3.


Moynihan Criticizes Clinton Format for Paying for Home Care
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan said today that the Clinton Administration had proposed an inequitable formula for distributing money to states for long-term care for people living at home.
Under the formula, the Government would pay a larger share of benefits in states with low per capita incomes.
Mr.
Moynihan said that approach would shortchange states like New York, which has a comparatively high per capita income but also many poor people.


Corrections
A picture yesterday with an obituary of Louis Soutendijk, a Dutch economist and diplomat, was published in error.
It showed Robert Marjolin, an official of the European Economic Community, during a meeting with Mr.
Soutendijk in 1964.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  RITES OF PASSAGE AT CITY HALL The jewel-box setting of City Hall seemed to be a stage being cleared for a freshly proclaimed hit.
The David N. Dinkins show is closing, with the spotlight soon to illuminate a Rudolph W. Giuliani production.
A1.
GIULIANI NAMES 2 TO NEW POSITIONS Mayor-elect Giuliani named two prominent campaign supporters to newly created advisory positions.
B3.
ANGER OVER TALK OF SHIFTING ARTS MONEY Plans by the Giuliani administration to increase financial support for New York City's premier arts institutions, possibly at the expense of less renowned ones, were met with anger and trepidation by some arts groups and politicians.
B3.
NEW EVIDENCE ON CROWN HEIGHTS Federal and local investigators examining the 1991 disturbances in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, have received new evidence and have begun to develop leads that could result in new Federal or state civil rights charges being brought against some of those who participated in the violence, officials involved in the case said.
A1.
DINKINS VETOES CARRIAGE BILL Mayor Dinkins vetoed a bill that would have allowed horse-drawn carriages to go beyond Central Park into midtown streets much more than they do now.
The Mayor said his veto would leave the city without any regulations governing carriages after midnight Friday, thus giving the city's 68 carriages the right to go just about anywhere, anytime they want.
B6.
REGION  2 ARE ARRESTED IN BOMBINGS A man apparently angry at his girlfriend's relatives was arrested in connection with a series of bombings across upstate New York that killed five people on Tuesday evening.
A second man, who the authorities said had bought dynamite and blasting caps, was also arrested.
A1.
WHITMAN COMPLAINS TO FLORIO Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey complained to Gov.
Jim Florio that a recent flurry of salary increases, appointments and contract extensions violated an understanding that such actions would be deferred until she takes office on Jan. 18.
B4.
DOLPHINS REMAIN TRAPPED BY ICE Three dolphins who lingered too long in the Shrewsbury River in New Jersey remained trapped by ice that frustrated rescuers' efforts to shepherd them to open waters.
B4.
PLANS FOR HINDU TEMPLE STIR CONCERN Plans to turn a boarded-up Y.M.C.A. in Sayreville, N.J., into a Hindu temple have been opposed by some town residents.
The question remains whether the opposition springs from parking problems or prejudice.
B5.
ARREST IN DEATH OF BAILED-OUT LOVER A Medford, N.J., woman has been charged with helping to murder her lover shortly after she bailed him out of jail, where he had been held on a charge of assaulting her.
B6.
MANEUVERING ROOM IS URGED FOR NYNEX A New York State panel has recommended relaxing some regulations to give the Nynex Corporation more room to maneuver in the competitive telecommunications market.
D3.
Neediest Cases B2  Holiday Schedule B2


Men, Mostly Nervous, Voted For Russian Right, Poll Says
A picture of those Russians who voted for the ultranationalist Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky in parliamentary elections two weeks ago is beginning to emerge from an analysis of polling data that suggest his electorate will not be stable.
The vote for Mr.
Zhirinovsky, an ardent rightist whose oddly named Liberal Democratic Party secured the highest percentage of the party-preference votes on Dec. 12, has been interpreted as a vote against economic reform, a vote against crime and instability, a vote for empire, a vote for Russian racial primacy.


Electrohome Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Man With AIDS Sentenced for Child Sodomy


Specialty Equipment Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Whitman Assails Florio Over Last-Minute Raises
Governor-elect Christine Todd Whitman complained to Gov.
Jim Florio today that a recent flurry of salary increases, appointments and contract extensions violated an understanding that such actions would be deferred until she takes office Jan. 18.
Mrs.
Whitman, in a letter released by her transition office while she vacations in Florida, said she did not expect "the orderly processes of government" to cease, but she said the recent actions by several state authorities and state officials, including Mr.
Florio, could hardly be construed as essential.


Daniel C. Thomas, 73, Trustee of Seminary
The Rev.
Daniel C. Thomas, a retired vice president and past trustee of Princeton Theological Seminary, died on Tuesday at the Princeton Medical Center.
He was 73 and lived in Princeton.
The cause was prostate cancer, his family said.


Sports of The Times; The Giants: Good, but How Good?
WHEN a pro football traveler apologized or making various airline reservations from Dallas, San Francisco and New York to Atlanta for Super Bowl XXVIII, his explanation was that the site of the National Conference game was yet to be determined.
"But I know who's going to the Super Bowl," the reservationist said.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
WHEN she was growing up, Chriss Garlick was jealous of the extra attention that her twin brother, Bill, got from their parents.
She was angry that she would be punished for misbehavior he could get away with.
But she felt she couldn't express those feelings directly to her parents.
She was healthy; Bill was mentally retarded and had cerebral palsy and other neurological problems.


Blood Test Devised to Warn Those Prone to Rare Cancer
Scientists have developed a simple blood test to identify people with an inborn predisposition to one type of colon cancer, offering those in high-risk families the earliest possible warning if they have the trait and a large measure of relief if they do not.
The test detects mutant proteins that indicate whether a person has inherited the gene for familial adenomatous polyposis, a rare condition in which the lining of the colon sprouts hundreds or thousands of tiny wart-like polyps.
If left untreated, the condition almost invariably leads to colon cancer, often when patients are in their 20's or 30's, and sometimes even younger.


Great Country Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


New Victim of a New Era: Fallout Shelter Guidelines
Diplomats may debate and historians may argue, but consumers have now spoken.
The cold war is over.
The market for fallout shelters is dead.
So dead, in fact, that the Federal Trade Commission will no longer try to regulate manufacturers of fallout shelters and home radiation-monitoring devices.


2 Quarterbacks, Many Questions
For two different reasons, the Oilers and the Jets were today pondering the decorum of playing or not playing their starting quarterbacks in Sunday's regular-season finale for both teams at the Astrodome.
The issue arose for the Oilers when Warren Moon cracked his ribs against the 49ers last Saturday.
The Oilers have a playoff spot wrapped up, and if Buffalo loses to Indianapolis on Sunday Houston will have a first-round bye and home-field advantage throughout the playoffs.
If that happens and Moon doesn't play against the Jets, he could rest for three weeks and give his ribs time to heal.
Oilers Coach Jack Pardee said today that Moon probably won't practice this week and that he will make a game-time decision on whether Moon will start.
The Jets and Oilers will know if the game matters before the opening kickoff.
Different Problem for Jets
Jets Coach Bruce Coslet reacted sharply when an article Tuesday in Newsday suggested that the team might decide to bench Esiason if the Jets are eliminated from the playoffs before Sunday's game.
The reason: If Esiason increases his quarterback rating to 89 (it is now 87.1), the Jets will owe Cincinnati a second-round pick from the 1994 draft.
That was one of the provisions of the trade that brought Esiason to the Jets from the Bengals in the off season.
Coslet said Esiason will play "every snap" of the game, barring injury.


Clintons Borrow Vacation Home Again
For the third time since he took office, President Clinton and his family are spending a holiday at a luxurious resort in a vacation home borrowed from an absentee host whom they hardly know.
Their host is Paul Bob Burge, a West Virginia businessman who also lent his rose-colored Palmetto Dunes beach-front home to the Clintons a year ago, before the President's inauguration.


ACCOUNTS
*
Frito-Lay Inc., Plano, Tex., to BBDO New York, as the first agency to handle advertising for a new wave-cut potato chip brand, Wavy Lay's.
Also, DDB Needham Promotions, Dallas, was named to create sports-themed promotional commercials for Wavy Lay's.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Remington Products Co., Bridgeport, Conn., to Grey Advertising, New York, to handle advertising for its newly acquired line of appliances like hair dryers and curling irons, bought from the Clairol unit of Bristol-Myers Squibb.
Grey already handles Remington's main shaver account.
Billings were not disclosed.


Shares of Merry-Go-Round Retreat After Big Increase
Shares of Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc. retreated yesterday after more than doubling in the last week in an inexplicable surge.
Merry-Go-Round, a specialty retailer, has tantalized Wall Street since late November with speculation over whether it will file for bankruptcy protection.


U.S. Jews Don't Clamor for Spy's Release
To the Editor:
American Jewish organizations, including rabbinical groups, have been urging President Clinton to shorten the sentence of Jonathan J. Pollard, a United States Government official convicted of spying for Israel in 1987 and sentenced to life in prison.


Market Place; Cygnus's patch technology looks more impressive with a new deal.
WHAT a difference a deal makes.
Shares of Cygnus Therapeutic Systems Inc., which had lanquished in the mid-single digits for much of the year, soared yesterday, reaching a high of $11.25 before closing at $11.125, up $1.25, in Nasdaq trading.
The company announced late Tuesday that it would collaborate with Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories to develop and market five transdermal patch products for the hormone-replacement market.
While analysts say the deal validates Cygnus technology, the stock price may no longer be undervalued.
"In the last month or so, they finally have started to hit some of their milestones," said Michael Walsh, an analyst with Robertson, Stephens &amp; Company.
"We always felt they had the best transderm technology, and they are finally getting some recognition of their capability. Unfortunately, at $11.50 a share, I don't feel comfortable enough about the next year and a half."


Desegregate Housing, and Schools Will Follow; Busing's Residue
To the Editor:
The year of greatest school segregation, 1968, was the year I was bused from my safe neighborhood near Kew Gardens, Queens, to a seventh-grade classroom in South Jamaica, Queens.
It was a personal disaster for me and, judging from the local school board's reversal of the busing plan a year later, a political fiasco as well.


Fluent in Fiction and in Mideast Realities
None other than Shimon Peres, Israel's Foreign Minister, has suggested that his country's internationally acclaimed novelist Amoz Oz, a founder of the Peace Now movement, would make a good Prime Minister.
"I couldn't do it because I'm incapable of saying, 'No comment,' " Mr.
Oz said recently in an interview in Manhattan.
"I'm not like Vaclav Havel. Now if they offered me the job of running the Czech Republic, I might consider it, but if they offered Havel the job of running Israel, he'd run for his life!" He lighted another cigarette.
"If writers moved into politics and politicians into writing, it would be the end of civilization as we know it. Anyway, it's more exciting to write a novel than to run a country."


Haiti: Ready to Explode?
There is no justifying the vicious mob attack that killed two civilian supporters of Haiti's military regime Monday and provoked a retaliatory rampage against slum dwellers presumed to support the exiled President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
But it is not hard to understand why frustrated Aristide supporters may now be turning to violence.
Since the September 1991 military coup, most have put their faith in international diplomacy or sought to flee Haiti altogether.


Why Blame California For Rice Subsidies?
To the Editor:
Contrary to "Look at What Rice for Japan Will Cost Us" (letter, Dec. 19) by Prof.
Thomas Koelble, California rice grows principally in northern California with a small amount in central California, and none in southern California.
No water from the Colorado River is diverted to central or northern California.
Furthermore, diversion of Colorado River water, while not used for rice growing, is neither an economic disaster nor environmentally destructive.


Hurley Is Well on the Way to Recovery
Although his voice was weak, Bobby Hurley spoke with strong optimism yesterday about his chances for a full recovery from the injuries he suffered in a car crash on Dec. 12 in Sacramento and returning to the Kings by the start of next season.
"Yesterday, I made it over to the doctor's office and was examined by orthopedic doctors and doctors working on my lungs and chest injuries," said Hurley, speaking to reporters in a telephone news conference from his apartment in Sacramento.
"They feel that everything is fine, and that I'm right on schedule for a full recovery."


Security Capital Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


A Bigger Blockbuster Stake May Cost Viacom an Asset
To raise its investment in Viacom Inc.'s battle for Paramount Communications Inc., the Blockbuster Entertainment Company is said to be seeking a Viacom asset as well as better terms, several executives close to Blockbuster said yesterday.
While it was unclear whether a revised deal between Viacom and its equity investor was imminent, many analysts said they expected Viacom's chairman, Sumner M. Redstone, to make another bid before Jan. 7.
That is the deadline the Paramount board has set for Viacom to top the cash-and-stock offer from QVC Network Inc. that is now worth about $10 billion.
Viacom needs $700 million more.
So far, Blockbuster has invested $600 million in the deal.


Carrying the Tradition: Flanigan's Sons Share His Fire
Growing up near Green Bay, Wis., means growing up with football.
Life consists of going to Packers practices, waiting for a tired player to head back to the locker room and offering him a lift on your bike.
Time is spent memorizing the license plates of the players' Pathfinders and Jeeps in the parking lot of Lambeau Field and spotting them later at the mall.


New Evidence in U.S. Inquiry Helps Build Crown Hts. Case
Federal and local investigators examining the 1991 disturbances in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, have received new evidence from witnesses and have begun to develop leads that could result in new Federal or state civil rights charges being brought against some of those who participated in the violence, officials involved in the case said today.
The advances in the investigation represent a significant turnaround, as just four months ago, Attorney General Janet Reno decided to close the investigation into the slaying of a Hasidic rabbinical student during the disturbances.
But as rumors about the decision to drop the inquiry began circulating among Hasidic residents of Crown Heights and at the Brooklyn District Attorney's office, the District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, and Representative Charles E. Schumer persuaded Ms.
Reno to change her mind just moments before she was to have announced her decision at a news conference.
New Leads Emerging
Ms.
Reno ordered the Civil Rights Division of the Justice Department to take a second look at the case, but for a few weeks after her Sept. 9 reversal, the investigation appeared to have stalled.
Officials said today, however, that over the last few weeks investigators from the District Attorney's office and Federal prosecutors had begun to develop small leads into larger ones and that it now seemed likelier than before that Federal or state charges could be filed against some of those involved in the killing of the student, Yankel Rosenbaum.


Hong Kong Honors Buddha


Looking Beyond the Eastern Trails
The same conversation surfaces with each new ski season: Where is the best skiing?
Is it where the snow is deepest or the lift lines shortest?
East or West?
But why argue the point when you can have it both ways.


U.S. Issues Rules on Diet Supplement Labels
The Food and Drug Administration today issued new regulations that will bar the labeling of dietary supplements with health claims that have not been proved truthful and scientifically valid.
The ruling will not affect supplements with labels that do not make health claims.


Talk of Shifting Arts Money Is Met With Anger
Plans by the Giuliani administration to increase financial support for New York City's premier arts institutions, possibly at the expense of less renowned ones, was met with anger and trepidation yesterday by members of the arts community and politicians who have wrestled with apportioning ever-shrinking arts dollars.
Borough President Ruth W. Messinger of Manhattan called such plans "misguided and unfortunate." Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone and the chairman of the Council Finance Committee, Herbert E. Berman, Democrat of Brooklyn, said they would protect money for cultural institutions against any "ill-informed and insensitive actions by the new administration."


Oncogene Science Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  NO BREAKTHROUGHS IN MIDEAST  Although Israel proclaimed a "meeting of the minds" as the latest round of talks with the P.L.O. closed, significant differences remain.
A1  EASTERN EUROPE'S DRUG LORDS  One enterprise that is thriving in Eastern Europe, and especially Poland, is drug trafficking.
A3


Poland Becomes a Major Conduit for Drug Traffic
When four containers of fish from Nigeria arrived at the airport recently, customs officers were suspicious about the unusual cargo.
Fish from Nigeria?
So they searched, and they discovered, packed with the 120 pounds of carp, half a ton of marijuana worth about $2 million on the street.
A few weeks before, Polish officials on the border with Belarus seized 4.5 tons of hashish that had been secreted in a shipment of fermented raisins from Afghanistan.
And earlier this year, the Costa Rican Ambassador to Poland was arrested at the Warsaw airport with nearly 25 pounds of pure heroin in his luggage, with a street value of $900,000, while another drug bust netted 220 pounds of cocaine from South America, with a value of about $7.5 million.


Israeli Reports Some Progress In P.L.O. Talks
Israel's Foreign Minister said today that Israel and the P.L.O. had concluded their latest round of talks with a "meeting of the minds," but there was no breakthrough and significant differences remained.
The two sides, still trying to work out the details of the accord that they signed in Washington in September and that was supposed to have gone into effect two weeks ago, reached what an Israeli official described as "a set of understandings" on how to carry out the first phase -- an Israeli withdrawal from the occupied Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.


Argentine Senate Backs Menem on Second Term
The Argentine Senate approved a bill early this morning endorsing constitutional changes that, among other things, will allow Carlos Saul Menem and all subsequent Presidents to seek a second consecutive term.
By 38 votes to 7, the lawmakers, eager to leave on their summer vacation, approved an agreement reached last month by Mr.
Menem and his Peronist party and former President Raul Alfonsin, leader of the opposition Radical Civic Union.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Willis Finds Range  Kevin Willis missed 13 of his first 15 shots, then scored twice in the final minute, including the game-winner with 4.4 seconds left, lifting the Atlanta Hawks to a 92-90 victory over the Magic at Orlando, Fla., last night.
Willis took advantage of the absence of Magic center Shaquille O'Neal, who was ejected with 3 minutes 52 seconds left in the third quarter for arguing an official's call. (AP) SuperSonics 99, Lakers 92: Shawn Kemp scored 12 of his 25 points in the fourth quarter as visiting Seattle beat Los Angeles.
Kemp, who played despite suffering a slight concussion and bruises on his jaw in a collision with Houston's Robert Horry Tuesday night in Seattle, came off the bench for the third straight game after missing three with a bruised left knee.
He also finished with 13 rebounds. (AP) Kings 103, Bullets 97: Sacramento, down by 16 points in the third quarter, held Washington to one basket in the first seven minutes of the final period and pulled out a victory at Landover, Md.
Lionel Simmons scored 27 points and Walt Williams had 6 of his 14 in the final six minutes. (AP) Jazz 110, Celtics 107: Karl Malone scored 25 points, and Utah held visiting Boston to one field goal for the first four minutes of overtime.
John Stockton had 17 points and 17 assists for the Jazz, joining Maurice Cheeks and Alvin Robertson as the only players in National Basketball Association history with 1,900 assists. (AP) Trail Blazers 114, Clippers 98: Terry Porter tied his season high with 25 points, 17 of them in the first half, as host Portland defeated Los Angeles.
The Blazers led by 20 after one quarter and led by as many as 27 in the second quarter. (AP) N.H.L.
Stars Shut Out Leafs  Russ Courtnall had a goal and an assist and Darcy Wakaluk posted his fourth career shutout as Dallas snapped a four-game home winless streak with a 4-0 victory over struggling Toronto last night.
The Maple Leafs, without captain Wendel Clark (bruised foot and sore knee) and goal-scoring leader Dave Andreychuk (twisted knee), are 11-12-6 after starting the season with 10 consecutive victories. (AP) Oilers 6, Canadiens 3: Vladimir Vujtek scored twice as awakening Edmonton routed visiting Montreal.
Edmonton, getting another strong goaltending effort from Bill Ranford, earned its third straight victory and sixth in its last eight games. (AP) Jets 3, Blackhawks 2: Dean Kennedy scoring the winning goal for Winnipeg with 2:38 remaining to defeat visiting Chicago.
Tie Domi, whose wife Leanne gave birth to daughter Carlin-Nicole earlier in the day, also scored for the Jets. (AP) Panthers 5, Whalers 3: Scott Mellanby and Scott Levins each had a goal and an assist at Hartford as Florida extended its road unbeaten streak to seven. (AP) COLLEGE FOOTBALL Kansas State Triumphs  Kansas State won a bowl game for the first time in its 97-year history, routing Wyoming, 52-17, in the Copper Bowl last night at Tucson, Ariz.
J.
J.
Smith ran for 133 yards, Chad May completed 19 of 28 passes for 275 yards and two touchdowns and Andre Coleman caught 8 passes for 144 yards and a touchdown and scored on a 68-yard punt return.
The Wildcats finished 9-2-1 for their most victories since 1910.
Wyoming was 8-4. (AP) SKIING Austrian Sets Pace Hannes Trinkl of Austria attacked one of most demanding downhill courses on the circuit at Bormio, Italy, yesterday and wound up with his second World Cup victory in eight days.
He beat the defending World Cup champion, Marc Girardelli of Luxembourg, by 28-hundredths of a second and 23-year-old Tommy Moe of Palmer, Alaska, by 0.51. (AP)


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday, about a halt in trading of the stock of QVC Network Inc., misstated a point made in The Wall Street Journal on Monday.
The Journal said that while Arthur Levitt Jr., chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, reportedly asked Nasdaq about the halt, a Nasdaq spokesman denied that Mr.
Levitt had spoken directly to Joseph Hardimann, chairman of Nasdaq.
The Journal did not say Mr.
Levitt had approached Mr.
Hardimann.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIANT TECHSYSTEMS, Hopkins, Minn., has been awarded a $59.7 million contract to provide ammunition for the Army's M1A1 Abrams tank, with production and delivery between February and November of 1994.
CRANE CO., Stamford, Conn., acquired Burks Pumps Inc. of Piqua, Ohio, for $70 million in cash.
W.
R.
GRACE &amp; CO., Boca Raton, Fla., has agreed to sell its 46.5 percent stake in Canonie Environmental Services of Dallas to Smith Environmental Technologies Corp.


CHRONICLE
Think of the South Beach section of Miami Beach and the vision that comes to mind is one of celebrities, film stars and models mingling in the trendiest hotels and nightclubs, along with hordes of celebrity watchers straining for a glimpse.
But that's not what draws GIANNI VERSACE to the city that was recently declared a sister city to St.-Tropez.
Or so he says.


PEOPLE
*
Jack Palancio was named to the new position of director of creative services at QLM Associates, Princeton, N.J.
He was previously a freelance creative director in New York.


What Went So Very Wrong With 'Red Shoes'
The song that opened the second act of "The Red Shoes" was called "Do Svidanya," Russian for "goodbye," and singing it during the Sunday matinee on Dec. 19, the fifth and last performance of the show at the Gershwin Theater, cast members were nearly numb.
"There was such sadness," said Margaret Illmann, who played the lead role, the ballerina Vicky Page.
"We never imagined we'd be saying goodbye so soon."


...And With a Kiss, They Lived Happily Ever After
FAY CRAMP and Mel Roseman dressed formally for their wedding on Dec. 19 -- but not too formally.
The bridegroom wore a white cutaway.
The bride wore a traditional white floor-length satin gown.
But Mr.
Roseman's bow tie, cummerbund and socks bore images of Mickey Mouse, and when the new Mrs.
Roseman kicked up her legs to dance the hora, she revealed Mickey Mouse pantyhose.


More Choice for Some Poor Women
On Jan. 1, poor women who are made pregnant by rape or incest will have the same choices about whether to continue or end their pregnancies that more affluent women do.
That's when the Clinton Administration will issue a directive requiring states to pay through their Medicaid programs for abortions for victims of such cruel circumstances.
The directive was made possible by Congress's decision two months ago to relax the Hyde Amendment, which had banned Federal funding for abortions under Medicaid unless the woman's life was in danger.
But what of those poor women who are pregnant because of carelessness or contraceptive failure or just plain ignorance?
Will they, too, have the same health care options?
Not as long as America's compassion is doled out sparingly to some women and denied to others.


Amgen
Shares of Amgen Inc., the nation's largest biotechnology company, continued to rise yesterday, extending a surge that began on Dec. 20 after favorable reports from securities analysts and a bullish article in Barron's.
And last week, the American Stock Exchange opened trading of debt securities linked to the company's common stock.


Desegregate Housing, and Schools Will Follow; What Money Can Do
To the Editor:
According to a Dec. 14 article on Fordham Heights Academy, an alternative school in the Bronx, classrooms with student-teacher ratios of 15 to 1 offer hope to students who have not met with success in traditional settings.
How could they not?


Changes at Y.&amp; R.'s Latin America Shops
Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. has announced several changes involving its agencies in Latin America.
Y.&amp; R. said yesterday that it had acquired Iconic, an advertising agency in Mexico City, and merged it with its office there to form Young &amp; Rubicam de Mexico.
The terms of the transaction were not disclosed.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In an age of retailing overkill, new products are fewer and more focused on finding customers.
OUT with the old, in with the new!
That cry will be heard often in the next couple of days.
Consumer product marketers, though, have been shouting it at shoppers and retailers almost since the moment World War II ended.
New products have helped to fuel the growth of the mighty American consumer economy since 1946, when Tide detergent, "the washday miracle," revolutionized clothing care by supplanting soap flakes.
And as recently as this week, Alpo Petfoods announced that it would introduce -- no kidding -- Alpo Beef Chip Cookies, a crunchy dog treat that is baked, shaped and bagged to resemble chocolate chip cookies. (Anthropomorphism has its limits, however; there's no chocolate.)


Voucher Program for Street People Shows Ambiguous Charity; Don't Say Beggars
To the Editor:
While the voucher program in New York City moves further toward establishing a new, improved perception of the homeless community, I was enraged by the term used to describe those individuals in your Dec. 20 article, "beggars." The reference, used repetitively through the article, diminishes the very essence of the program.


From Guests, No R.S.V.P., No Regrets
ONE of the givens of life, at least the social part of life, is that even before the party, a host frequently develops a hatred of prospective guests.
Needless to say, this doesn't apply to all prospective guests but it does encompass a dispiriting percentage, a percentage that seems to grow every year and zooms up, up, up at holiday time.
Who are these social-oaf guests, these raisers of hackles?
They are, in fact and at one time or another, most of us.
Who has not, on occasion, ignored the R.S.V.P. on an invitation?


For Job Seekers, a Toll-Free Gift of Expert Advice
A grandmother bored with staying home, a telecommunications manager fired two years ago, clerical workers bounced from temporary jobs, chemists, accountants and factory workers were all among the early callers this morning to Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas Inc., a job-search consulting firm here that annually dispenses free advice for two days as a holiday gift to the nation's unemployed.
"About 70 percent of the calls come from people who have never had access to this kind of help," said James Challenger, the president of the firm he founded in 1965.


South Africa Leads World In Road Risk
Michael Simpson, a Pretoria psychiatrist, has seen the predatory drivers of New York City.
He swears a Manhattan cabbie once swerved across three lanes in an attempt to hit him as he stepped from a curb.
With something akin to home-team pride, Dr.
Simpson asserted, "New York drivers are really cuddly compared to the average driver here."


Khmer Dancers Try To Save an Art Form Ravaged by War
"Don't be afraid of spirits and ghosts," the legendary dance master recently told a darkened auditorium full of refugees from the carnage of Pol Pot's Cambodia.
"They are all part of our culture."
Above him on the stage, under a thin beam of light, a single dancer in a costume glittering with gold threads performed the ancient gestures of the apsaras, or heavenly dancers, carved into the walls of the temple of Angkor Wat.


New Debate on Regional Economics
In an era of academic downsizing, small departments are prime targets for university cost cutters.
And to administrators at the University of Pennsylvania, the three-decade-old regional science department seems a likely candidate for closing.
Only six faculty members and three dozen graduate students are part of the tiny band that studies the economies of cities, states and groups of countries.
The change, said Barbara Beck, a spokeswoman for the university, would be "part of an overall effort to streamline and re-engineer the college."


Headboard Goes After All
The Gracie Mansion headboard that drew headlines and criticism in 1990 is not going to headboard heaven after all.
Leland T. Jones, the Mayor's press secretary, said last week that Mr.
Dinkins would not be taking the headboard with him when he left Gracie Mansion on Friday for a new apartment on East 68th Street.
Instead, he said, it would would be put in storage.


The Carpet Man Fulfills a Promise; With Guns-for-Toys Program, Fernando Mateo Succeeds at Last
The toys-for-gun man, so deluged by claims on his time, was hardly able to ponder wall-to-walls or cut-piles, though it was his success in floor coverings that made his goodness possible.
"I'm going crazy, but it's a good kind of crazy," he said, settled behind his carpet store desk, which was strewn with phone messages.
The phone and his beeper trilled simultaneously.
He scooped up the phone.


Giants Looking at a Whole New Game
The last time Dallas and New York played, everything went wrong for the Giants.
On the field, Giant linebackers Michael Brooks and Carlton Bailey, who are good friends, got into a shouting match in the huddle.
Rodney Hampton, one of the game's best running backs, didn't play because of a knee injury.
And finally, Mark Collins said today, some of the Giants were in awe of the defending Super Bowl champs and suffered from stage fright.


IN THE CREATIVE PROCESS WITH: Tom Robbins; Perfect Sentences, Imperfect Universe
THE dark-season rains have come to this little hamlet at the mouth of the Skagit River, and under the wet blanket of winter, Tom Robbins is burrowing ever deeper into his imagination.
He finds the rain nurturing; it would be hard to work without it.
Just now, he has written himself into a corner on his sixth novel, "Half Asleep in Frog Pajamas." It is a story of a long Easter weekend that begins the day after a stock market crash, Mr.
Robbins says.
As usual, plot is of secondary importance.
What he strives for is the perfect sentence -- trying to do with a few words what another famous Northwesterner, Jimi Hendrix, used to do with his electric guitar.


Essay; Office Pool 1994
Welcome to the 20th annual Office Pool.
Because this participatory prognostication has answered the unfelt need of millions, this tradition has been imitated in all media.
I have always tried to score lower than my readers, and last year went especially deep into the tank: all but one wrong. (That one, however, forewarned that Clinton would jack up the highest effective tax bracket over 40 percent. Richies could have saved millions acting on this tip.)


Desegregate Housing, and Schools Will Follow
To the Editor:
"Study Finds Rising Concentration of Black and Hispanic Students" (front page, Dec. 14), on the report of Gary Orfield of Harvard University that depicts accelerating racial resegregation in our country's public schools is no surprise.
Since the epochal Brown v.
Board of Education of Topeka decision on May 17, 1954, which invalidated de jure school segregation, there has largely been national resistance and recalcitrance to obeying the law as required in that decision and the decision of May 31, 1955, which required "all deliberate speed" and other judicial and legislative remedies to extirpate de jure segregation in our public schools.


Transactions
Football  National Football League DETROIT LIONS -- Claimed Melvin Jenkins, cornerback, off waivers.
Waived Vernon Turner, wide receiver.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Erik McMillan, safety.
Waived Tom Ricketts, tackle.
Signed Pete Shufelt, linebacker, to the practice squad.
Released Fred Montgomery, wide receiver, from the practice squad.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Signed Israel Byrd, cornerback.


Re-Use the Trimmings
NOT long ago, the success of the holidays was measured by the size of the trash piles at curbsides on Dec. 26.
Christmas refuse was a status symbol.
Recycling, except for the school newspaper drive, was rare.
Guilt was nonexistent.
By law and personal choice, consumers are becoming more environmentally savvy, discarding the remains of Christmas 1993 selectively.
For those who don't want to use up precious landfill space, there are other ways to dispose of holiday waste.


Dutchwoman Paralyzed
The Dutch speed skater MONIQUE VELZEBOER, critically injured in a training accident, will never skate again and is unlikely to walk.
De Telegraaf newspaper of Amsterdam quoted the team physician, FRANS NOLLET, as saying that the 24-year-old Dutch national champion for short-track skating is paralyzed in both legs and has difficulty breathing because of the severe spinal injuries she received when her head hit the track barrier on Dec. 22.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 24
Dec. 17
Dec. 25
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.6
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.4
3.2
Gasoline stocks
224.5
225.0
213.4
Distillate stocks
142.7
141.9
138.9
Crude imports, daily
6.0
6.8
5.2
Product imports, daily
1.5
1.7
1.9
Crude stocks
348.4
346.8
321.6
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.0
Refinery utilization (%)
90.4
91.7
87.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Bengals Give Shula A 2-Year Contract
Coach DAVE SHULA, whose Cincinnati Bengals have the worst record in the National Football League, was given a two-year contract, the team said yesterday.
The Bengals declined to reveal any terms of the deal, other than to say that Shula's contract runs through the 1996 season.
Shula, 34, has a 3-12 record in his second season.
In his first season, the Bengals finished 5-11.


Books of The Times; Adventure and Crime, As Told on Sports Pages
The Best American Sportswriting  1993  Edited by Frank Deford  464 pages.
Houghton Mifflin. $22.
The rock composer Pete Townshend recently declared that "ghettoized communities are where all great music comes from." It would be difficult to make exactly the same claim for the ghettos of genre journalism: men's and women's magazines, and the articles found on the fashion, sports and home sections of newspapers.
But if they seldom produce writing that could be called great, it is fair to say that those ghettos regularly produce writing that lives to inform, excite and, if necessary, offend, rather than to inform, pacify and bore.


CSX Places Order for 300 Locomotives
In another sign of the resurgence of the nation's railroad industry, CSX Transportation said yesterday that it had ordered 300 locomotives from the Transportation Systems division of the General Electric Company.
The sale, the terms of which were not disclosed, adds to a long list this year of orders from railroads upgrading their equipment and investing in new technology.


Mayor Vetoes Carriage Law Expanding Operating Areas
Mayor David N. Dinkins vetoed a bill yesterday that would have allowed horse-drawn carriages to go beyond their current confines in Central Park into midtown streets much more than they do now.
The Mayor said his veto would leave New York City without any regulations governing carriages after midnight Friday, when the existing law expires, thus giving the city's 68 carriages the right to go just about anywhere, anytime they want.


Space Telescope Repairs Pass First Round of Tests
Three weeks after astronauts installed new optics and made other repairs, the Hubble Space Telescope has passed all its initial performance tests and is now ready to begin taking pictures to see if its vision has been corrected to match preflight expectations.
Results might be available in less than a month, project astronomers said in a briefing yesterday.


Microstar Software reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


U.S. Broadening Prudential Criminal Inquiry
Federal prosecutors have broadened their inquiry into the fraud scandal at Prudential Securities and have begun to advise a number of current and former executives that they should hire criminal lawyers, people involved in the case said yesterday.
The actions of a wide array of those executives, including George L. Ball, the former chairman and chief executive, and Loren Schechter, the current general counsel, are being examined by prosecutors as part of a broad criminal inquiry into the firm's sales of limited partnerships in the 1980's.


Mother Said to Bundle Up, and She Knew
On these days of winter's first cold snap, Adam Alb eats garlic with his lunch, Jersey City firefighters carry "winter bags" on their trucks, Guenter Skammel lugs around a bucket of hot water on his feeding rounds at the aquarium on Coney Island, and Ron Ste-Marie clomps around an unheated recycling center in far northern New York State in boots that are better than antifreeze -- "good to 80 below," he says.
For people who earn their living outdoors, the trick and the challenge in coping with temperatures in the teens and 20's and with snow in the air is keeping warm and avoiding frostbite while they tend zoo animals, work on cars, fight fires, police highways, teach skiing, plow snow, cut down trees or play football.


Review/Theater; 'Twelfth Night' Mischief
Rollicking good comedies are about as easy to come by these days as good news from Somalia or Sarajevo, but one of these rare creations is to be found at the Pearl Theater Company, 125 West 22d Street in Chelsea.
The author is a fellow named Shakespeare, who has a way with words, a taste for wit, a flair for romance, a gift for plot and is as willing to tweak the highborn as he is to bestow virtue on commoners.
This fellow calls his holiday-season offering "Twelfth Night," and to start matters off, he separates twins (Sebastian and Viola), who believe each other to have perished in a shipwreck.
Before the tale is finished, Viola disguises herself as a young man (a eunuch, no less), enters the service of Duke Orsino in a place called Illyria and finds herself falling in love with the duke.
At the same time, Olivia, the Duke's unwilling love object, is falling in love with Viola, not knowing that she is not a he.


Cowboys and Giants Are Ready
In a game between 11-4 teams that will crown the division champion and settle home-field advantage throughout the playoffs, the key for the Giants' defense will be to stop Michael Irvin and Alvin Harper, the Dallas Cowboys' big, fast and explosive wide receivers.
"We're going in to this game scared to death of losing," Irvin said today at the Cowboys' training base here.
"And when you're scared, you do everything you can to prepare so you won't lose."


Starks's Line: Few Points, No Excuses, No Answers
John Starks answered questions today, but he still needed an answer for his shooting slump.
The recent problems plaguing both Starks and the Knicks were magnified Tuesday during their fourth-quarter fold against the Nets at Madison Square Garden.
Holding a 5-point lead, with the ball and one minute to play, the Knicks disintegrated after Starks missed two ill-advised 3-point jumpers and lost, 97-95.


International Jensen Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


V Band Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Oncogene Science Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Federal Jury Frees Officers In Beatings
A Federal jury today acquitted a Yonkers police officer and a retired colleague of charges that they spirited two Northern Ireland immigrants to a deserted commuter parking lot and beat them repeatedly with their nightsticks.
Immediately after the verdict, the trial judge, Charles L. Brieant of Federal District Court, offered an unusually candid commentary upon the flaws of the case, saying he should never have let the matter go to the jury.


Neediest Cases Fund Aids the Mentally Ill
Robert P. sat on the edge of the bed in his 10-by-12-foot room and told -- in the way of one who has done so many times -- of the legacy of his mother, who spent so much time in state hospitals.
"She said that I inherited schizophrenia from her," he said, pausing to consider his phrasing.
"My brother and sister, they're O.K. I'm the one that had a problem."
His problem has taken him in and out of hospitals for the last 30 years, since he was 13 years old.
He trained in woodworking and maintenance but cannot keep a job because the pressures of daily life invariably disrupt his medication schedule, and that is disastrous.


Village of Domes Is New Frontier for the Homeless
It could hardly appear more incongruous, a neighborhood of 18 igloo-like structures on an old parking lot near a freeway entrance ramp, scarcely blocks west of the towers of downtown.
While they may look odd, the little white fiberglass domes next to the Harbor Freeway are a striking improvement from what they replaced two months ago: the more familiar trappings of the urban homeless -- shacks and jerry-rigged shanties, blankets draped over fences for warmth and privacy, shopping carts for belongings, boxes for beds.


Arrow International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Americans bought existing homes in November at the fastest pace ever recorded, spurred by confidence in the economy and the fear that low interest rates might not last.
The higher-than-expected activity reinforced optimism about continued economic expansion.
A separate report showed another rise in the index of leading economic indicators.  [ Page A1. ]
A California H.M.O. was ordered to pay $89.1 million to the family of a woman for whom it refused a costly, experimental treatment for the breast cancer that ultimately killed her.  [ A1. ]
At a time when regional economics has become a hot topic, the University of Pennsylvania plans to close its regional science department, a model of the field.  [ D1. ]
Few industries are growing faster than the corporate-financed job search business.
These out-placement firms provide employment services for laid-off workers.  [ D1. ] Companies
The inquiry into the fraud scandal at Prudential Securities is reportedly being broadened by Federal prosecutors, who are advising current and former executives -- including George L. Ball, the former chairman -- to hire criminal lawyers.  [ D1. ]
CSX ordered 300 G.E. locomotives in another sign of the railroad industry's resurgence.
The low-maintenance high-efficiency locomotives use new alternating-current electric motors.  [ D1. ]
Blockbuster Entertainment is said to be seeking assets from Viacom and better terms in exchange for an increased investment in Viacom's bid to take over Paramount Communications.  [ D1. ]
New York Life Insurance is being investigated in Florida after disclosing that one of its agents used the same misleading sales practices as Metropolitan Life Insurance.  [ D3. ]
Merry-Go-Round shares retreated after more than doubling in a week on rumors of progress in talks with lenders.  [ D3. ]
Nynex should have more room to maneuver in the telecommunications market, a New York State report urged.  [ D3. ]
Intel won a key court decision allowing it to speed up its copyright cases against Advanced Micro Devices.  [ D3. ] International
China will unify its two-tier exchange-rate system and let the value of the yuan float at market rates.
The step brings China closer to a convertible currency, which will help foreign investors and its eventual entry into GATT.  [ D2. ]
The economic policies of President Carlos Saul Menem could be extended because Argentina's Senate backed constitutional changes allowing Mr.
Menem to seek a second term.  [ A5. ] Markets
The stock market turned higher, pushing the Dow to its third straight gain and closer to the 3,800-point level.  [ D4. ]
Treasury securities prices weakened in sluggish trading.
The 30-year bond yield rose to 6.24 percent from 6.23 percent.  [ D12. ]
Oil prices surged in a short-covering rally ahead of an anticipated weekly report on domestic inventories.  [ D14. ]
The dollar rose solidly against European currencies.
Gold prices rose in New York after falling overseas.  [ D14. ] Today's Columns
The notion that Russia has tried shock therapy for its economy and has failed is a false one, according to many American economists and diplomats.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Cygnus Therapeutic's stock got a sudden lift from the announcement of a collaboration with Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories on transdermal hormone replacement patches.
Market Place.  [ D4. ]
With consumer products proliferating, Leo Burnett is urging their creators to, among other things, base new brands on already-proven qualities.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D16. ]


Harold M. Marks, 88, Real-Estate Executive
Harold Maurice Marks, a retired New York real-estate and construction executive, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 88.
He had had a long illness, his family said.


Iowa Women Lose Star
TIA JACKSON, the leading scorer on Iowa's second-ranked women's team, will miss the rest of the season because of a torn anterior cruciate ligament in her right knee.
The injury, suffered on Dec. 19, was first diagnosed as a severe sprain.
Jackson was averaging 16.8 points a game before her injury. (AP)


Anglican Prelate Defies Sudan in Trip to South
The Archbishop of Canterbury left London tonight on a long-planned tour of mostly Christian areas of the rebellious southern Sudan, defying a last-minute attempt by Khartoum's militant Islamic Government to place restrictions on his itinerary.
At the same time, the Archbishop, the Rev.
Dr.
George Carey, who is the spiritual head of the world's 70 million Anglicans, said he would curtail his trip by two days and abandon earlier plans to travel to the northern Sudan and to meet with officials in Khartoum.


Juan Gonzalez, 51, Painter in Tradition Of Realism, Is Dead
Juan Gonzalez, a Cuban-born realist painter who taught for nearly two decades at the School of Visual Arts, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 51.
The cause was AIDS, said his daughter Maria Schleifman of Manhattan.


WHITE HOUSE ACTS TO PROTECT STAND ON GAY TROOP BAN
The Clinton Administration has decided to fight a court ruling that threw out the old military policy under which service members could be dismissed for simply declaring their homosexuality.
But the Administration has decided to appeal only on technical grounds, to avoid broad constitutional issues that could undermine its new policy on gay service members.
The decision to appeal is part of an Administration effort to bolster its position against any challenge to the new policy.
The ruling, handed down in November by a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, involved a midshipman who was forced out of the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis and not commissioned as an officer because he said under questioning that he was homosexual.
Dealing With Old Policy
The court ruled that forcing him out violated the equal protection guarantee of the Constitution.
The court was dealing with the old Defense Department ban on homosexuals, but its decision cast doubt on the Administration's slightly more liberal policy, which permits homosexuals to serve in the armed forces but only if they keep their sexual orientation a secret.


J. Wayne Reitz, 84; Headed U. of Florida
J.
Wayne Reitz, a former president of the University of Florida, died on Friday at Shands Hospital here.
He was 84 and lived in Gainesville.
The cause was respiratory failure after a gall bladder infection, his family said.


CHRONICLE
"If anyone had told me when I was 17 years old that not only would Little Richard be singing one of my songs, but that I would be walking him through it and improvising switches on the melody with him, I would not have believed it," JEFF MOSS said the other day.
"If you don't get a kick out of that as a songwriter, you won't get a kick out of much."
All that and more came true for Mr.
Moss during the recent taping of the 25th anniversary special of "Sesame Street," which will be broadcast on March 6.
Mr.
Moss and Joe Raposo, now deceased, were the show's original composers and lyricists, and Mr.
Moss was its head writer for four years in the early 1970's.


INSIDE
Germany Bars Zhirinovsky
After being expelled from Bulgaria, the Russian nationalist politician Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky was barred from Germany for fear he could prejudice state interests.
Page A10.
Poland, New Drug Capital
Poland has become the newest major drug transfer point, and trafficking has risen in the Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania and Russia.
Page A3.
New Rules on Vitamins
The Government's new labeling regulations will prevent makers of dietary supplements from making claims they cannot prove.
Page A15.
Blood Test for a Cancer
A simple blood test can identify people who carry a gene for a form of colon cancer, allowing them to take early preventive action.
Page A12.


Lauchlin Currie, 91; New Deal Economist Was Roosevelt Aide
Lauchlin Currie, an economist who helped shape the New Deal during the Administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt, died last Thursday at his home in Bogota, Colombia.
He was 91.
The cause was a heart attack, said Juan Carlos Guerrero, an associate.


Tech's Best Leaves Redmen Grasping
Nearly half an hour after they lost a heartbreaking game to Georgia Tech, the Redmen were still talking about Ivano Newbill's shot that gave the Yellow Jackets a 71-69 victory last night in the final of the Chemical Bank E.C.A.C.
Holiday Festival at Madison Square Garden.
With the game tied, 69-69, and 26.1 seconds left in regulation, Travis Best was directing the Yellow Jackets' offense, passing the ball around and finally got it back into his hands with 4.1 seconds left.


Graves Deflects Shots and Praise
Adam Graves will tell you that the two goals he scored tonight were lucky deflections involving no skill.
He will tell you that his selection to his first National Hockey League All-Star Game is a reflection of some league official's personal insanity.
And he will insist that some other Ranger should wear the captain's "C" while Mark Messier, the team's official leader, sits home with a sprained right wrist.


Corrections
A brief report on the Health page yesterday, about sources of help for people with the winter lethargy known as seasonal affective disorder, referred incorrectly to the Guilford Press, publisher of "Winter Blues," by Dr.
E.
Norman Rosenthal.
It is an independent publisher, not affiliated with the Sunbox Company.


Microstar Software reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Lidak Pharmaceuticals (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Giuliani Picks Supporters For 2 Top Adviser Posts
Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday named two prominent campaign supporters to newly created positions as advisers to the Mayor.
Mr.
Giuliani said Richard J. Schwartz, the deputy manager of his campaign, would serve as a senior adviser to work at "the highest level of city government" carrying out the administration's policies throughout the municipal bureaucracy.


Review/Television; Point and Counterpoint With Arafat and Rabin
Tonight's edition of "Talking With David Frost" confirms that whatever Yasir Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin say in public during this period of on-and-off negotiating is naturally or unnaturally phrased with an eye as much on their own divided constituencies as on each other, not to mention on outsiders like Mr.
Frost's audience.
The hourlong program itself is divided between Palestinian and Israeli, with the first half given to the enduring leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization, who seems almost to have shaved for the occasion.
Despite a little talk-show vaporing ("But that's the dream that's never left you," Mr. Frost prompts Mr. Arafat about Palestinian claims to Jerusalem), the program does get into several prickly subjects.
On Jerusalem, Mr.
Arafat, whose spotty English requires Mr.
Frost to repeat some answers, proposes making the contested city the joint capital of Israel and a Palestinian state.
For some reason, Mr.
Frost does not elicit the Israeli Prime Minister's opinion of any such innovation.
Nor does he ask Mr.
Arafat about his intentions toward the Jewish settlements in Gaza, which Mr.
Rabin maintains "are going to stay; they are not going to be uprooted."
Although Mr.
Rabin avows his commitment to successful negotiations, he does not exude as much confidence as his new television partner, who announces more than once, "Where there's a will, there's a way." To one interesting question -- what would the newly organized Palestinian police force do if a Palestinian should shoot an Israeli -- Mr.
Arafat replies, "Sorry, we are not speaking about small issues."
Among the issues that Mr.
Rabin does not consider small is whether, as Mr.
Arafat holds, an Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and Jericho represents the beginning of a Palestinian state or whether, as Mr.
Rabin views it, the withdrawal is only "an interim agreement that leaves the future open." They also disagree on which side will control the borders of the territories in question.
Both men assure Mr.
Frost that they can manage the opponents among their own people to any agreement, but Mr.
Rabin expresses skepticism about Mr.
Arafat's ability to bring into line groups like Hamas, which are continuing to attack Israelis.
The Prime Minister observes in his flat bass: "They deny the right of Israel to exist. They opposed the very peace negotiations. They are against the agreement."
The two leaders display different styles.
Mr.
Arafat is more the showman; he speaks of himself as a martyr.
Mr.
Rabin is the Jewish Al Gore.
But in their different ways, both leaven hope with wariness as they edge toward what Mr.
Rabin calls "calculated risks for peace."
Their appearance tonight makes plain, in case there was any doubt, that despite Mr.
Arafat's waving away of what he calls "small issues," the road to peace in the Middle East is still a minefield of details as well as principles.
Talking With David Frost PBS, tonight at 10 (Channel 13 in New York) Robert Muller, coordinating producer; produced by Wallace Westfeldt for David Paradine Television and WETA in Washington; John M. Florescu and David Frost, executive producers; Mr.
Frost, host.
WITH: Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat.


Talk Is Cheap as Mets Try to Make a Deal
No, the trade of Bobby Bonilla is not imminent.
But the possibility still remains, as the Mets and the Orioles await the new year and the probable resumption of negotiations that could cause the exit of the Mets' high-priced outfielder to usher in a host of young Orioles players and the new era the Mets so desire.
Both Mets and Orioles officials spent much of yesterday debunking reports that Bonilla was on the verge of being traded for Mike Devereaux, Baltimore's productive center fielder; David Segui, a first baseman who batted .273 with 60 runs batted in last season, and Brad Pennington, a hard-throwing left-hander who is 24 years old and had a 3-2 record with four saves in 33 innings with Baltimore.
Their Kind of Deal
"That report is erroneous in that there was no offer made," Ed Lynch, a special assistant to the Mets' general manager, Joe McIlvaine, said yesterday.
"I cannot say that those names did not come up, but there was no offer made."


Bangalore Journal; For Many Brides in India, a Dowry Buys Death
A few days ago, the police arrested Nagavani's husband.
It came none too soon: she's still alive.
"My husband wanted a house in his name," she began, whispering.
"He wanted a 30,000-rupee scooter," worth about $1,000.
"He said if I did not give him this, he would take me to the top of a building and push me down."


Panel Urges Easing Rules For Nynex
A New York State panel of business and government experts has recommended relaxing some regulations to give the Nynex Corporation more room to maneuver in the increasingly competitive telecommunications market.
But the panel's 90-page report leaves unaddressed other matters, like pricing flexibility, that Nynex also considers burdensome.
The report, entitled "Connecting to the Future," lacks many details for its proposals.
But the acting chairman of the panel, Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine, said in an interview yesterday that state officials were intent on lifting "regulatory shackles" from Nynex, as well as from Rochester Telephone, cable-television operators and others expected to build complex new information networks in New York State.


Clock Unveiled in Times Square to Record Number of Gun Killings


Defensive Grip Tightens As Seton Hall Triumphs
While the snow was falling steadily outside, the shots definitely were not falling inside the Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight in the first game of the second Seton Hall/ Meadowlands Tournament.
And when the game was mercifully over, Seton Hall had a 67-47 victory over the University of San Diego, despite shooting a woeful 38 percent from the floor.


Howard P. Kellett, 86, Episcopal Prison Priest
The Rev.
Howard Pearson Kellett, a former Massachusetts prison chaplain long active in social causes, died on Saturday in a hospital in York, Me.
He was 86.
He had a brief illness, his family said.


Executive Changes
DATA TRANSMISSION NETWORK CORP., Omaha, named Steve Ball chief financial officer and Greg Sloma chief operating officer.


Economic Scene; Russia's political turmoil follows half steps, not shock therapy.
STARTLING events have a way of focusing the attention of an otherwise distracted body politic.
And few events in recent months have been as startling as the rise of Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, Russia's 1930's-style bully boy with a 1990's flair for television.
Mr.
Zhirinovsky's success at the polls, Vice President Al Gore says, shows that economic reformers have asked excessive sacrifice from the already-humbled Russian masses.
Or, as Strobe Talbott, Ambassador at Large to the former Soviet republics and the nominee for Deputy Secretary of State, put it, reform has consisted of "too much shock and too little therapy."


Chiefs Sign McMillan
The Kansas City Chiefs signed the 28-year-old safety ERIK McMILLAN yesterday, waiving tackle TOM RICKETTS to make room for the two-time Pro Bowl selection.


Voucher Program for Street People Shows Ambiguous Charity
To the Editor:
The voucher plan that was just imported from Berkeley, Calif., to New York City's Upper West Side by Laura Friedman and West Side Cares (news article, Dec. 20) is a menacing and deceitful proposition.
The apparent rationale for giving panhandlers not cash, but 25-cent vouchers (which customers may buy at stores on Broadway between 106th and 125th Streets and which may be redeemed for food or personal items in seven stores), is the widespread perception that a great deal of the earnings from begging ends up in a crack pipe.


Events: Gilded Furniture on View
Gilded Antiques  New York Coliseum, Broadway at 59th Street; (201) 384-0010.
Making a comeback: Gilded furniture -- sconces, mirrors, etageres and stools -- often seen in those oh-so-chic European rooms of the 1920's to 1950's.
These copies of 16th- and 17th- century originals are called "costume furniture," a nod to the imaginative, frankly fake jewelry of the period.
There should be a plentiful supply at the 200-dealer New York Coliseum Antiques Show on Saturday, from noon to 7 P.M., and on Sunday, from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission, good for both days, is $10.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
2.98
2.60
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.98
3.05
3.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.20
3.23
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.23
5.20
6.35
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.24
6.23
7.37
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.23
7.23
8.38
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.50
5.52
6.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


He's Back After 7 Years
Goalie ROBERTO ROMANO might make play in a National Hockey League game tomorrow for the first time in nearly seven years.
The Pittsburgh Penguins recalled the 31-year-old Romano from the International League yesterday because their top two goaltenders were injured in Tuesday's 4-4 tie with the Philadelphia Flyers.
TOM BARRASSO is expected to miss 10 to 14 days because of a sprained knee and KEN WREGGET might be out 10 to 14 days because of a separated shoulder.


Review/Film; Rampaging Appliances In 'Ghost in the Machine'
"Ghost in the Machine" is the kind of movie in which a curling iron, a garbage disposal and a dishwasher become potential murder weapons.
The explanation will thrill technophobes: a serial killer dies during a lightning storm and his soul seeps from the hospital's X-ray scanner into a mainframe computer.
From there he roams through Ohio's electrical system, ejecting videos from VCR's at will and terrorizing Terry Munroe (Karen Allen) and her 13-year-old son, Josh (Wil Horneff).
Considering that premise, the film should have been a lot wackier.
Although "Ghost in the Machine" opened yesterday without advance screenings (the surest sign of trouble), the movie is not a disaster.
It is a competent, occasionally witty genre piece that never tries to be anything more.


Pursuing Corrupt Cops
The Mollen commission's interim report on police corruption in New York City puts into writing the same message the commission's hearings conveyed in the fall: that pockets of police corruption and brutality exist because the ingrained culture of the Police Department tolerates wrongdoing, even protects the wrongdoer.
The panel recommends shaking up the department's anti-corruption bureaucracy, and appointing an outside panel to conduct investigations.
It remains unclear how pervasive corruption is within the department.
The commission, perhaps hoping to influence the new mayor, issued its recommendations prematurely; its final report, due in a few months, owes New Yorkers a clearer picture of the extent of police wrongdoing.


It's Close, but Nets Fall To 0 for Almost 8 Years
There was no Michael Jordan sighting tonight at Chicago Stadium, but that did not alter recent history for the Nets.
There were still too many ghosts lingering in this building.
Ghosts that change a visiting team into a victimized team in the fourth quarter.
At least that is the way it seems.
It happened again tonight.
After playing an inspired three quarters against the three-time defending champion Bulls and continuing their strong revival with a one-point lead, the Nets wilted during the final period when Chicago stopped toying with them, employed its powerful arsenal of Scottie Pippen and Toni Kukoc and burst to a 94-86 victory.


Corrections
Two diagrams in Science Times on Tuesday, with an article about subterranean microbes, referred incorrectly in some editions to the depth at which they are suspected to live.
It is in the crust of the earth, not the mantle below.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Shirley Mac Laine's effort to build a home on Atalaya Mountain outside Santa Fe omitted parts of the actress's response to critics in some editions.
She said her celebrity singled her out unfairly among many people who plan to build on the mountain's upper reaches and made her a "punching bag" for local politicians and radical environmentalists.
She said she had bought the property in part to protect it from unregulated development.
Karl Sommer, a lawyer for the prime developer in the area, supported her position, saying, "The city and the county did not plan for the growth that is taking place here."


No Headline
"It's not the hottest item we sell, but it's still available. There has been a lot more  interest around here since they've been rattling their swords at the North Koreans." -- DICK MANKAMAYER, who sells fallout shelters in McKenna, Wash.  [ A16:2. ]


Frederick Harlfinger; Vice Admiral Was 80
Frederick J. Harlfinger 2d, a retired Vice Admiral, died on Tuesday at his home in Sarasota.
The Admiral, who was known as Fritz, was 80.
The cause was complications from respiratory problems, his family said.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
The Elusive Bayberry
Q.
I have several bayberry plants that have not borne fruit since I planted them in my Cape Cod garden two years ago.
Might there be separate male and female plants?
Would this account for the lack of berries? -- Thomas W. Wolff, New York.


Rites of Passage (With Plenty of Boxes)
In his dwindling days of power, as his office records and possessions were being packed up, David N. Dinkins set up a clothes rack in the executive wing of City Hall, stocked it with scores of the zippered warm-up jackets he had worn as his trademark costume as Mayor, and had a going-out-of-business souvenir offering for his neighboring loyalists.
Tenderly, he also saw to the wrapping of the kaleidoscopic array of photos of himself with the rich, the famous and the plebian that lined the hidden passageway leading down to the basement inner-sanctum from his office in the northwest corner.
The Jimmy Walker-like society pleasures of incumbency for Mr.
Dinkins were never clearer to outsiders than in that passageway.
Checking Out the Premises
As if for contrasting symbolism, Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani arrived unannounced last Sunday morning with Peter J. Powers, his deputy mayor-designate and Richelieu-handyman.
Lacking celebrity rotogravure, but with the City Hall building blueprint itself in hand, Mr.
Giuliani meticulously took stock of the premises he finally won after a five-year, tooth-and-claw campaign.


SALES IN NOVEMBER OF EXISTING HOMES HIT A RECORD PACE
Spurred by growing confidence in the economy and a fear that low interest rates may not last, Americans snapped up single-family homes in November at the fastest pace ever recorded, the National Association of Realtors announced today.
Sales of existing homes in November ran at an annual rate of 4.21 million homes.
That rate, which is statistically adjusted for seasonal variations, was 2.9 percent higher than in October and 9.1 percent ahead of the November 1992 pace.


2 Held in Upstate New York Bombings Fatal to 5
A man apparently angry at his girlfriend's relatives was arrested yesterday in connection with a series of bombings across upstate New York that killed five people within 90 minutes of each other on Tuesday evening.
A second man, who the authorities said had bought dynamite and blasting caps and helped make the bombs, was also arrested.
Law-enforcement officials said six bombs were delivered to relatives of the girlfriend, Brenda Lazore, who lives in the Rochester area.


Many Well-Educated People Leaving Ex-Yugoslav Lands
Hundreds of thousands of the former Yugoslavia's best educated people are fleeing war, poverty and hatred in the shattered country, creating a brain drain that has not only hastened economic ruin but also removed a moderating force from the region's harsh political discourse.
"It's difficult to quantify, but certainly it's into the hundreds of thousands," said Brian T. Casey, the Canadian consul in Belgrade, whose embassy gets between 100 and 200 applications for emigration each day and has granted about 6,000 permanent visas this year.


Suddenly, Islanders Get a Sinking Feeling
The Islanders had stormed through six straight victories, all against winning teams.
Then something happened.
In 24 hours, they saw their winning streak, their top defenseman, Vladimir Malakhov, and their leading scorer, Pierre Turgeon, quickly fade.


AGRA Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Inquiry Into Radiation Tests Extends to Veterans
The Energy Department is expanding its inquiry into improper use of human subjects in radiation experiments to determine whether patients in Veterans Administration hospitals were used, a department official said last night.
The number of veterans involved, the nature of the experiments and when they were conducted are not clear, the official said.
But he said that between the veterans and other subjects now coming to light, it appeared that "at least 1,000" people had been exposed to radiation for purposes clearly unrelated to their health.


Bridge
The climax of the tournament year for players in the New York area is the Winter Regional Championships of the Greater New York Bridge Association, beginning today at the Sheraton New York Hotel, Seventh Avenue at 53d Street in Manhattan.
These events are scheduled:


Hindu Temple Plans Stir Concerns in Community
When word got around that the boarded-up Y.M.C.A. here, complete with outdoor pool, was destined to become a Hindu temple, some residents were less than pleased.
Though the Sayreville Planning Board has moved to resolve the issue by permitting the temple if certain conditions are met, the question remains whether opposition to the temple springs from parking problems or prejudice.


Germany Blocks a Second Visit by Russian Ultranationalist
The German Government denied the Russian nationalist politician Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky permission to enter the country with seven associates today, saying his renewed presence here would "prejudice German state interests."
Mr.
Zhirinovsky later returned to Moscow On Tuesday, he was expelled from Bulgaria for statements he made about its president.


Peale Remembered for Instilling Hope and Peace
The three children of the Rev.
Dr.
Norman Vincent Peale offered poignant recollections of their father at his funeral yesterday, which ended with his widow, Ruth Stafford Peale, announcing her determination to wage a national campaign in behalf of positive thinking.
Speaking from the pulpit of Marble Collegiate Church in Manhattan, the church where Dr.
Peale was pastor from 1932 to 1984, Mrs.
Peale said she would blanket the country with copies of her husband's best-seller, "The Power of Positive Thinking."


Gallery of History Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Giovanni Ruffini, 79, Luxury Liner Captain
Capt.
Giovanni Ruffini, who commanded a series of luxury ocean liners and cruise ships for Home Lines, including its flagship Oceanic for 28 years, died on Sunday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 79 and lived in Manhattan.
The causes were cancer and complications from diabetes.


INSIDE
Irving (Swifty) Lazar Dies
Irving Lazar, the agent for Humphrey Bogart, Ernest Hemingway and Cole Porter, among many other celebrities, died at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
Page A25.
Rabbi Marshall Meyer Dies
Rabbi Marshall T. Meyer, a critic of the Argentine military and a major voice of American Jewish liberalism, died at age 63.
Page A24.
New Demjanjuk Strategy
The Justice Department still believes John Demjanjuk was a war criminal, if not one of the most barbaric Nazis of the Holocaust.
Page A13.


After His Last Day on the Job, Dinkins Gets a Musical Send-Off


Royal Palm Beach Colony L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Islanders' Father Time Is Losing His Patience
From the time he became coach of the Islanders 20 years ago, when they were the worst team in National Hockey League history, Al Arbour never offered, or accepted excuses.
So when the Islanders bowed to the Nordiques in Quebec, 5-2, Wednesday night, Arbour was angry and annoyed, not compassionate.


Killings in Bosnian Monastery Widen Croat-Muslim Divide
The first Bosnian Government statement, released two days after the incident, said only that an unknown gunman killed two Roman Catholic priests inside the Franciscan monastery here on Nov. 13.
But for many of central Bosnia's Catholic Croats, faith in the mostly Muslim Government's official stand in favor of preserving an ethnically mixed country died that day, when, by all accounts, a Muslim soldier in the Bosnian Army gunned down the Rev.
Nikica Milicevic, the monastery's 37-year-old abbot, and the Rev.
Leon Migic, its 57-year-old vicar.


New Home Sales Jump By 11.3%
Sales of newly built single-family homes shot up 11.3 percent in November to their highest level since 1986, the Commerce Department reported yesterday -- providing new evidence that families are hurrying to move out of rented apartments and into their own homes before they are priced out of the housing market again.
"People are starting to believe that the declines in home prices that had plagued the market for months have stopped and prices might move up again, along with mortgage rates, so they are taking advantage of this window of opportunity," said Richard T. Curtin, director of the University of Michigan's Consumer Research Center.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Capitals' Tabaracci Returns With Flair  Rick Tabaracci made 26 saves in his first shutout of the season, and the Washington Capitals reached the .500 mark for the first time since Nov. 16 by beating Anaheim, 3-0, at Landover, Md., last night.
Mike Ridley, Enrico Ciccone and Dmitri Khristich scored for the Capitals, who are 6-3-1 in their last 10 games and 17-17-3 over all.


Home Video
The Holocaust
"Schindler's List," Steven Spielberg's harrowing film about the Holocaust, can be daunting for youngsters, but parents looking for films to inform their children about the period might consider a collection of 20 Holocaust tapes from Ergo Media, a distributor of videos on Jewish subjects in Teaneck, N.J.


Diplomatic Pact Signed by Israel And the Vatican
Formally recognizing each other after decades of diplomatic aloofness and centuries of frequent Jewish-Catholic rancor, Israel and the Vatican signed an agreement today to establish diplomatic relations.
But at the dawn of a new epoch of reconciliation, many Israelis were unable to shed their memories of pain and bloodshed that they associate with the church.


Events in Russia Send Shivers East and West; Not I.M.F.'s Fault
To the Editor:
Vice President Al Gore chose the wrong target in blaming the International Monetary Fund for difficulties in Russia.
The I.M.F. has no power to direct its financing to provide the social safety net Russia needs.


I.R.A. Sniper Kills British Soldier, Raising Doubts on Peace Initiative
An I.R.A. sniper shot and killed a British soldier on patrol in Northern Ireland today, raising doubts over prospects for a British-Irish initiative aimed at bringing peace to the province.
The killing, for which the I.R.A. took responsibility, was the first in Northern Ireland since Britain and Ireland started their peace bid on Dec. 15, challenging the I.R.A. to halt its violence in exchange for a seat for Sinn Fein, its political arm, at talks on the future of the province.


Critics' Choices; Artistic Ideas for Starting the New Year Right
Cabaret
No Broadway composer distilled the spirit of New York City in the 1940's and 50's with more passion and energy than Leonard Bernstein.
Picking up where George Gershwin left off in painting the city as a glorious musical melting pot of highbrow and lowbrow, European, American and Latin American, Bernstein created music that was as sophisticated as it was optimistic.
That upbeat tone mirrored the mood of the postwar era when America felt great about itself and New York City became an international artistic mecca.
"The Leonard Bernstein Revue: A Helluva Town," a revue of Bernstein's theater songs at Rainbow and Stars, evokes the vitality of the time with a ferocious eagerness.
The show, which has been extended through Jan. 29, creates a retrospective portrait of the city as a magnet for people with oversized dreams of achievement and love.
Under the direction of Richard Sabellico, the five cast members -- Marilyn Caskey, Lauren Mitchell, J. Mark McVey, Patrick Quinn and Ruth Williamson -- evoke a bracing mixture of aggressiveness and open-hearted romanticism.





Holiday Weekend
New Year's Day is tomorrow, and many businesses and government offices will be closed today.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES State offices and courts in New York State open, closed in New York City.
Government offices in Nassau and Rockland Counties are open today and closed tomorrow.
Offices in Suffolk, Westchester and Putnam and Federal offices are closed both days.


Critics' Choices; Artistic Ideas for Starting the New Year Right
Art
The show called "Face of the Gods: Art and Altars of Africa and the African Americas," at the Museum for African Art, shouldn't be missed.
Presenting sacred objects in a secular setting, the exhibition is a groundbreaking exploration of a religious and cultural diaspora that includes altars assembled and consecrated at the museum.
On purely visual terms, there has probably been nothing quite like it.
A "bottle tree" in the middle of one gallery is a tree festooned with colorful plastic bottles and frying pans, in the manner of Kongo-based shrines in the American South.
A jerry-built closet contains a virtual forest and elaborate instruments of ritual, like mirrors and feathers, in a shrine constructed and consecrated by Felipe Garcia Villamil, a Cuban-born Palo Monte priest and artist, who now lives in the Bronx.
Another altar, related to AIDS and put together by a Brazilian priest, Pai Balbino de Paula, presents rows of clay pots adorned with metalwork and sprinkled with popcorn, one of the foods sacred to the Brazilian Yoruba deity Omo-Olu.
The final altar in the show is timely: a diorama representing Copacabana beach in Rio de Janeiro illuminated by candles, in the manner of a New Year's Eve ritual dedicated to Yemoja, the Yoruba deity of the Atlantic Ocean.


Paris Journal; Frenchwomen Say It's Time to Be 'a Bit Utopian'
Women are no more fully represented in French politics today than they were after universal suffrage was finally introduced here 48 years ago, but a group of determined women -- the French generally shy from the word "feminist" -- is now intent on changing that.
Their goal is a law requiring that seats in the lower house of the French Parliament be shared equally by men and women.
But on the way to achieving this, they must first win over the men who control the country's main political parties.
And that will not be easy.


New Year's Resolutions For the Second Half of Life
NEW YEAR'S EVE. Not again.
Why is this night different from all other nights?
I know; wrong holiday.
But when a horror is familiar and you know it's coming, you wait for it, trepidatiously, and tonight's the night for that awful moment at midnight when the clock ticks and the universe makes a tiny, perceptible lunge forward and there we all are, one step closer to, well, you know.
The point is it's worse this year, the worst it's ever been.
I'm 40. (A guy I know actually turns 40 tomorrow. Can you imagine making it through New Year's Eve only to wake up 40? Chilling.)


Pentagon Memo; Quickly the Pentagon Is Becoming Inman's Camp
With Defense Secretary Les Aspin on the way out, the race is on among some top Pentagon officials to show, one, that they never thought much of him anyway, and, two, that they deeply respect the genius of one Bobby Ray Inman, who has been nominated to be Mr.
Aspin's successor.
Mr.
Inman has not set foot in the Pentagon since he was picked by Mr.
Clinton, and he has sworn to keep quiet about issues like Bosnia, Somalia and homosexuals in the military until his Senate confirmation hearing next month.


Diner's Journal
Going Home, as the Chef
Rick Laakkonen is going back across the East River to the River Cafe in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Laakkonen, who worked at the restaurant for five years when Charles Palmer and then David Burke were executive chefs, left in 1990 to spend about a year in France in the kitchens of Gaston Lenotre, Michel Guerard and Alain Ducasse.
"The idea was always for Rick to work here when he returned from France but the timing wasn't right," said Michael O'Keeffe, the owner.


Books of The Times; A Novel's Rich Tapestry From Another Century
The Green Knight By Iris Murdoch 472 pages.
Viking. $23.95.
In this age of glittering post-modern fictions and tiny, domestic novellas, Iris Murdoch's commodious novels of ideas tend to feel like strange, provocative throwbacks to the 19th century.
Her elaborate, improbable plots; her sprawling casts of characters; her insistent manipulation of symbols and myths; her preoccupation with enduring philosophical and religious themes: all make one think of a Dickens who has read the existentialists or a Dostoyevsky who has been immersed in Plato.


Vatican Seeks Arab Favor; Plans Accord With Jordan
Even as it finally recognized Israel, the Vatican sought today to defend its position in the Arab world and to register its demand for international guarantees of Jerusalem's spiritual status as a holy place for Christians, Jews and Muslims alike.
The spokesman for the Vatican, Joaquin Navarro-Valls, set out its position at a news conference here several hours before the signing of a recognition agreement supposed in part to ease 2,000 years of often painful history.


Review/Theater; Woodstock As Signpost On the Road To Sanity
Say what you like about the two women who share room 9B of the Heavenly Hills mental health clinic in John Ford Noonan's "Music From Down the Hill." Whatever their psychological problems -- and one of them says she has murdered several of her college roommates -- they are an awfully good audience for each other.
Whenever one feels the urge to deliver a big, poetic monologue about how she got the way she is -- and there are many such monologues -- the other goes obligingly silent, fading right into the institutional green walls.
Following a formula he has employed in such earlier works as "A Coupla White Chicks Sitting Around Talking" (1980) and "Some Men Need Help" (1982), Mr.
Noonan has again created two characters from dissimilar backgrounds who gradually discover what they have in common and how they can help each other.
But in "Music," the author has burdened his characters with long, confessional speeches that have the feeling of acting-class exercises.
There is little reciprocal, natural flow in their exchanges, and the viewer may expect the actresses to step out of character and give critiques of each other's performances.


44 Years Later, the Truth About the 'Science Club'
A 53-year-old man who learned this week that he may have been among the boys who were fed radioactive milk in 1949 at the Walter E. Fernald State School in Waltham, Mass., expressed outrage at having been used as a "guinea pig."
Some scientists, meanwhile, defended the experiments, saying the research, which began in 1946, had involved only low levels of radiation.


Sparta Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Carlo 'Works on Paper, 1960-73' Phyllis Kind Gallery 136 Greene Street (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Jan. 20
This delightful show of 27 gouaches, the first United States exhibition of the artist's work since 1968, re-introduces Carlo, an Italian laborer and soldier born in 1916 in Verona and hospitalized there in 1947 with what was diagnosed as paranoid schizophrenia.
In 1957, after drawing on the walls of his room with a brick, Carlo was given art materials, and he painted and drew every day for the next 14 years. (His output diminished after he was moved to another hospital; he died in 1974.)


It's Official for Dykstra
LENNY DYKSTRA, who led the Philadelphia Phillies to their first National League pennant in a decade, officially signed a four-year extension to his contract yesterday and became baseball's seventh-highest-paid player, based on yearly average.
The 30-year-old outfielder, who will earn $2.6 million in 1994, agreed last week to an extension that will amount to $24.9 million from 1995 through 1998, an average of $6.25 million a year.


In Search of News Along the Sideline
The sight of a sideline reporter is often enough to make you cringe and ask: Why is he or she there?
The deficiency is usually in the restrictions placed on the reporter by a body like the National Football League, which won't let CBS's Lesley Visser on the field during a game, thus limiting access and information.
But the problem sometimes lies with the reporter's lack of enterprising journalistic skills, such as with NBC's Ahmad Rashad, whose megadependence on Michael Jordan became an embarrassment.


Miscellany
*
Barry Blau &amp; Partners Inc., a direct-response agency in Fairfield, Conn., has formed a division specializing in broadcast direct-marketing advertising called Blau &amp; Beatty Broadcast Direct Marketing.
Bob Beatty, previously a senior vice president of Lawrence Butner Advertising, New York, will head the unit as president and chief executive.


Neither Snow, Rain Nor Competition
Admit it.
You are breaking the law.
And not just once: some of you do it dozens of times a month.
The offense?
Sending Aunt Sally a get-well card, or the home office a memo, via private overnight courier.
For years, millions of otherwise honest Americans have blithely assumed that they can use Federal Express, United Parcel Service and the other private couriers anytime and anywhere -- as long as they are willing to pay the premium price.
Not so, says the U.S.
Postal Service.
Ever since the 19th century it has been a crime for anyone other than the Federal post office to deliver letters.
The Postal Service allows exceptions for "urgent" mail, but nothing else.


Livingston Selected For a Fox Network
FX, the cable television network to be introduced by Fox Inc. on June 1, said yesterday that it had selected Livingston &amp; Company to handle its consumer and trade account, with billings estimated at $5 million to $10 million.
Lucy Hood, vice president of consumer and affiliate marketing at FX in Los Angeles, said the choice was made after a monthlong review that began with about 20 agencies and was narrowed to 6 finalists.


Corrections
An article in Your Money on Nov. 13, about the deductibles on auto and homeowners insurance, misspelled the surname of an insurance specialist at Consumers Union.
He is Greg Daugherty.
Mr.
Daugherty reported the error in a letter dated Dec. 17; this correction was delayed by the misrouting of a computer message at The Times.


While Barbie Talks Tough, G. I. Joe Goes Shopping
Your son tears the wrapping paper off his fierce new "Talking Duke" G. I. Joe doll and eagerly presses the talk button.
Out comes a painfully chirpy voice that sounds astonishingly like Barbie's saying, "Let's go shopping!"


Checking for Any Last-Minute Hitches


Karnishovas Awakens, Rallies Pirates to Title
If Seton Hall is going to have any success at all in the Big East this season, someone is going to have to fill the void created by the graduation of Terry Dehere.
Arturas Karnishovas is supposed to be that player.
A four-year starter and career 47 percent shooter from the floor for three years, Karnishovas had yet to find his touch before tonight, barely managing to connect on 30 percent of his attempts in the Pirates' first eight games.


Markets Open
The stock, bond and currency markets will be open today in the United States.
But the commodities markets in New York will be closed in observance of New Year's Eve, and those in Chicago will end trading early.


Magazine Group Adds More Prizes
The Magazine Publishers of America said yesterday that it had added four categories to its annual MPA Kelly Award competition.
In addition to awarding a $100,000 general excellence prize to the agency creative team that produces what is judged to be the year's best magazine advertising campaign, there will also be noncash awards for best design and graphics, best headline and copy, best at meeting campaign objectives and best new work by a new team.
The 1993 award will be presented on May 26 in New York; the deadline for entries is Feb. 7 and the 25 finalists will be announced in March.


CHRONICLE
MICHAEL HAMBURGER, 69, a German-born poet, essayist, translator and college lecturer who now lives in England, has received many honors, among them the Order of the British Empire in 1992. (A listing of his literary prizes takes up a dozen lines in Who's Who.) Still, he has received meager attention for his work in the United States.
So he was astonished recently to receive the Oscar Williams and Gene Derwood Award, which is given annually to needy or worthy artists or poets.
The donors were a husband and wife who wrote in the mid-1900's.
It has been 20 years since the publication in this country of his last critical essays, and the three volumes were not reviewed.
"No copies were sold, not a penny in royalties received," he said from his home in Suffolk.
"It is a very sad story."
His new American award, a $15,000 prize, came from a fund created by the donors at the New York Community Trust, a philanthropy based in Manhattan.


Florida Seeks U.S. Aid For Illegal Immigrants
Gov.
Lawton Chiles of Florida has ordered his state to sue the Federal Government to try to reduce the flow of illegal immigrants and recoup the money Florida is forced to spend on social services for them.
"The people of Florida should not be compelled to subsidize the entry of illegal aliens into the United States, nor should they tolerate continued failure of the United States Government to carry out its duty under the law," Mr.
Chiles wrote in a letter to the State Attorney General, Bob Butterworth, this week.


Sometimes, to Get Loose, You Have to Tighten Up First


Casino Resource Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Conservative Thinkers Are Insiders; It's Now Their City Hall, and Manhattan Institute Is Uneasy
With Rudolph W. Giuliani about to become Mayor, the conservative Manhattan Institute should be riding high.
The iconoclastic research group has seen some of its favorite ideas -- selling city hospitals to private groups, cutting local business taxes, curbing the excesses of multicultural education -- adopted as pillars of Mr.
Giuliani's campaign.
The group's stalwarts are on first-name terms with the new City Hall team.
One trustee, Peter M. Flanigan, managing director at Dillon, Read &amp; Company, had lunch this week with Donna Hanover Giuliani, the Mayor-elect's wife.
Ninfa Segarra, the new Deputy Mayor for health, social services and education, has praised its work on giving parents more choice of the public schools their children attend.
And Richard J. Schwartz, senior adviser to Mr.
Giuliani, calls the institute an "integral part of the movement for a new urban agenda for the 1990's."


Restaurants
"What's new?"
When people ask me that, they mean it in the literal sense.
They want to know about Markham and Bolo and Christer's, about Amarcord, Shin's and Iridium, all restaurants that have opened in the last couple of months.


Genentech's Drug to Treat Cystic Fibrosis Is Approved
A genetically engineered drug made by Genentech Inc. that is the first new treatment for cystic fibrosis in 30 years was approved today by the Food and Drug Administration.
The drug, called Pulmozyme, was developed and approved in about half the usual time because, in part, Genentech and the F.D.A. cooperated.
The company received input from the F.D.A. during clinical trials and expedited approval of manufacturing and packaging even before today's approval.


Starks Finds Cure For His Ills: The Bullets
The Knicks were down to seven healthy regulars for the second half of last night's game.
Fortunately for New York, John Starks felt terrific.
Starks ended his eight-game shooting slump -- 29 points on 13-for-22 shooting -- and led the Knicks past the downtrodden Washington Bullets, 102-84, last night at Madison Square Garden.
Starks's outburst was timely because both Anthony Mason (sprained left ankle) and Tony Campbell (pinched nerve, left foot) sat out the second half.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Some fanciful suppositions as Madison Avenue makes its resolutions for a new year.
IF Madison Avenue created New Year's celebrations, Old Man 1993 would be a self-confident, silver-haired model toting a tennis racquet, straight out of a commercial for denture adhesive, not a crotchety geezer lugging a scythe.
And Baby 1994 would be a voluptuous nymph in a revealing swimsuit, borrowed from a beer campaign, rather than a diaper-clad infant.
Fortunately, advertising, marketing and media executives participate in only three New Year's rituals: ringing out the old, ringing in the new and making resolutions.
For anyone wondering what they might resolve for 1994, here are some fanciful suppositions:


Critics' Choices; Artistic Ideas for Starting the New Year Right
Design
"Diana Vreeland: Immoderate Style," now at the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, toasts the new year with a lively dose of Champagne sparkle.
This Dom Perignon of a show mixes fashions that Vreeland wore or promoted; layouts from Vogue and Harper's Bazaar; neon-colored hairpieces; classic photographs by Richard Avedon and Irving Penn; lively memos to her staff, and pictures of Vreeland herself at work.
But the show isn't all froth.
There are delicious ideas bubbling around in this effervescent glass of fashion.


Critics' Choices; Artistic Ideas for Starting the New Year Right
Classical Music
It is not every day one gets to hear Victor Borge clowning around with Robert Merrill, or Robert Sherman delivering the narration to "Ferdinand the Bull," or Giora Feidman coaxing a small concert hall full of hard-nosed music professionals to sing along with a klezmer melody.
But such were offerings on Dec. 23 at Merkin Concert Hall at the taping of the final broadcast of "The Listening Room," Mr.
Sherman's 24-year-old radio show.
It put most galas to shame.
And it can be heard tomorrow night at 10 on WQXR-FM (96.3).
Chee-Yun showed why she is one of the most promising young violinists on the current scene.
She and Joseph Kalichstein, Toby Appel and Dorothy Lawson made chamber music seem like truly serious fun.
Thomas Hampson sang Cole Porter; Claude Frank and Lilian Kallir played Mozart and Schubert for piano, four hands; Isaac Stern, suffering from an injured finger, simply offered praise -- all of it just -- to Mr.
Sherman and his program.
And always, there was Mr.
Borge, wisecracking his way down the aisle, brilliantly improvising at the piano, making everybody else seem a little too serious and sad on an occasion that really was both.


Nets Again Break Down Late
The Nets spoke about fourth-quarter execution, and about how a veteran team like the Bulls was able to perform so cohesively while the Nets faltered.
On and on they droned.
They sounded like a losing team, and they were.
Again.
But Coach Chuck Daly and the Nets were simply being honest about what had happened at Chicago Stadium Wednesday night in a 94-86 Bulls victory.
Whenever the three-time defending champions needed a crucial basket in the final 12 minutes, there was Scottie Pippen or Toni Kukoc or even, believe it, the resurrected Bill Wennington to provide it.
Even without Michael Jordan, the Bulls adeptly orchestrate their offense.


ANOTHER SUSPECT NAMED IN SLAYING IN CROWN HEIGHTS
Law-enforcement officials said yesterday that they have identified a new suspect in the killing of a Hasidic scholar during the Crown Heights disturbances two years ago.
The officials said they believe that it was this suspect who joined a crowd attacking the man, Yankel Rosenbaum, and delivered the stab wounds that killed him.
The Brooklyn District Attorney is trying to persuade United States Attorney General Janet Reno to bring a broad civil rights case against the suspect, who is now in prison for unrelated crimes and to include in that case charges against Lemrick Nelson Jr., who has been tried in state court and acquitted of the slaying of Mr.
Rosenbaum.


Sponsor Spending Expected to Rise
North American companies will increase sponsorship spending by 15 percent to $4.25 billion in 1994, according to the 10th annual forecast by the IEG Sponsorship Report.
The forecast, published in the newsletter of the International Events Group in Chicago, said that the 1994 spending growth would follow one of the industry's most active years to date.
In 1993, spending has increased 17 percent to $3.7 billion, from sponsorships signed in connection with events including the Olympics.


Dr. Arthur Lautkin, Radiologist, 82
Dr.
Arthur Lautkin, a radiologist who practiced medicine in Manhattan for 50 years, died on Monday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 82.
The cause was cancer, said a son, Dr. Everett Lautin.


Valle Joins Red Sox But Takes Pay Cut
Catcher DAVE VALLE and the Boston Red Sox agreed yesterday to a $1.2 million, one-year contract, a steep cut from the $2,366,667 million he made last season with the Seattle Mariners.
Last season, Valle, a former Queens high school star, had the best offensive year of his career and was one of the best defensive catchers in the American League, but after becoming a free agent, those factors did not produce a lucrative contract.
Valle, 33, hit .258 for the Mariners last season and had career highs in games caught (135), hits (109), doubles (19), home runs (13) and runs batted in (63).


Chinese Opera
The Yeh Ching Taiwanese Opera Troupe is to present the full-length opera "Vanity Carnival" on Sunday at 6 P.M. at the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, 199 Chambers Street.
The opera features the actress Yeh Ching in the role of a man who is forced to make a profound moral choice.
English subtitles will be projected.
Tickets are $15 and $25.
Information: (212) 431-9740.


F.C.C. Delays Radio Deals By Howard Stern's Employer
The Federal Communications Commission is raising the stakes in its campaign against Howard Stern, the New York radio personality whose on-air revels in scatological humor and sexual topics have already generated $1.2 million in fines.
The agency has decided to delay deals totaling $170 million by the Infinity Broadcasting Corporation, Mr.
Stern's employer, to buy three big radio stations while the F.C.C. ponders a new series of complaints about Mr.
Stern's program, which is heard by millions of listeners across the nation each weekday morning.


As Texas Death Row Grows, Fewer Lawyers Help Inmates
As the population continues to swell on death row in Texas, the number of lawyers willing to subject themselves to the anguish and expense of representing these inmates in the final stages of their appeals is shrinking, creating what their legal advocates are calling a crisis.
Three hundred and seventy-two people, 368 men and 4 women, are under death sentences here, more than in any state but California.
And despite unremitting appeals to the Texas bar plus extraordinary help from out of state volunteers, 65 to 70 of these inmates remain without lawyers -- more than twice as many as a year ago.


Westchester Adopts a Budget, But Its Legality Is Questioned
The tug-of-war over the Westchester County budget descended into near-comic confusion today as County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke signed the $948.6 million spending plan into law, even though the County Legislature is still preparing to override his vetoes of items totaling $6.3 million on Friday.
Caught by surprise, the legislators seemed uncertain of the legality of Mr.
O'Rourke's action and consulted lawyers.
Some officials saw it as a ploy by Mr.
O'Rourke to fend off what seemed like the certainty of the overriding of the vetoes and predicted that the battle might end in the courts.


Hornets End Bulls' Streak At 10 Games
Hornets 115, Bulls 95
Dell Curry scored 28 points and was 5 for 7 on 3-pointers as the Hornets, without Alonzo Mourning and Larry Johnson, snapped the Chicago Bulls' 10-game winning streak, 115-95, last night in Charlotte, N.C.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that close soon: Closing This Weekend
"ABE LINCOLN IN ILLINOIS," Vivian Beaumont Theater, Lincoln Center.
Robert E. Sherwood's 1939 drama, directed by Gerald Gutierrez, about Lincoln's formative years.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $42.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"FORBIDDEN BROADWAY 1994," Theater East, 211 East 60th Street, Manhattan.
A musical parody of Broadway shows and their stars.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8:30; tomorrow at 7 and 10 P.M.; Sunday at 3:30 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $37.50; theater and dinner packages: $50 to $62.50.
Information: (212) 838-9090.
"A GRAND NIGHT FOR SINGING!" Roundabout Theater at the Criterion Center, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
The songs of Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d.
Through Saturday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $60.
Information: (212) 869-8400.
ROY LICHTENSTEIN, Susan Sheehan Gallery, 41 East 57th Street, Manhattan.
Prints.
Closes today.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 888-4220.


CONDOM HANDOUTS VOIDED IN SCHOOLS
New York City's influential program of providing condoms on demand to students in public high schools as a way to combat AIDS was thrown out yesterday by a state appellate court, which ruled that such a program required parental consent.
Hours after the ruling, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said he was already drafting a plan that would meet the court's objections.


Accounts
*
Berlitz Publishing Co., New York, to PG Marketing Communications, Lodi, N.J., to handle direct-response marketing for the publisher of travel and language books, previously handled in-house.
Billings were estimated at $1.5 million. *
Snowblade Corp., Franklin Lakes, N.J., to Griffin Bacal Inc., New York, as the first agency to handle the winter recreational equipment maker's account.
Billings were estimated at $1.3 million.


CHRONICLE
Poetry is an avocation with EDGAR KOERNER, an investment banker who was recently elected president of the Children's Aid Society.
And so is music: he is the president of the Turtle Bay Music School's board.
He first heard about the Children's Aid Society as a teen-ager in the late 1940's from his father, who said, "Now, these people really do good."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The F.C.C. has delayed Infinity Broadcasting deals to buy three radio stations for $170 million while it considers complaints about Howard Stern, the New York radio personality whose running sexual banter on Infinity stations has already brought $1.2 million in fines.
Any delay past New Year's Day could cost Infinity several million dollars in penalties.  [ Page A1. ]
Prudential Securities' general counsel, Loren Schechter, resigned his post amid a widening investigation into the firm's tactics in selling limited partnerships in the 1980's.
Mr.
Schechter, who will remain at the firm as an executive vice president, had been criticized for his apparent failure to stop fraud at the firm.  [ D1. ]


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  ANOTHER SUSPECT IN CROWN HTS. SLAYING
Law-enforcement officials said they have identified a new suspect in the killing of a Hasidic scholar during the disturbances two years ago in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
The officials said they believe that this suspect joined a crowd of youths attacking the man, Yankel Rosenbaum, and delivered the stab wounds that killed him.
A1.


CHRONICLE
For a while it seemed that two major business improvement groups in Manhattan would begin 1994 with a dispute -- over confetti.
To GRETCHEN DYKSTRA, the president of the Times Square Business Improvement District, confetti is a gentle ingredient of the New Year's Eve celebration, which she calls the "ultimate block party." The merrymaking peaks at midnight when the ball is dropped from 1 Times Square and 3,000 pounds of confetti are released from the rooftops of 18 buildings.
"It is safe, joyous and good fun, and 200 million television viewers will be watching," Ms.
Dykstra said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article and an accompanying chart in Your Money on Dec. 11 about how watchdog groups rate various charities did not adequately distinguish between the Public Citizen Foundation, whose contributions are tax deductible, and its lobbying arm, Public Citizen Inc., whose contributions are not.


Rita Klimova, 62, Czech Dissident Who Became Ambassador to U.S.
Rita Klimova, a former dissident who served as Czechoslovakia's first Ambassador to the United States after the ouster of the Communist Government, died yesterday in a hospital in Prague.
She was 62.
Her death was reported by The Associated Press, which quoted C.T.K., the official news agency of the Czech Republic.
She had recently undergone treatment for leukemia.


David Weinstein, 66, Judaic Studies Scholar
David Weinstein, a professor of Judaic studies, died on Sunday in Sarasota. He was 66.
He had a heart attack while playing tennis with his wife and son, his family said.


CompuMed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Anika Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Death Sentences for the Bahai
A few days before Christmas, jarring news made its way from Iran: Three adherents of the Bahai faith have been condemned to death solely because of their beliefs.
The judicial judgment against two defendants living in Karaj, near Teheran, accuses them of a new kind of crime -- transmitting information that they were on trial for their lives to the United Nations and to Bahai groups outside Iran.
Those facing execution squads are thus expected to collaborate in a cover-up of their own fate.
They are meant to meet their deaths with the silence of lambs being led to slaughter.


Shaman
Stock in Shaman Pharmaceuticals Inc., which develops compounds from tropical plants, has risen sharply since Dec. 22, when it announced clinical trials for a product to treat herpes infections.
The stock has attracted institutional investors who anticipate success in the trials, which are to be completed late next year.


2d Amendment Silence From Supreme Court
To the Editor:
To support the argument that the Second Amendment does not apply to the states, Stuart J. Davis (letter, Dec. 19) asserts that the Supreme Court "upheld without comment" the United States Court of Appeals decision in Quilici v.
Village of Morton Grove, which supported an ordinance barring private ownership of handguns in the village.


Sylvan Bloomfield, Ophthalmologist, 82
Dr.
Sylvan Bloomfield, an expert on glaucoma who practiced ophthalmology in Manhattan for many years until retiring in 1987, died yesterday at his home in Great Neck, L.I.
He was 82.
The cause was heart disease, said his son, Steven Bloomfield.


Osborne Out for Season
Left-hander DONOVAN OSBORNE will be lost to the St.
Louis Cardinals for the 1994 season after surgery on his pitching shoulder.
Osborne, 24 was 10-7 with an earned run average of 3.74 in 26 starts last season.
"The good news is when they went in there, they thought there would be a problem with the rotator cuff and found there wasn't," Cardinals Manager JOE TORRE said.
"The bad news is, of course, he's out for the season." (AP)


Oilers End Sniping And Begin A Streak
Three months ago, or maybe an eternity ago, the Oilers were sinking with a 1-4 record.
Buddy Ryan, the defensive coordinator, was publicly criticizing Kevin Gilbride, the offensive coordinator.
Jack Pardee, the head coach, seemed headed for the scrap pile.
What happened?
The Oilers straightened out against lesser teams and won their next 10 games, a division title and a playoff berth for the seventh straight year.
If the 11-4 Oilers beat the 8-7 Jets here Sunday night in the regular-season finale, and if the 11-4 Buffalo Bills lose to the 4-11 Indianapolis Colts, the Oilers will have home-field advantage throughout the American Conference playoffs.


Hong Kong Tycoon's Road to China
There are more sharks on the land in this want-to-get-rich town, Gordon Y. S. Wu likes to say, than in Victoria Harbor, the less than fragrant waters of Hong Kong's busy port where the 58-year-old engineer-developer will fearlessly take a plunge.
Nominally, Mr.
Wu has lost a public bet that he could finish his Hong Kong-to-Guangzhou highway, the first superhighway into China, by September.
Then he bet on Dec. 31.
He just keeps losing the bet, so jumping into the harbor is his self-imposed penalty.


Art in Review
Thomas Florschuetz  Goethe House  1014 Fifth Avenue (near 82d Street)  Sunday through Jan. 29
For several years, Thomas Florschuetz, a young Berlin artist, has been creating impressive photographic grotesques by combining close-ups of bits of his hands and face.
The resulting figures, presented in large, intensely colored prints, suggest the fantastic monsters a daydreaming child might see in the features of a grown-up.


For Children
'Art Machines' 'The Sculpture of Norman Tuck' 'The Discoverers'  Liberty Science Center  Liberty State Park  Jersey City  (201) 451-0006  Recommended for all ages
With Norman Tuck's sculpture "Disco," children can see what it's like to walk forward and move backward simultaneously. (It doesn't feel like dancing.) His "Wave Generator" piece shows how one wave can move twice as fast as one next to it, a phenomenon bodysurfers will appreciate.
Mr.
Tuck is a sculptor; in this new exhibition, which is to run through Feb. 13, his interactive art apparatuses demonstrate periodicity, kinetic energy, resonance and magnetism.


U.S. Recasts Demjanjuk As It Seeks to Oust Him
In a significant shift in its legal strategy, the Justice Department today abandoned its long-held contention that John Demjanjuk was one of the most barbaric Nazi figures of the Holocaust.
But it nonetheless accused him of being a lesser war criminal and of lying on his immigration papers, and it moved to have him stripped of his American citizenship and removed from the United States.
In briefs filed simultaneously in Federal District Court in Cleveland and in a Federal appeals court in Cincinnati, Federal prosecutors asserted that Mr.
Demjanjuk lied on his immigration papers in the 1950's and had served as a Nazi S.S. guard in German death camps in Poland.


TV Weekend; 'Viper,' a Car to Warm Technophiles' Hearts, In a New Action Series
Before settling into its regular slot on Fridays at 8 P.M., "Viper" is being given a two-hour preview at 9 this Sunday.
With the year spanking new, NBC is already champing at the action bit.
Conceived by the team of Danny Bilson and Paul DeMeo ("The Rocketeer," "The Flash"), "Viper" is set in the near future in -- paranoia triumphant -- a city run by a crime syndicate called the Outfit.
The only hope for the good guys is a top-secret supercar outfitted with every gadget known to technology fanatics.
The title was actually inspired by the Dodge Viper, the current limited-edition car of choice among those who desperately need everything.
Chrysler has designed the fictional Viper for this series.
Publicity agents call it animalistic, predatory and intimidating.
In more ways than one.


Palestinian Guerrillas Killed During Raid Into Israel


Madrid Bank Turmoil Hurts Reputation of J. P. Morgan
No banking company has symbolized quality -- and profited from it -- like J. P. Morgan &amp; Company.
This week, however, as a result of financial problems at one of its customers, some of its own money and that of clients may have been lost, and the Morgan reputation has been hurt.
And some investors and bankers are questioning whether Morgan's desire to earn fees has taken the edge off its usual good sense.
Morgan was a big investor and financial adviser to Spain's third-largest bank, Banco Espanol de Credito.
But on Tuesday, the Bank of Spain, the country's central bank, took over Banesto, as the bank is called, and dismissed its flamboyant chairman, Mario Conde.
The central bank said it was acting out of concern for the bank's financial condition.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a Federal inquiry into the 1991 racial violence in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, incorrectly described the vehicle that struck and killed a 7-year-old black boy, touching off the violence.
The car was in the entourage of the leader of the Lubavitcher Hasidim; the rabbi was not actually in the car.


Ohio State Makes Its Coach's Word Good
Ohio State 28, B.Y.U. 21
Coach John Cooper guaranteed an Ohio State bowl victory and the Buckeyes came through -- barely.


For Convicted Murderer, No Escaping His Name
He went to prison as Robert R. Reldan, and he will stay in prison as Robert R. Reldan.
That is what the New Jersey Appellate Division ruled on Wednesday in the case of a convicted murderer who tried to change his name to Howard B. (Beyer) Junior while serving time at the state prison in Trenton.
Mr.
Reldan, convicted in 1979 of murdering two women from Bergen County, N.J., said his choice of a name had little to do with the fact that the prison's warden, until last June, was Howard L. Beyer.


At the Bar; The I.R.S. is going after lawyers who are paid in piles of cash but who won't name names.
As the hours of 1993 dwindle down to a precious few, many are doing some last-minute tax planning.
So, too, and quite unhappily, are some cash-carrying criminal defense lawyers who find themselves facing some very stiff fines from the Internal Revenue Service, which is pursuing them as it previously has car and boat dealers, jewelers and furriers.
In the last few weeks, the I.R.S. has sent letters to many lawyers -- how many it will not say, but at least in double digits -- each of whom has received more than $10,000 in cash payments for services rendered in particular cases.
In a sense, each of these lawyers is a model citizen: rather than stuff the stuff in their pockets, they complied with requirements that such payments be reported.
But each omitted one crucial detail: the name of the client handing them the money.
Doing so, they contend, jeopardizes the lawyer-client relationship.


Underdog Nebraska Is at Ease With Role
Could it be that all those believers in Nebraska know something that all those entrepreneurs in Las Vegas do not?
Could it be that the strategic adjustments the Cornhuskers have made -- their greater emphasis on speed and the switch to a four-man line in a quicker, more aggressive defense -- have given Nebraska a chance to challenge Florida State for a national championship in the Orange Bowl?
Could it be that a No. 1 vs.
No. 2 bowl game may be a lot closer than you think?


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
2.85
3.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.97
2.98
3.07
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.18
3.27
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.34
5.23
6.40
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.34
6.24
7.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.32
7.23
8.38
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.52
5.50
6.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Reporter's Notebook; New Team Cleans Up Cleanup Plans
It seemed like a great idea for inaugurating the new administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Aides to Mr.
Giuliani wanted to begin a cleanup of the litter along the expressways into Manhattan from the city's airports in Queens.
And they wanted to start on his first day in office.
If only government worked so easily.


Human Guinea Pigs Have a Right to Data
To the Editor:
Your article on secret nuclear research performed on human subjects in the decades after World War II (front page, Dec. 17) must be read in the context of the practices of university medical researchers.
As the partners of pharmaceutical manufacturers, universities -- nominally nonprofit institutions -- exploit human research study participants.


Dr. Hans Steinitz, 81, A Newspaper Editor
Dr.
Hans Steinitz, an editor of the German-language newspaper Aufbau for many years and the former president of the Foreign Press Association in New York, died on Wednesday at the Jewish Home and Hospital for the Aged in the Bronx.
He was 81.
The cause was a series of strokes, said his daughter, Dr. Lucy Kiekebusch-Steinitz.


U.S. Expands Inquiry Into Its Human Radiation Tests
The Clinton Administration today expanded an inquiry into the propriety and safety of human radiation experiments conducted by the Government in the decades after World War II.
Following the lead of the Department of Energy, which three weeks ago began to comb its archives for records on the experiments, the Department of Defense, the Department of Veterans Affairs and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said today that they would also begin investigations.


California Fires Volley On State Farm's Rates
California's insurance commissioner, John Garamendi, fired a broadside yesterday at the State Farm Insurance Companies, the largest insurer of cars and homes in the state, accusing it of charging excessive rates and other unauthorized activities.
In turn, State Farm accused Mr.
Garamendi, who is the first California insurance commissioner to be elected rather than appointed, of using his office to gain favorable publicity before he seeks the Democratic nomination for Governor next year.
California is one of 12 states where the insurance commissioner is elected.


Critics' Choices; Artistic Ideas for Starting the New Year Right
Film
Whatever horrid things you've heard about the recent, short-lived Broadway musical "The Red Shoes," don't hold them against the lush, beloved Technicolor movie that inspired it.
The 1948 extravaganza about a ballerina doomed to choose between love and her career is a holiday sugarplum of a movie.
It has returned to Film Forum in the South Village, where it will play through Jan. 13.
The film has the same overripe appeal of many smaller 1940's movies in which a tragic love affair sends some woman flying in front of a train or dropping on the pavement (the "Waterloo Bridge" genre).
Victoria Page (Moira Shearer) is torn mercilessly between two men: the heartless impresario Boris Lermontov (Anton Walbrook), who only wants her to dance, and the young conductor Julian Craster (Marius Goring), who wants her to give up her art for love of him.
The acting is florid, but the melodrama and snippets of ballet are as alluring as ever.


Hemagen Diagnostics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The State's Schools: Leadership Needed
No one is responsible for the problems in New York State's schools -- and that's the problem, according to a special commission.
Put another way, too many people are responsible, but their authority is fragmented.
No one can be held accountable.
One person who could at least exercise more leadership on education issues is Gov.
Mario Cuomo.
He should act on this report.
To his credit, Mr.
Cuomo did appoint the nine-member commission in May after a $960,000 retirement package was awarded to a superintendent of a special district on Long Island.
He asked the commission to look at the state's education practices, particularly how it spends money.


Dr. Mabel Ingalls, 92, Bacteriology Professor
Dr.
Mabel Satterlee Ingalls, a bacteriologist who was the last surviving grandchild of J. Pierpont Morgan, died on Tuesday at her apartment in Manhattan.
She was 92.
The cause was heart failure, said her daughter, Sandra van Heerden.


Art in Review
'Collection in Context'  Gorky's 'Betrothals'  Whitney Museum of American Art  945 Madison Avenue (at 75th Street)  Through Jan. 9
The paintings of Arshile Gorky (1904-1948) are a kind of Gothic interior of the human spirit, with all the sense of sinister darkness in clear light that this image implies.
Both elements are fully evident in the show of 14 late works in the Whitney's Lobby Gallery, part of the "Collection in Context" series.
The show's centerpiece is the museum's own painting "Betrothal II" (1947), exhibited for the first time with two slightly earlier versions and a group of studies on paper.


Journey Set to Begin
ISABELLE AUTISSIER, a 37-year-old French yacht racer, was expected to leave New York Harbor at 8 A.M. today for her 14,000-mile voyage from New York to San Francisco.
The journey will take her 60-foot sailboat, Ecureuil Poitou-Charentes II, around South America's Cape Horn.


Review/Photography; Smithson's Ways of Looking at the Land
Two cameras are installed as reverently as saints' bones in a vitrine near the entrance to "Robert Smithson: Photo Works," the wide-ranging show of images by the pioneering earthworks artist now at the International Center of Photography.
Despite this respectful treatment, the cameras, which belonged to Smithson, testify to the artist's less-than-reverent attitude toward photography: both are Kodak Instamatics; one fancier than the other, but amateur models nonetheless.
For Smithson, photography was by and large a convenient and unpretentious tool, a way of recording outdoor sculptures that could not be shown in a gallery, or of preparing proposals and sketches for projected pieces.
But this show, organized by Robert Sobieszek for the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, demonstrates that he used photography in surprisingly diverse ways, and pursued it with a remarkable degree of energy and invention.


Bill, Hillary and Other Plain Folks Are All Set for One Heady Weekend
Imitators beware: The Renaissance Weekend, that festival of earnestness that President Clinton is attending for the 10th time this weekend, is now protected by trademark.
Lest anyone try to establish a Renaissance Weekend cookbook or dating service, for instance, organizers say they are prepared to defend their exclusive rights to their name for the annual gathering, dedicated to "personal and national renewal" but perhaps most valued for those whom it brings together.


Judge Denies Union's Request to Suspend 34 Redskins
A Federal judge who is obviously a keen student of the game cleared the way tonight for the Washington Redskins and the Minnesota Vikings to play their last football game of the regular season Friday at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium, despite an arbitrator's ruling that 34 Redskins should be suspended for failing to pay their union dues.
The judge, Joyce Hens Green of the United States District Court in Washington, said that she would not issue the order against the players, in part because the union did not show that it would be irreparably harmed if the game went on.


A Moscow Synagogue Burns, Fanning Anti-Semitic Fears
A synagogue in Moscow was destroyed by fire early this morning, fanning fears among some Jews that a new wave of anti-Semitic vandalism could be starting.
"We don't know what happened," said Rabbi Berel Lazar, an Italian-born Lubavitcher who has been working since the fall of Communism to rebuild Russian Judaism.
"Of course, there is reason for concern because of the political situation," he added, referring to the recent success of ultranationalists in Russia's parliamentary elections.


Fund the Arts Broadly
John Dyson, Rudolph Giuliani's deputy mayor for economic development, said this week that the new administration wanted to give more support to New York's prominent cultural institutions, perhaps by cutting the budgets of less established arts groups.
The more popular institutions draw tourists and therefore help the city's economy, he explained, while lesser-known groups do not, and some may be getting political handouts to boot.
Though he was not sure of that.
Mr.
Dyson's acknowledgment of the economic importance of the arts is most welcome.
But his view is narrow.
Since when does a government interested in all its citizens play reverse Robin Hood, robbing from the poor to give to the rich (or, given the weak economy, the less poor)?


GERMANY INDICTS 4 IN DEATH OF TURKS
Eager to show that they are doing all in their power to suppress rightist violence, federal prosecutors announced today that they had indicted four young men in connection with the most lethal attack on foreigners in recent German history.
The four men, aged 16 to 24, are accused of having set fire to a home in the western town of Solingen in May, killing five Turkish citizens.


Review/Art; Vivid Watercolors By Kadinsky
THE inaugural exhibition of the Guggenheim Museum SoHo in June 1992 included a large selection of paintings by the modernist Wassily Kandinsky, so in one sense it may seem a bit soon to mount a show like "Watercolors by Kandinsky at the Guggenheim Museum" at the same location.
Add the fact that the run of "Singular Dimensions in Painting," a selection of Minimalist works in the second-floor galleries, has stretched to six months (it is now to close on Sunday), and one can easily conclude that the Guggenheim SoHo is in something of a holding pattern.
The branch has played host to some impressive traveling shows, but otherwise it has seemed underused, as if the museum has bitten off more space than it can handle, whether for curatorial or financial reasons.
Nonetheless, while undeniably familiar around the edges (and scheduled for its own six-month run), this new exhibition does present the early modern master most thoroughly associated with the museum in a refreshing light, one that is intimate and process-oriented and therefore especially well suited to a part of town full of working artists.


Penn State Picks Curley
TIM CURLEY, who as a boy hawked football game programs and parked cars outside Penn State's Beaver Stadium, was appointed as the university's new athletic director yesterday.
Curley, 39, will replace JIM TARMAN, who is retiring after 36 years with the university. (AP)


Using Laws From Reconstruction Era
On Oct. 30, 1992, less than 24 hours after a Brooklyn jury acquitted Lemrick Nelson Jr. of the murder of a Hasidic student during racial violence in Crown Heights, Federal authorities said they would begin an inquiry into whether the case could be pursued anew under Federal civil rights laws.
The laws, enacted during Reconstruction, have been used largely to prosecute police and government officials accused of violating the rights of citizens.
But an outcry from political, civic and religious leaders persuaded officials at the Justice Department in Washington to investigate whether the laws could be applied to Mr.
Nelson, who was a 16-year-old high school student when the killing occurred in 1991, or anyone else who might be implicated in the case.


Review/Art; Sacred Pieces From Sardinia
AS of February, the I.B.M.
Gallery of Science and Art will present shows from its permanent collection, and will no longer offer the loan exhibitions that have made it a vital presence in New York City during the last decade.
With such scholarly shows as "Corot to Monet: The Rise of Landscape Painting in France," the splendid Tibetan showcase "Wisdom and Compassion" and highlights from several of America's treasurable smaller museums to its credit, the gallery's track record has been honorable, and sometimes a good deal more than that.
It ends, happily, in a literal blaze of glory with the filigreed, gilded altarpieces that constitute "Sardinia: Sacred Art of the 15th and 16th Centuries," organized by the Italian Ministry of Cultural and Environmental Assets and the State Archives of Cagliari, among others.
No doubt the light, reflective gold paint that covers these objects lends them a mysterious, numinous glow in dark churches and monastic interiors.
But at least as mysterious for the visitor is the distinctive but hard-to-define collective flavor they project, a flavor that has much to do with the rocky Mediterranean island from which they came and where they still reside today.


Critics' Choices; Artistic Ideas for Starting the New Year Right
Jazz
By tomorrow night, Greenwich Village's jazz clubs will have mopped up the spilled Champagne and swept up the exploded party favors, returning to the regular business of presenting superb musicians in intimate settings.
Cover charges drop from astronomical levels, the pressured hilarity of New Year's Eve will be over, the groups will have had an extra night to tighten up, and, of course, it's still the weekend.
It's a good time to check in with jazz's hard-bop mainstream, the province of both seasoned and younger musicians who find pleasurable challenges in playing by, and with, the rules of tonal harmony.
Stephen Scott, a young pianist with the chromatic savvy of Herbie Hancock and his own sense of timing and suspense, is at the Down Beat, 70 Grove Street, at Seventh Avenue South, (212) 620-4000.
Sets are at 9 and 11 P.M. and 1:30 A.M. tomorrow night and 9 and 11 P.M. on Sunday night; there is a $10 cover at tables, $7 at the bar, plus a one-drink minimum.


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
Soukous and Soca
Tabu Ley Rochereau/Pan Rebels Steel Orchestra, Harambee, 127 West 43d Street, Manhattan, (212) 819-1133.
Tabu Ley Rochereau is a suave crooner who leads one of Zaire's longest-running soukous bands, playing gleaming, lilting, repatriated rumbas.
He shares a bill with the Pan Rebels, a Trinidadian steel-drum orchestra that peals out jubilant soca tunes.
The club is offering three packages, all including a Champagne toast: one with dinner and reserved seating for $120 a couple or $65 for individuals; one with dinner for $95 a couple and $60 for single tickets, and general admission for $25.
Doors open at 8 P.M., with dinner and recorded music at 9:30; live music begins around midnight.
JON PARELES International Mix
Nana Vasconcelos, Hassan Hakmoun and others, the Cooler, 416 West 14th Street, West Village, (212) 229-0785.
An international lineup features the Brazilian percussionist and singer Nana Vasconcelos, whose body becomes his instrument when he's not playing drums, bells or the one-stringed berimbau, and Hassan Hakmoun, a Moroccan sintir (plucked lute) virtuoso and singer who plays the propulsive riffs of traditional Gnawan music.
Music begins about 10 P.M.; admission is $25.
J.
P.
A Spectacle of Herself
Janet Jackson, Madison Square Garden, Seventh Avenue at 32d Street, (212) 307-7171.
State-of-the-art video-era spectacle -- song, dance, fireworks -- by the Jackson family's overachieving younger sister, who sets out to seduce and dazzle her audience.
Tony Toni Tone opens at 9 P.M.; tickets are $50 and $75.
J.
P.
Testosterone Alert
Robert Gordon, the Lone Star Roadhouse, 240 West 52d Street, Manhattan, (212) 245-2950.
Since the late 1970's, when he was a member of Tuff Darts, punk-rock has meant rockabilly to Robert Gordon.
He yowls, leers and swaggers through his own songs and rediscovered obscurities like the testosterone boast of "Red Hot." For the early show, Mr.
Gordon performs at 11 P.M., following the Hassan Hamid swing band, which begins about 9:30 P.M; tickets are $30 including a Champagne toast.
The late show, with Mr.
Hamid's band at 12:30 A.M. and Mr.
Gordon about 2 A.M., costs $20.
J.
P.
Funk at Maxwell's
Luscious Jackson, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Minimalist funk grooves and knowing, off-handed vocals from women who are proud to be cool.
Sexpod opens at 10:30 P.M.
Tickets are $12.50 in advance, $15 at the door.
J.
P.
Wine in the Wetlands
God Street Wine, Wetlands, 161 Hudson Street, TriBeCa, (212) 966-4225.
A neo-hippie band that mixes the usual strong Grateful Dead influences with touches of progressive-rock precision and, now and then, a rap.
Doors open at 9 P.M.; admission is $20.
J.
P.
Happy Together Again
The Turtles featuring Flo and Eddie, the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6300.
Along with Turtles hits like "Happy Together," Howard Kaylan and Mark Volman (Flo and Eddie) parody the year in rock in this annual engagement.
Tonight at 10:30; tickets are $27.50.
Tomorrow at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.; tickets are $17.50.
J.
P.
Audible Export
Nina Hagen, Tunnel, 220 12th Avenue, at 27th Street, Chelsea, (212) 695-7292.
Blasphemy, erotic bravado, operatic vocals and dance-music rhythms from one of Germany's strangest exports.
Doors open at 10 P.M., with recorded music until Ms.
Hagen performs at 2 A.M.
Admission is $50.
J.
P.
Memories of Marvin
"Fast Forward: A Tribute to Marvin Gaye," Majestic Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, (212) 592-3779.
Corey Glover, from Living Colour, and Sandra St.
Victor, from the Family Stand, join the Black Rock Coalition Orchestra, a group of hard-rock and funk virtuosos, in a midnight tribute to Marvin Gaye.
Li'l Dex Johnson plays house and funk recordings for dancing from 10 P.M. to 4 A.M.
Tickets are $40, $50 at the door, including free hors d'oeuvres.
J.
P.
Chinese Country
Five Chinese Brothers and others, Rodeo Bar, 375 Third Avenue, at 27th Street, Manhattan, (212) 683-6500.
Five Chinese Brothers play amiable, clever country-rock songs with more than a tinge of Elvis Costello; the bill also includes the Twanglers and Bar-B-Q Bob and the Spareribs.
Doors open at 9 P.M., with music until 4 A.M.
There is no cover or minimum, and there will be a free tequila toast at midnight.
J.
P. 8 Bands on Avenue A
The Lyres, the A-Bones and others, Brownie's, 169 Avenue A, at 10th Street, East Village, (212) 420-8392.
Sweaty, stomping garage rock from eight bands, featuring the organ-driven Lyres at 2 A.M., the twangy A-Bones at 1 A.M and the country-trucking Roscoe's Gang at 4 A.M., along with the Vice Royals at 10 P.M., Gone Native at 10:30, the Swingin' Neckbreakers at 11, the Devotions at midnight and the Henchmen at 3 A.M.
Admission is $12, including champagne.
J.
P.
Kooper's Keyboards
Al Kooper, Downtime, 251 West 30th Street, (212) 695-3373.
The ubiquitous keyboardist of the 1960's (backing Bob Dylan, co-founding Blood, Sweat and Tears) returns, backed by Jimmy Vivino and the Black Italians.
Doors open at 8 P.M.; admission is $25.
J.
P.
The G-7 of Blues
Bob Gaddy, Jimmy Spruill, Jimmy Dale and others, Tramps Cafe, 45 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
A New York blues summit, with half a dozen singers, pianists and guitarists trading boasts and woes.
Shows at 9 and 11 P.M. and 1 A.M.; admission is $15.
J.
P.
Irene Reid
Irene Reid, Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street, (212) 749-2228.
Irene Reid's jazz singing is informed by the bluesy resilience and acerbic wit of Dinah Washington, with a spunk that's all her own.
Sets are 8 and 11 P.M.
The 8 P.M. cover charge is $20, with a $30 minimum.
The 11 P.M. cover charge is $30, with a $40 minimum.
J.
P.
Big Band on 53d Street
The Artie Shaw Orchestra, the Citicorp Atrium, 53d Street and Lexington Avenue, (212) 371-3367.
The suave arrangements of Artie Shaw's big band brought him pop success without entirely erasing his jazz credibility.
The 17-piece band, now directed by Dick Johnson, makes a rare New York appearance; Mr.
Shaw, who is 83, no longer performs.
Tickets, including a five-course dinner at Alfredo the Original of Rome, are $149 a person, including tax and tip; the band performs between 9 P.M. and 3 A.M.
J.
P.


Sandy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


It's Resolved: No More Rushing by Committee
The power shift in the Jet backfield began on draft day last spring when New York traded positions in the first round with Phoenix, moving to No. 4 from No. 3, and picking up Cardinals running back Johnny Johnson in the deal.
The shift is complete now as Johnson has supplanted Blair Thomas, the No. 2 draft pick over all in the 1990 draft, as the Jets' starter and has been rewarded with a two-year, $5 million contract extension.
The move has been so thorough that Thomas, who will become an unrestricted free agent when his contract expires in February, has become an afterthought in the rushing department.
In the process, the Jets running-by-committee policy has been rescinded.


Events in Russia Send Shivers East and West; Central Asian View
To the Editor:
"Is It 1933 All Over Again?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 18) by Charles S. Maier examines the widespread correlation between Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky's parliamentary success and Hitler's rise to power but suffers from geopolitical myopia.


Demise of WNCN Shows Erosion of the Arts
To the Editor:
Classical music lovers were shocked to hear that radio station WNCN in New York City would no longer broadcast the classics, but become strictly a rock station.
As a musician and piano teacher, I have followed this trend keenly.
Even in the time of Bach and Beethoven, the classics were enjoyed by the nobility.
Ordinary people cared for ballads, peasant dances and tunes of the day.
In all ages, popular music reigned supreme for the masses of people.


Treasury Securities Drop Sharply
Reports of more strong economic trends on a day of very slow trading combined to push prices of Treasury securities down sharply yesterday, sending interest rates higher.
The price of the Treasury's 30-year bond dropped 19/32 , to 9826/32 , or about $12.81 for each $1,000 of face value, while the yield jumped to 6.34 percent, from 6.24 percent Wednesday.


Corrections
An article on Monday by The Associated Press about state laws that will take effect in January misidentified the state that has raised the minimum hourly wage to $4.90.
It is Washington, not Oregon.


Precision Drilling reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Stocks Slip in Thin Trading; Dow Off 18.45
Pressured by a weak bond market and profit taking after setting new records in previous sessions, the stock market declined yesterday on light trading volume.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 3,775.88, down 18.45 points, and the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index closed at 468.64, down 1.94.
But the Nasdaq composite index of secondary stocks rose 2.60 points, to 771.08.


U.S. Sees Progress On Nuclear Talks With North Korea
North Korean diplomats have told the United States that international monitors can have access to their seven officially disclosed nuclear sites, Clinton Administration officials said today.
But the North Koreans have not approached the International Atomic Energy Agency to work out the procedures for the inspections, nor have they offered to allow inspectors to visit two undeclared nuclear waste sites that have been off limits to the agency.
As a result, Administration officials say it is too soon to determine if the two sides have achieved a breakthrough in the talks, as the official North Korean news agency asserted today.


Some Ways To Ring Out And Ring In
Here is a sampling of New Year's Eve and New Year's Day activities around town: Today
RADIO CITY "CHRISTMAS SPECTACULAR," Radio City Music Hall, Avenue of the Americas at 50th Street.
The annual Christmas show with the Rockettes.
Performances: Today, 11 A.M. and 2 P.M.; tomorrow, 2 and 7 P.M.; Sunday, 2 and 5 P.M.
Tickets: $33 to $49.
Through Jan. 8.
Information and schedule: (212) 307-1000.
"STAR OF CHRISTMAS," Hayden Planetarium, Central Park West at 81st Street.
The annual holiday sky show.
Through Jan. 2.
Show times: Today, 1:30 and 3:30 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday, 1, 3 and 5 P.M.
Admission: adults, $7; ages 2 to 12, $4; students and the elderly, $6.
Information: (212) 769-5100.
CHRISTMAS LIGHTS TOUR, New York Gray Line.
Two-hour bus tour of Christmas light displays in midtown.
Today and tomorrow, 7 P.M.
Tickets: $18 for adults; $9 for children.
Information: (212) 397-2600.
"THE NUTCRACKER," Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan.
Adaptation of the holiday classic for children.
New York Theater Ballet.
Today, 1 and 3:30 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50; $12.50 for children.
Information: (212) 355-6160.
MARATHON READING OF GERTRUDE STEIN'S "MAKING OF AMERICANS," Paula Cooper Gallery, 155 Wooster Street, SoHo.
The annual free reading featuring about 100 readers begins today at noon and ends on Sunday morning.
Information: (212) 787-8556.
RUNNER'S WORLD/NIKE MIDNIGHT RUN, Central Park.
A five-mile run, a costume parade and a fireworks display.
The parade starts at 11:15 P.M.; the run at midnight.
Entry fee: $14; $10 for members of the New York Road Runners Club.
Registration until 10:30 tonight at the New York Road Runners Club, 9 East 89th Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 860-4455.
FIRST NIGHT NEW YORK '94.
A 14-hour celebration beginning today at 11 A.M., with music and dance performances, dancing and entertainment for children.
Admission to all events: adults, $15; under age 12, $7.
Entry buttons may be bought at D'Agostino Supermarkets, the tourist information windows at Grand Central Terminal and Penn Station, and Ticketmaster outlets.
Information: (212) 922-9393.
NEW YEAR'S EVE BENEFIT CONCERT, Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center.
The New York Philharmonic, conducted by Leonard Slatkin, play works by Mozart, Gershwin, Rodgers, Bernstein, Johann Strauss Jr., Leroy Anderson and others.
Tonight at 8.
Tickets: $20 to $90.
Information: (212) 721-6500.
POETRY SLAM, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
A poetry-reading competition featuring Samantha Coerbell and William Fogarty, with one-act plays, comedy and music.
Tonight at 7:30.
Admission: $10.
Information: (212) 505-8183.
"THE NUTCRACKER," New York City Ballet, New York State Theater.
Tonight at 8.
Balcony tickets only: $18.
Through Jan. 2.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
CONCERT FOR PEACE, Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
A concert and readings, with the Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra, Odetta, Metropolitan Opera soloists, Jason Robards, Ron Silver, Mayor David N. Dinkins and Mayor-elect Rudolph Giuliani.
Tonight at 7:30.
Free admission.
Information: (212) 662-2133.
NEW YEAR'S EVE WITH THE BIG APPLE CIRCUS, Damrosch Park, Lincoln Center.
A one-ring circus, then a party.
Tonight at 9:30.
Tickets: $35 to $100.
Information: (212) 307-4100 or (212) 721-6500.
CHINATOWN WALKING TOUR, sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring.
Tonight at 6.
A tour of the area, followed by dinner; $13.
Meeting place and reservations: (212) 265-2663.
TIMES SQUARE.
Annual countdown for the New Year.
The Sony Video I Jumbotron screen will broadcast live excerpts from a performance by Janet Jackson at Madison Square Garden.
The crowd usually starts forming at 10 P.M.
FIREWORKS IN PROSPECT PARK, Grand Army Plaza.
Annual display to toast the new year.
Midnight.
FIREWORKS IN CENTRAL PARK, Manhattan.
Launched from the Heckscher Ballfields, West Drive and 64th Street, and visible along Seventh Avenue to 42d Street.
Midnight.
FIREWORKS AT THE SOUTH STREET SEAPORT, lower Manhattan. Midnight. Tomorrow
CHORUS TREE, South Street Seaport Market Square, Fulton Street between Water and South Streets, lower Manhattan.
"The Chorus Tree," performances of holiday songs by the St.
Cecilia Chorus.
Saturday and Sunday at 3 and 4 P.M.
Information: (212) 732-7678.
NEW YEAR'S DAY MARATHON POETRY READING, St.
Mark's Church in the Bowery, East Village.
Annual poetry reading featuring more than 100 readers, including poets, musicians, dancers and artists. 2 P.M. to midnight.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 674-0910.
BOAR'S HEAD AND YULE LOG FESTIVAL, Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
Music, dance and juggling, featuring the Mettawee River Company; the Pipes and Drums of the New York State Courts; Omega Liturgical Dance Company; Bowerie Boys Morris Dancers; Karen Gersch and Company, acrobats; Jocko McKean, juggler, and the Cathedral Combined Choirs with Instrumental Ensemble, conducted by Bruce Fifer.
Saturday at 3:30 and 7:30 P.M.; Sunday at 3:30.
Tickets: $12, $18 and $35; $6 and $9 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 662-2133.
WALKING TOUR OF GREENWICH VILLAGE, sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring.
A tour of the West Village. 1 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Meeting place and reservations: (212) 265-2663.


Critics' Choices; Artistic Ideas for Starting the New Year Right
Theater
A one-person show may sound like a meager way to usher in the new year, but when the person in question is Sherry Glaser or Charlayne Woodard, you can count on an evening of bountiful pleasures.
In "Family Secrets," Ms.
Glaser plays five members of a Jewish family originally from the Bronx, now of Southern California, and the hilarity is nonstop.
The characters range from Mort, a retired accountant and long-suffering father, to Rose, an incontinent grandmother who discovers love and racquetball in her old age.
If Ms.
Glaser didn't transform herself before your very eyes, you'd swear there were five performers in the cast.
Pain, humiliation and junk food stalk these troubled souls, but Ms.
Glaser never sentimentalizes or ridicules them.
"Family Secrets" has a deep appreciation of human singularity.


N. William Pandell, Inventor, 70
N.
William Pandell, an inventor and former textile executive, died on Monday at his home in Niskayuna, N.Y.
He was 70.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Karen.


The Surgeon General Has People Thinking
From her 18th-floor suite far from the cotton fields she used to pick, it is becoming clear that Dr.
Joycelyn Elders is not in Arkansas anymore.
The blunt-speaking Surgeon General, who was a cross between country preacher and suffragist back home, stood over the fallout from her latest offhand remark, the one recommending more study of the legalization of drugs.
She never said she was in favor of legalizing drugs when the question arose earlier this month after her speech before the National Press Club, but that is how people took it just the same.
She pointed to the boxes and boxes of letters from Oakland, Calif., and Columbia, Mo., and New York and North Dakota, with messages ranging from "Go, Girl" to "You need to resign tomorrow."


Sports of The Times; Frazier Ran All the Way To Nebraska
THEY turned up the heat in Nebraska the day Tommie Frazier visited from Florida.
All the way up to 30 degrees, maybe even 40.
That amounted to a heat wave in January, but they could have saved the energy they used to warm up the entire state that day.
Tommie Frazier was leaning toward Nebraska anyway, for as many as three reasons.
Foot-ball.
Academics.
And, quite possibly, distance.
He may have needed to get away, maybe not from temptations but from memories of an older brother who ran the wrong option plays in life.


Soft Hands and Hard Licks Give Cross Edge at Tight End
When he was with the Raiders, Todd Christensen, a five-time Pro Bowler, was one of football's best tight ends.
Today, when he studies the football landscape, he isn't too impressed by some of the well-known tight ends in the National Football League.
Christensen doesn't mince words.
And when he talked recently about some of the league's tight ends, he felled them the way a farmer harvests wheat.
But his sickle did spare one player: Howard Cross of the Giants.


Mideast Talks Expected to Resume Soon
Palestinian and Egyptian officials said today that they expected talks between the Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization to resume soon.
They added that they believed that the two sides would reach a compromise on an Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho that was to have begun on Dec. 13.
The officials said the P.L.O. had given Israel "understandings" of security arrangements between the two sides after the withdrawal and of how Palestinians' access to these regions would be organized.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BASIC HOLDINGS LTD., the Bahamas, has abandoned plans to sale its 32.7 percent stake in Basic Petroleum International, New York.
L.
M.
ERICSSON, Stockholm, has signed a contract valued at $26 million for the delivery of AXE 10 switching equipment in China.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Jamie Moyer, pitcher, to a one-year contract.


Transition Stirs Cautious Hope
Tonight at midnight Rudolph W. Giuliani will become the 107th Mayor of New York.
The occasion has filled many New Yorkers, no matter their race, ethnicity or political passions, with a certain sense of cautious optimism for the future of the city.
After a divisive election that was decided by fewer than 50,000 votes, interviews conducted with 36 New Yorkers throughout all five boroughs found an almost urgent hope that the new Mayor would improve life in the city, from cutting crime to cleaning the streets to improving the delivery of services.


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
Hardy Partiers
NRBQ, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
It will be hard to find a better party anywhere.
The band, whether it's New Year's Eve or not, take the idea of carnival, of excess and celebration, to the limit.
They'll play a weird hybrid of country, jazz, blues and rock-and-roll, with the Beach Boys and Sun Ra thrown in for some surrealism.
They'll be joined by Terrance Simien and his Mallet Playboys, a rocking Louisiana zydeco band.
There are two shows: the first, at 7 P.M., costs $20; the second, at 11 P.M., costs $40 and includes a Champagne toast at midnight.
Both shows have a two-drink minimum.
PETER WATROUS Classic Blues
Jimmy Witherspoon, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, near 17th Street, Manhattan, (212) 533-7902.
One of the last of the great blues shouters will treat an audience to the classic stanzas of the blues.
He can have a sweetness to his voice as well, and he's always ready to improvise on jazz standards, all of which will come with a blues nastiness to them.
Tickets are available for the 8:30 and 1 A.M. shows.
There is a $25 cover and a $10 minimum.
P.
W.
Zanzibar Guitar
Matt (Guitar) Murphy, Zanzibar, 73 Eighth Avenue, near 14th Street, West Village, (212) 924-9755.
Before this guitarist was saddled with leading the Blues Brothers Band, from the movie of the same name, he was an exceptional blues guitarist who made James Cotton's mid-1970's band rock.
He's all speed and texture, and he uses whirling lines that can cause a commotion.
There are two sets, at 10:30 P.M. and 12:30 A.M. , and $75 gets you a four-course meal and Champagne, while $35 lets you stand at the bar.
P.
W.
Time-Warped Tunes
Michael White, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
Mr.
White, a clarinetist, leads what may be the best New Orleans-style band in jazz.
It's polyphonic, with tight ensemble parts giving way to the raucous group improvisations that bray and holler.
He has become a New Year's tradition at the Vanguard, and hearing his band invites audiences into a time warp; it makes a listener understand why the music so quickly became the popular dance music of its era.
There is a $40 cover and a $20 minimum.
Sets are at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M.
There is also a 1 A.M. show with a $20 cover and a $10 minimum.
P.
W.
Piano Man
John Hicks, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
He's a florid pianist who always plays like he's never going to play again, and wants to get everything he knows in by the last chorus.
He'll be backed by the bassist Santi Debriano and the drummer Victor Lewis, who is one of jazz's greatest living drummers.
It will be interactive, a three-way musical conversation at its best.
The show starts at 9, and for $120 there is a five-course dinner and Champagne.
Before 1 A.M. there is a $25 cover and $20 minimum for the bar.
From 1 to 4 A.M., the cover is $20 and there is a $15 minimum.
P.
W.
Two Wily Veterans
Nancy Wilson and Gato Barbieri, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-0049.
Ms.
Wilson can be a viscerally moving performer, one of the best singers to graduate from Dinah Washington's vocal finishing school.
She can be smooth or rough and nasal, and both stances imply emotion.
Mr.
Barbieri is a showman whose best recordings, made in the 1960's, have a hard power.
Tickets are available for the 7 P.M. show in the bar for $90.
At 1 A.M., the $120 tickets include breakfast and Champagne.
P.
W.
Ulmer Power
James Blood Ulmer, Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
This year is Mr.
Ulmer's fifth New Year's Eve at the Knitting Factory, which sounds a bit like a tradition.
The guitarist has recorded with everyone from Ornette Coleman to Art Blakey and Joe Henderson.
His current music, which makes use of drones and odd tunings, is as distinct as anything that walks the planet.
It's hard-rocking, slippery music, charged with power.
Sets are at 9 and midnight, and the $20 cover buys a free drink and a Champagne toast.
P.
W.
Dark Side Sounds
Stephen Scott, Down Beat, 70 Grove Street, off Sheridan Square, Greenwich Village, (212) 620-4000.
Mr.
Scott is the most austere pianist of his generation, somebody who plays the dark side of every tune.
The music comes out moody and emotional.
He's anything but glib, and his sense of space is wonderfully Monkish, elegant and relaxed, yet taut.
He's a young master.
There are three sets, at 9 and 11 P.M. and at 1 A.M.
The $35 cover includes two drinks plus Champagne and party favors.
P.
W.
Adderley's Band
Nat Adderley, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-1785.
One of the best working bands in jazz features Mr.
Adderley's cool sound on horn, and Vincent Herring's explosive soloing on alto and soprano saxophones.
The rhythm section includes Rob Bargan on piano, Walter Booker on bass and Jimmy Cobb on drums and it swings with authority.
It's mainstream jazz at its most exciting.
The show starts at 9 P.M. and $99 includes dinner, Champagne and party favors.
The late show, which starts at 1 A.M., has a $25 cover and a $25 minimum, and includes a Champagne toast.
P.
W.
Visiones, in the Village
Cecil Brooks 3d, Visiones, 125 Macdougal Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 673-5576.
Mr.
Brooks, a good young drummer, always leads swinging bands, and this one includes the trumpeter Jack Walrath and the pianist James Weidman.
Jeanie Bryson, a singer, will be on hand as well.
Sets are at 8:30 and 11 P.M. and at 1:30 A.M.
The first set has a $12 cover and a $10 minimum; the second, a $25 cover and a $10 minimum, and the 1:30 set has a $10 cover and $10 minimum.
For $100, stay for three sets and have a full dinner and Champagne; $65 buys three sets, three drinks and a Champagne toast.
P.
W.
Sharp in SoHo
Elliott Sharp, Nick and Eddie, 203 Spring Street, at Sullivan Street, SoHo, (212) 219-9090.
Mr.
Sharp, a guitarist and fixture of the downtown experimental scene, will be leading a trio that shows his roots.
From 9:30 to midnight, he'll be playing jazz standards.
At midnight he'll start playing blues.
The $75 ticket includes a four-course dinner and a Champagne toast.
P.
W.


Art in Review
Nick Waplington 'Natural Resources' Mark Boote Gallery 470 Broome Street SoHo Through Jan. 10
Best known for his wry and affectionate photographs of English working-class families, Nick Waplington here adopts a more self-consciously theatrical approach to comment on the dangers of nuclear power.
In a series of night shots, Mr.
Waplington appears in various stages of anguish in front of nuclear plants; in other images, interspersed with close-ups of electric space heaters, he stands in a loft bare-chested, glowing red.


Critics' Choices; Artistic Ideas for Starting the New Year Right
Film
It was a very good year for Gong Li, the sturdy and beautiful Chinese actress who played the title role in "The Story of Qiu Ju" and also appears so strikingly in "Farewell My Concubine." Tonight she can also be seen at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center starring in "Ju Dou," a memorably lurid 1990 film by Zhang Yimou, who has directed her often to such fine effect. ("Raise the Red Lantern" provides another example of their teamwork.)
Mr.
Zhang is in James M. Cain country with this tale of forbidden romance, in which Gong Li plays a woman who becomes treacherously involved with her husband's adopted son.
But Mr.
Zhang is also in the rural China of the 1920's, which gives this tale its peculiar wickedness.
The director's eye for color and composition is startlingly lovely, as ever.
And Gong Li shines.


A Rusty Duke Still Remains Undefeated
Duke 87, Western Carolina 67
Grant Hill rebounded from a poor start and scored 21 points as No. 3 Duke got past Western Carolina, 87-67, last night in Durham, N.C.
Playing after a seven-day layoff, the Blue Devils (7-0) couldn't build an offensive rhythm.
Hill struggled the most, missing five of his first six shots before closing with 4 points in the last three minutes.
He was upstaged by 6-foot-1-inch guard Frankie King, who scored 30 points and drew applause from the Duke fans for a spectacular dunk on a pass off the backboard in the second half.
He also grabbed a game-high 13 rebounds.


Abroad at Home; Death of a Dream
The year 1993 left at least one mark on modern history.
In that year the principle of the ethno-religious state was established in Europe.
That is what Bosnia means.
The inhumanity plucks at us: the daily toll of shells and cold and hunger.
But what really matters is the principle.


Bernard H. Perlman, Physician, 83
Dr.
Bernard H. Perlman, who practiced medicine in Manhattan for more than 50 years and was a member of the New York City Board of Health from 1978 to 1982, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 83.
The cause was lung cancer, said his son, Philip K. Perlman.


Events in Russia Send Shivers East and West
To the Editor:
In "The Clinton Challenge in Russia" (edititorial, Dec. 19), you criticize Western appeasement that "led to the dismemberment of Eastern Europe half a century ago" and point out the differences today.
"Today's challenge is to keep a new Hitler from taking power, in Russia or elsewhere. That means reassuring Eastern Europeans without isolating Russia and undermining its reformers."


William R. Martin, Producer, 59
William R. Martin of Manhattan, who staged commercial shows throughout the country for the electronics and clothing industries, died on Wednesday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Medical Center.
He was 59.
The cause was lung cancer, said Michael McConkey, a business partner.


Gratitude for Deliverance With Gifts to the Neediest
In late 1939, Ernest and Auguste Mohr received the most important letter of their lives.
In the envelope sent to their home in Bavaria was an affidavit of support signed by Julius Ochs Adler, a vice president and general manager of The New York Times and a friend of the Mohrs' distant relatives in the United States.


Among Catholics and Jews in U.S., 'Reconciliation' Is Often Heard
Roman Catholic officials, leaders of Jewish organizations and Israeli diplomats in the United States welcome the accord establishing diplomatic relations between the Vatican and Israel not only as a political achievement but also as a milestone in religious history.
In a joint statement yesterday, the National Conference of Catholic Bishops and the Synagogue Council of America said the accord "represents a revolution in the relations" between the Catholic Church and the Jews.
The Synagogue Council embraces the three major branches of Judaism.


Wagner Memorial
A public memorial service for Robert F. Wagner Jr., who died on Nov. 15, will be held at 6 P.M.
Wednesday in the Great Hall of Cooper Union on Seventh Street between Third and Fourth Avenues.
Among those scheduled to speak are Rudolph W. Giuliani, Edward I. Koch, Donna Shalala and Henry J. Stern.


Newborn Settles Caesarean Fight A Mother's Way
Mircea Bricci was beaming today as he held up what could be seen as evidence of his public redemption and his personal faith: a photograph of his newborn son, the center of a legal battle that reached the United States Supreme Court when the tiny baby was still a fetus and, according to doctors, in grave danger of death.
The doctors had warned that the fetus was not receiving enough oxygen in the womb and that only a Caesarean section could spare the fetus from almost certain death or mental retardation.
The Cook County prosecutor and the county's public guardian tried in vain to force the procedure on Mr.
Bricci's 22-year-old wife, Tabita, who refused the surgery for religious and personal reasons.


Rangers' 4th Line Watches And Waits
Eddie Olczyk and Mike Hartman took the locker-room ribbing good-naturedly.
What else could they do?
The Rangers had beaten the Blues, 4-3, Wednesday night in a tough game at St.
Louis.
Adam Graves, Esa Tikkanen and Steve Larmer had played countless minutes and done a superb job.
And so how could Olczyk complain?
Or Hartman?
Or Joey Kocur?


Biopharmaceutics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; Fund Investors See Fortunes Abroad
When it comes to mutual fund investors, the American stock market has become a bit passe.
Foreign markets are what is in -- particularly emerging ones that are very hot this winter.
"There's only one story here. It's international stocks," Jane White, a spokeswoman for T. Rowe Price, the mutual fund group, said yesterday.
Over all, she said, the flow of money into equity funds for December would come close to, and might surpass, the record set in October.


Indian Pt. 3 Poses Threat, N.R.C. Warns
Ten months after the Indian Point 3 nuclear plant was shut down because of mismanagement and safety problems, Federal regulators have told plant managers they are concerned that personnel there cannot handle the plant safely even when it is shut down.
According to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, despite months of work to straighten out operations at the state-owned plant, Indian Point 3 poses a risk to its own personnel and to the environment around it.


Critics' Choices; Artistic Ideas for Starting the New Year Right
Video
"Dave," an airy Capraesque comedy about a Presidential impersonator who secretly fills in at the White House after the Chief Executive suffers a stroke, is a 1930's-style political fairy tale in 90's dress.
Dave Kovic, the modern-day Mr.
Smith who finds himself running the country, may be a virtual body double for Bill Mitchell, the stricken President, but in his personality he is everything the Chief Executive is not: uncorrupted, happy-go-lucky and concerned for the less fortunate.
More than the story, which turns a bit sticky toward the end, what infuses Ivan Reitman's movie with charm are the performances of Kevin Kline, in dual roles as Dave and the President, and Sigourney Weaver, as an unhappy First Lady who warms to her suddenly transformed husband.
Mr.
Kline's Dave is a sunny-hearted Everyman who combines the sincerity of the young James Stewart with the suavity of Cary Grant, but he brings to the mix his own brand of springy, deceptively blank-faced niceness.


Equitrac Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Video Supplier Has New Chief
Live Entertainment Inc., a troubled home video distributor and music retailer, named Roger A. Burlage as chief executive and president yesterday.
Mr.
Burlage has been the chief executive and president of Trimark Holdings Inc., a film distribution company.


On Stage, and Off
Noble Efforts
Everyone knows it has been a tough few months in the commercial theater, particularly on Broadway.
"Wonderful Tennessee," "The Kentucky Cycle" and "The Red Shoes," among too many others, closed prematurely, and the specter of a nearly unmitigated flood of musical revivals looms.
The Broadway Alliance, the consortium of producers, craft unions and theater owners dedicated to bringing in low-cost dramas, teetered on the brink of extinction after two productions -- "Mixed Emotions" and "Any Given Day" -- foundered, and a third, Sam Shepard's "Simpatico," was abandoned.


Two at Hotel for Homeless Charged in Death of Baby
A couple living at the Coachman Hotel, a trouble-plagued shelter for homeless families here that was purchased by Westchester County this year, have been charged with accidently smothering their baby while in a crack-induced stupor.
The couple were arraigned Wednesday on misdemeanor charges of endangering the welfare of a child, but the District Attorney's office said an investigation is continuing and homicide charges are possible.


NEW SUMMARY
International A2-10  VATICAN RECOGNIZES ISRAEL  Formally recognizing each other after decades of aloofness, Israel and the Vatican signed an agreement to open diplomatic relations.
But at the dawn of a new epoch, many Israelis seem unable to shed the memories of church-induced pain.
A1  The Vatican still seeks to defend its position in the Arab world.
A8  In the U.S., praise from Catholic officials and Jewish groups.
A8  SETBACKS RATTLE BOSNIAN CROATS  The killings of two Catholic priests have deepened doubts among Bosnia's Croats that the Muslim-led Government is committed to an ethnically mixed country.
A1  A U.N. commander wants more peacekeepers, not resolutions.
A3  CAUTIOUS FAITH IN MIDEAST TALKS  Palestinian and Egyptian officials said they expected Israeli-P.L.O. talks to resume soon.
A10  FIRE RUINS SYNAGOGUE IN MOSCOW  A synagogue in Moscow was destroyed by fire, fanning fears among some Jews of a new wave of anti-Semitic vandalism.
A8  NORTH KOREA PLEDGES ACCESS  North Korea has told the United States that international monitors can visit its seven disclosed nuclear sites, Clinton Administration officials said.
But it has not proposed procedures for inspections.
A1  I.R.A.
KILLS BRITISH SOLDIER  An I.R.A. sniper shot and killed a soldier on patrol in Northern Ireland, raising doubts over prospects for a peace initiative.
A2  6%?
FRENCH WOMEN DEMAND 50  A determined group of French women is demanding a law guaranteeing that 50 percent of the seats in the National Assembly go to women.
Women now hold only 6 percent of the seats -- the same proportion they occupied in 1945.
A4  GERMANY INDICTS 4 IN FIREBOMBING  Prosecutors indicted four men in connection with a firebombing that killed five Turks in May.
A6  The Honduran Army pledged to open files on political killings.
A7  In Cairo, private burial is a luxury only the rich can afford.
A10 National A12-20  A CRISIS ON DEATH ROW  In Texas, the number of inmates on death row continues to rise, but the number of lawyers willing to represent them is shrinking, creating what their legal advocates are calling a crisis.
A1  DISPUTE OVER HOWARD STERN  The F.C.C. has delayed Infinity Broadcasting's purchase of three radio stations for $170 million while it considers complaints about Howard Stern, the radio personality whose scatological humor has already generated $1.2 million in fines.
A1  SURGEON GENERAL'S SPOTLIGHT  Dr.
Joycelyn Elders, the bluntspoken Surgeon General, has only been in office four months, and she has already attracted more attention without even trying than many other Administration officials.
A1  FLORIDA PREPARES TO FILE SUIT  The governor of Florida has ordered his state to sue the Federal Government in an effort to recoup the hundreds of millions of dollars the state spends on social services for illegal aliens.
A12  TOUGH-TALK BARBIE, SWEET G.I.
JOE  A group of Manhattan performance artists have swapped the voice boxes of Talking Dukes and "Teen Talk" Barbies.
The result?
Barbies who roar, "Eat lead, Cobra!" G.I.
Joe's who twitter, "Will we ever have enough clothes?" A12  BATTLE OVER BABY CONTINUES  In Chicago, a woman gave birth to a baby who, while still a fetus, was the center of an intense legal battle that reached the Supreme Court when doctors said the child would die or be retarded if carried to term.
A12  STRATEGY SHIFT ON DEMJANJUK  The Justice Department no longer contends that John Demjanjuk was one of the most barbaric Nazi figures of the Holocaust.
But it still accuses him of being a lesser war criminal.
A13  RADIATION INVESTIGATION WIDENS  The Clinton Administration has expanded an inquiry into the propriety and safety of human radiation experimentation conducted by the Government in the decades after World War II.
A18  LOOKING TO THE NEW REGIME  The race is on among some top Pentagon officials to show that they never thought much of Defense Secretary Les Aspin, and that they deeply respect Bobby Ray Inman, Mr.
Aspin's appointed successor.
A20  Law A23  At the Bar: The I.R.S. targets lawyers who accept payments in cash.
Metro Digest B1 CONDOM PROGRAM CALLED ILLEGAL  New York City's influential program of providing condoms on demand to students in public high schools as a way to combat AIDS was thrown out by a state court, which ruled that such a program required parental consent.
A1  NEW SUSPECT IN CROWN HTS.
CASE  Law-enforcement officials said that they have identified a new suspect in the killing of a Hasidic scholar during the Crown Heights disturbances two years ago.
The officials said they believe he delivered the stab wounds that killed the scholar.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-30  On New Year's resolutions.
C1  Gallery settles dispute with Greece.
C2  For Children C12  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  "Music From Down the Hill." C3  Restaurants C28  Art: Altarpieces from Sardinia.
C1  Kandinsky's watercolors.
C1  Smithson photographs.
C3  Art in Review.
C29  Inside Art C30  Books: Iris Murdoch's new novel.
C30  Television: TV Weekend D15  Sports B7-15  Basketball: Starks leads Knicks to victory.
B7  Columns: Vecsey on Nebraska's Tommie Frazier.
B7  Football: The Giants' Secret Weapon.
B7  Obituaries A24-25  Rabbi Marshall T. Meyer, a spiritual leader and social critic.
A24  Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials  Fund the arts broadly.
Snow, rain nor competition.
Death sentences for the Bahai.
State schools: leadership needed.
Letters  Anthony Lewis: Death of a dream.
David Levinthal: New Year's Eve through the ages.
Richard K. Betts: Outlaw with a bomb.
Neediest Cases B2  Chronicle B6  Crossword C29


After Nine New Year's Day Games, Will There Be One Champion or Two?
First come the games and then come the ballots.
The college football season concludes tomorrow with nine bowl games, three of which will be factors in the determination of a national champion -- Cotton, Orange and Sugar.
The foremost candidates are Florida State, Nebraska, Notre Dame and West Virginia.
The first two play each other in the Orange Bowl, with the loser certain to be eliminated.
Notre Dame, facing Texas A&amp;M in the Cotton Bowl, and West Virginia, playing Florida in the Sugar, must win to remain in contention.


Greece and Gallery Settle
The Government of Greece announced yesterday that its dispute with the Michael Ward Gallery of Manhattan had been resolved with the gallery's donation of a rare collection of Mycenaean jewelry and ornaments, from the 15th century B.C., to the Society for the Preservation of the Greek Heritage in Washington.
"These objects have now been returned at no cost to the Greek people," said Loucas Tsilas, the Greek Ambassador to the United States, who announced the gift in Manhattan at the Greek Consulate on Fifth Avenue.
He thanked Michael and Stark Ward, the owners of the gallery, at 9 East 93d Street, and said the society, a nonprofit organization, planned to exhibit the rare objects in the United States and in Greece.


E.P.A. Says It Won't Order New Water-Filtration Plant
Keeping New York City on a short leash, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency said yesterday that for the time being it would not require that the city build a multibillion-dollar water-filtration plant.
But the city will have to adhere closely to a year-old program to take more than 150 steps to protect its water supply, the E.P.A. said.
And the city will have to complete a preliminary design of the filtration plant.
That would mean no lost time if the E.P.A. eventually decides that the city has to build the plant.


No Headline
If I can't show my family and my congregation how to face death, what kind of rabbi am I? -- MARSHALL T. MEYER, who led services before entering the hospital, where he died of cancer on Wednesday.  [ A24:2. ]


Rolling Into Meadowlands
Roller hockey will skate into Byrne Meadowlands Arena in June, and the New Jersey Devils can't stop it, even in court.
Superior Court Judge Reginald Stanton ruled yesterday in Newark that the Devils could not stop a new Roller Hockey International franchise from signing a lease to play in the arena.


Officials Say They Can't Explain Vendetta Behind Fatal Bombings
As investigators continued today to try to piece together the circumstances that led to a string of deadly bombings across upstate New York, a portrait began to emerge of the main suspect as a con artist and irritable eccentric who had several previous brushes with the law but no apparent history of violence.
The authorities believe that the man, Michael Stevens, planned the bombings that killed five people and wounded two others on Tuesday night as retribution against his girlfriend's family, with whom he had a fractious relationship.
The woman's mother and sister were among those killed.


Yule-Haul


General Counsel Quits at Prudential Securities
The fraud scandal at Prudential Securities claimed the career of one of the brokerage firm's most senior executives yesterday.
Loren Schechter, Prudential's chief legal strategist who became the focus of criticism for his role in the unfolding scandal, resigned as general counsel and a director of the firm, according to an internal memorandum distributed throughout Prudential last night.


Inside Art
A Dirty Van Dyck
You can't be too careful if you're a museum selling a work of art, even if that work has long been relegated to storage and is not in good shape.
Recently, an early Van Dyck, "Portrait of a Seated Couple," from 1618-1620, was sold to an unidentified museum by the Manhattan branch of Colnaghi, the Old Master gallery, reportedly for $700,000.
Old Master experts knew the work.
The Detroit Institute of Arts sold it at Sotheby's in New York last January.
But instead of calling the work a Van Dyck, the auction house said it was "attributed to" the Old Master, and it put a low estimate of $10,000 to $15,000 on the painting.


It's a Wonderful Life for Frankel
"What kind of year have I had?" said Bonnie Frankel.
"Would crazy be enough of an answer? No? Well, then say I graduated college, won an issue, ran fifth in the nationals, gambled on not working so I could better myself and stayed alone. I don't want another powerful man to eat me up. I won't pair until I'm stronger."
Bonnie Frankel turned 49 this month.
And, as she would be the first to tell you, is still in the process of becoming.
She opened the year as a senior at Loyola Marymount University in Los Angeles.
She had found out she couldn't compete on the track team because her Division I eligibility had run out 26 years ago.


Events in Russia Send Shivers East and West; Orthodoxy's Embrace
To the Editor:
While in accord with A. M. Rosenthal's concern over the potential rise of a fascist leader in Russia in "Russia: Who's to Blame?" (column, Dec. 17), I am offended by his reference to "church bigotry" and "the passions of Holy Russia that exclude all others as foreign to themselves and God."


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
Brazilian Ballroom
The Raquel Lima Show, featuring Pe De Boi and Nando Gabrieli, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005.
The Ballroom's New Year's Eve extravaganza kicks off the club's fourth annual winter series of Brazilian music with the double bill of a hot jazz singer (Raquel Lima) and a rising young crooner (Nando Gabrieli), both of whom are appearing with a nine-member samba band, Pe De Boi.
Miss Lima is an improvisatory scat singer adept in several Afro-Brazilian styles.
Mr.
Gabrieli, a protege of Sammy Cahn, is only 28, and has been compared with the young Frank Sinatra.
The festivities begin at 10 P.M., with dancing after the show until 4 A.M.
Tickets are $65 and there is a two-drink minimum.
The show continues through Jan. 8 at regular prices.
STEPHEN HOLDEN Come to This Cabaret
Weslia Whitfield, Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-6800, extension 159.
A pop-jazz singer with impeccable taste in material and a relaxed and inviting living-room manner, Weslia Whitfield has been San Francisco's most popular cabaret performer for several years, and now she is catching on in New York.
Tickets are available for her show at 11 P.M. in the Gallery on the second floor; the cost is $175 a person and includes dinner, favors and dancing.
S.
H.


Critics' Choices; Artistic Ideas for Starting the New Year Right
Dance
The American Indian Dance Theater's highly seasonal program, "Winter Dances," is a special treat and qualifies as a family show.
The performers, who come from 17 tribes, offer many dances that have been favorites since they were first seen in New York in 1989.
Eddie Swimmer will still wow everybody in the "Hoop Dance," in which he steps in and out of a gaggle of hoops, creating designs resembling flora and fauna.
The newest treasures in the current program are the sunny "Pueblo Winter" dances of the American Southwest and the "Red Cedar Bark" ceremony of the Kwakiutl people from British Columbia.
This dramatic initiation rite is highlighted by a spectacular duet for two men who are identified with the tribe's ancestral bird spirits; wearing huge masks, they open their beaks and caw in rhythm.


In the Land of the Pyramids, Charity Graves Await Many
The woman sat on the wooden plank over the entrance to the grave, a 30-foot-deep pit where the body of her eldest son lay with dozens of other corpses.
"If we had the money we could have put him beneath a proper tombstone and planted flowers and plants around it," the woman, Awatif Khalil Mohammed, said.


Deep in Stretch, Smith Gets Stakes Record
Mike Smith awakened yesterday morning hoping that the snow had stopped falling.
He figured that if the weather was clear, he had a good chance to make racing history, to accomplish something akin to Roger Maris's 61 home runs.


No Headline
Rabbi Marshall T. Meyer, an articulate voice of American Jewish liberalism and spiritual leader of Congregation B'nai Jeshurun on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, died on Wednesday at New York Hospital.
He was 63 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Southwestern Public Service reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


A Gift for a Brother
For speed skater KRISTEN TALBOT, a chance to help her brother live is more important than a shot at glory in the upcoming Winter Olympics.
Starting today at the Pettit National Ice Center in Milwaukee, Talbot will try to make the Olympic team for the third time.
After the Olympic time trials, she has an appointment on Jan. 11 to donate bone marrow to her 19-year-old brother, JASON, who has aplastic anemia, a rare and potentially fatal condition that impedes the body's ability to produce blood cells.
Talbot, 23, of Schuylerville, N.Y., is making the donation even though it will weaken her and probably end any hope of winning a medal.
The Olympic speed skating competition begins Feb. 13. (AP)


