CHRONICLE
Where, oh where, is that invitation to the July 4 weekend festivities for the Santa Fe Opera?
For many people, the wait for the four-day round of performances, dinners, barbecues and parties that marks the opening of the summer season in Santa Fe will be futile this year.
The series of events, which run from July 1 through 4, is sold out.
NANCY ZECKENDORF, a former ballerina who is chairwoman of the opera, has no idea why.
"For some strange reason it's sold out and I haven't even sent out the invitations," she said the other day, speculating that the demand might be due to magazine articles describing the southwestern city as "the hottest place in the world."


Hurley's Day Is One for Us All
Beneath the brass rail within Cameron Indoor Stadium, in the lower stands where the Crazies were spending their Sunday afternoon, Duke students extended their arms above their heads and bent at the waist, again and again, in their We-Are-Not-Worthy salute to Bobby Hurley.
The game had not yet started.
Above the brass rail, where the not-quite-as-crazy sit, the Assist-O-Meter was set at 20, the number Hurley needed to surpass the national career record of 1,038 set by Chris Corchiani when he played for North Carolina State.


Abby Kleiman, Lawrence LaSala
Abby Rose Klieman, the daughter of Lenore and Larry Klieman of Fair Lawn, N.J., was married yesterday to Lawrence Joseph LaSala, the son of Jeanne M. LaSala of Ridgewood, Queens.Cantor Nancy Hausman officiated at the Crystal Plaza, a catering establishment in Livingston, N.J.
The bride, 25, is keeping her name.
She is a development officer in the corporate fund-raising office at Columbia University in New York, where she is also a master's degree candidate in international affairs.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father, who is retired, was a social worker in Fair Lawn.
Her mother is a customer service representative at the Research Institute of America, a publishing company in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Merchants; Dip in Sales Is Expected
The explosion on Friday dealt a blow to the businesses that serve the tens of thousands of people who work at and visit the World Trade Center.
Some, like the Vista Hotel at 3 World Trade Center, are expected to remain closed for weeks.
Others, like nearby restaurants, clothing stores, copier shops and messenger services, anticipate that their sales will sag until the complex reopens and the area is once again flooded by people.


Snowmobiles: Comparing Liabilities and Assets
THE message painted on a plastic-covered bale of hay is simple: "No Snowmobilers! Keep Out!"
That is a succinct summary of one side of a winter-sports debate here in Lewis County, where many people are tired of the constant whine of snowmobiles in their backyards and on local roads.


Vicki Ressler, Matthew Gold
Valerie Kay Ressler, a daughter of Mrs.
William B. Ressler of Hartsdale, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Ressler, was married yesterday to Matthew J. Gold, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack A. Gold of Caldwell, N.J.
Rabbi Joshua Gutoff officiated at the Hotel Westbury in New York.
Mrs.
Gold, 38, is known as Vicki.
She is an investment specialist for GNA Securities, a brokerage in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and received an M.B.A. from Baruch College.
Her father was a lawyer in New York.


Doubts Mar PBS Film of Black Army Unit
Former Capt.
David Williams of the 761st Tank Battalion, one of the few black combat units to fight in World War II, was talking about distances, Sherman tanks and truth.
"On April 29, 1945," he said, referring to the day the Dachau concentration camp was liberated, "the 761st was near Straubing, which is about 70 miles from Dachau as the crow flies. Bridges were down, the tanks were all beat up. There wasn't enough gas. Nobody could have just taken a Sherman tank on a 140-mile round trip and not have been noticed missing. He would have been court-martialed."


Gina Sanders, Steven Newhouse
Gina Susan Sanders, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold R. Sanders of Ardsley, N.Y., was married yesterday to Steven Oliver Newhouse, a son of Donald E. Newhouse, the publishing executive, and Susan Newhouse of New York.
Rabbi Philip E. Schechter, the bride's uncle, performed the ceremony at Il Cantinori restaurant in New York.
The bride, 33, is the advertising manager at HG magazine in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University.
Her father is an emeritus attending urologist at Montefiore Medical Center and a former clinical assistant professor at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, both in the Bronx.
Her mother, Joyce Sanders, writes a column on volunteerism for Women's News, a monthly community newspaper in Harrison, N.Y.


Another Irish Parade Sequel
If this was a movie, it would be an installment in one of those interminable series whose titles end in Roman numerals: "St. Patrick's Day Parade III." And as is so often true with such film sequels, each incarnation seems more brutal than its predecessor and less likely to attract an audience.
With this year's version apparently resolved by a judge's ruling on Friday, it is difficult to see how anyone gained much, if anything, by once again wading into the fight over whether gay Irish-Americans, under their own banner, can march up Fifth Avenue on March 17.


Alexandra Petas, Dean Pappas
Alexandra Elizabeth Petas, the daughter of John and Virginia Petas of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday to Constantine William Pappas, the son of William and Helene Pappas of Bridgewater, N.J.
Metropolitan Silas, the Greek Orthodox bishop of New Jersey, performed the ceremony at Holy Trinity Greek Orthodox Church in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mrs.
Pappas, 25, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is the human resources officer for National Westminster Bancorp in White Plains.
Her father is the vice president of Monitor Controls Corporation, an elevator-accessories manufacturer in Farmingdale, L.I.
Her mother is the director of development at the Chapin School, a private girls school in New York.


Losses Hurt Reputation Of 5 Horses
Racing people were still searching for clues and candidates today after at least five contenders for the Kentucky Derby were beaten this weekend in major prep races in Florida and California.
At Gulfstream Park here on Saturday, in one section of the Fountain of Youth Stakes, the favored Silver of Silver ran third, while in the other section, Great Navigator finished second and Itsal'lknownfact ran sixth.
At Santa Anita, meanwhile, two even higher-ranking prospects for the Derby were far outdistanced in the San Rafael Stakes: the favored Stuka finishing in third place, 12 lengths behind, and the second choice, Art of Living, fifth in the field of six.
Storm Tower Undefeated
Amid the debris, the winners were Storm Tower and Duc d'Sligovil in the two sections of the Fountain of Youth, and Devoted Brass in the San Rafael.
And in terms of advancing on the road to Louisville, where the 119th Kentucky Derby will be run May 1, the most progress was probably made by Storm Tower, who is now undefeated in four starts in a brief career that began last June at Monmouth Park in New Jersey.


Review/Music; Rameau's Wild Exclamations Punctuating 'Castor et Pollux'
The word "baroque" was first applied in music to disparage one of Rameau's operas: like a misshapen pearl, it lacked regularity.
Unlike Lully's music, which had defined French opera for the early 18th century, it was extreme, full of jarring modulations and exclamations, expressions that strained the limits of taste.
Rameau raised the temperature of French opera.
Some of those musical effects could be heard in a marvelous concert performance of "Castor et Pollux" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Friday night, when William Christie came from Paris with his accomplished group of early-music performers, Les Arts Florissants.
Opening a weekend of performances (with Rameau's "Indes Gallantes" on Saturday night and a repeat of "Castor" on Sunday afternoon), the only regret was that the musical drama couldn't have been made visible as well as audible.
The visits of Mr.
Christie, now becoming annual under the auspices of the Brooklyn Academy, are among the musical highlights of New York's music seasons; a year ago, Mr.
Christie's and Jean-Marie Villegier's full-scale production of Lully's "Atys" was hauntingly beautiful; the opera's mythic tale of stifled love was transformed into a formal ballet of moves and countermoves at the court of Versailles.


Dudley Takes Anger Out On Knicks
As the trading deadline neared last Thursday, the talk in the Nets' locker room was that Chris Dudley would be sent to Utah for center Mike Brown.
In fact, it was more than just talk.
The Nets were only a heartbeat away from making the last-minute deal but had a change of heart.
Dudley was both confused and angered when he heard about the proposed deal, saying to another player: "I don't understand. Why are they sending me to Utah? I want to stay here."


Man Faces Charges In Death of Infant
A 20-year-old Bronx man was charged yesterday with beating to death the 6-month-old daughter of his stepsister, the police said.
Eddie Garcia of 2119 Hughes Avenue in East Tremont was arrested and charged with murder a day after the infant, Tiffany Garcia, died at St.
Barnabas Hospital in the Bronx, said Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a police spokesman.


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Director; Port Authority's Chief Takes Blast Personally
Stanley Brezenoff, his tired eyes the size of peas behind glasses slipping down his nose, was stopped yesterday by the palm of a security guard at the entrance to One World Trade Center.
He was asked to produce his identification card.
"This is my building," said Mr.
Brezenoff, the executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
"But that's O.K. They asked me for I.D. at 1 Police Plaza, too, and then they also told me I looked a lot younger in my picture -- which was taken before the explosion."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  U.S.
BEGINS AIRDROP OVER BOSNIA  With successful flights by three U.S. military cargo planes from Germany, the United States began airdropping food, medicine and other supplies to besieged towns in eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A1  Two Bosnian factions signaled opposition to the U.N.'s proposal.
A6


Damaged Yacht Can't Seek Prize
A submerged object in the Southern Ocean punctured the hull of the yacht Enza New Zealand yesterday during its attempt to sail around the world in 80 days.
The impact, which has forced the crew to head for the nearest port, has eliminated any chance for the seven-man team to claim the Jules Verne Trophy and the accompanying $1 million in prize money.
The 85-foot catamaran was about 1,400 miles southeast of the tip of Africa when the accident occurred.
Enza's co-skippers, Peter Blake of New Zealand and Robin Knox-Johnston of England, reported by radio that none of their crew was hurt, but that the boat was damaged too severely to continue.


Review/Pop; At Ice Cube Rap Concert Everyone Goes to a Party
Ice Cube hit the stage, and the audience jumped to its feet.
Starting out with the song "When Will They Shoot?," featuring self-aggrandizing and mildly paranoid lyrics and his own percussive rapping, he turned the house into a party.
He had the men in the audience chanting lines, only to have the women compete with them; he and his fellow rapper, W. C., split the house in half to see who could cheer more loudly, and everybody yelled, cued by W. C., the standard abusive lines at Ice Cube.
By the time the show had finished, the wall between audience and performer had gone down several times.
The concert, at the Apollo Theater on Saturday night, was supporting Ice Cube's new album, "The Predator" (Priority), which hasn't done as well as it might have.
His last, "Death Certificate," was a major pop hit, and when he toured for it, Ice Cube took an elaborate stage setup with him.
His new stage is different, spare and uncluttered, leaving Ice Cube and W. C. to cruise the stage, driving home his stories.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday with articles about the explosion at the World Trade Center misidentified a building shown with smoke billowing from an entrance.
It was the New York Vista Hotel.


Book Critics Honor 'All the Pretty Horses' in Fiction
Cormac McCarthy's novel "All the Pretty Horses" (Alfred A. Knopf), the story of a young rancher who heads off for a dangerous adventure along the Texas-Mexico border, won the 1992 National Book Critics Circle Award for fiction, the organization announced yesterday.
The novel, which also won the National Book Award, is Mr.
McCarthy's sixth, but it was the first one to be acclaimed and to become a best seller.
Even now, months after its publication, "All the Pretty Horses" often climbs back onto best-seller lists.


Pressure Mounts to Keep Psychiatric Centers Open
As chairman of the State Senate's Mental Hygiene Committee, Senator Nicholas J. Spano says that New York should take the money it saves from closing its outdated psychiatric hospitals and invest it in a new network of community mental health programs.
But as a legislator who represents Yonkers, Mr.
Spano, a Republican, says that at least one hospital -- the Harlem Valley Psychiatric Center, many of whose workers live in his district -- should remain open for now.


Jody Lewis, William Gorin
Jody Louis, a vice president at National Westminster Bank, was married yesterday to William S. Gorin, a vice president in the financial products group of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, both in New York.
Rabbi Daniel Mehlman performed the ceremony at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs.
Gorin, 32, graduated magna cum laude from Boston University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Louis of North Woodmere, L.I.
Her father, now retired, was a senior vice president of the Sidney Gould Company in New York, a former women's sportswear division of Interco Inc., a St.
Louis-based manufacturer of shoes and furniture..


Susan Weissbach, Alan Friedman
Susan Gail Weissbach, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Murray S. Weissbach of Roslyn, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Alan Seth Friedman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Burton Friedman, also of Roslyn.
Rabbi Robert S. Widom performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel of Great Neck, L.I.
Mrs.
Friedman, 28, is a social worker with the New York Association for New Americans, a refugee resettlement agency in New York.
She graduated from Hamilton College and received master's degrees in social work and public health from Boston University.
Her father, now retired, was a surgeon in Forest Hills, Queens.
Her mother, Margaret Weissbach, is an artist and an art teacher.


Queens Residents Protest Opening of a Topless Bar


Renter-to-Owner Ratio Shifts, and With It the Political Climate
IF reports of its death are greatly exaggerated, liberalism may be ailing in New York City because of shifts in a sensitive sociological index: the ratio between condos and condoms.
A larger proportion of New Yorkers now own their homes or apartments than at any time in the 20th century.
And owners, rendered less mobile physically and less liquid fiscally by their stakes in real estate, tend to be more politically conservative than renters.
Liberal leadership also has been diluted by divisions between black and Hispanic politicians and between white liberals and blacks and by the ascendancy of white liberals in the political establishment.


CHRONICLE
The incoming president of Duke University, NANNERL O. KEOHANE, met with hundreds of alumni and parents of students Saturday night at a Manhattan fund-raiser for the university's drama department.
"New York is an important city for Duke," said Dr.
Keohane, who was making her first formal appearance at a Duke event since being named president.
"There are lots of exciting people here, and it is such a lovely evening and setting and I am just so pleased to be here."


Review/Dance; Sitting Back and Enjoying What Can't Be Understood
Sometimes listening to words in a foreign language is so delightful that one does not care that every statement is incomprehensible.
Watching Yoshiko Chuma's "Jo Ha Kyu" on Sunday night at St.
Mark's Church was a choreographic equivalent of such an experience.
The events in this work, presented under the auspices of the church's Danspace Project, made no sense.
A program note explaining that the title referred to a type of musical composition used in the traditional Noh theater of Japan in no way clarified the action.
But this was an occasion in which literal sense did not matter.


Corrections
An article last Tuesday about the bank fraud trial of Representative Harold E. Ford referred incorrectly to two assistant United States attorneys who asked to be removed from the case.
Those prosecutors, Gary Humble, assigned to the Eastern District of Tennessee, and Dan Clancy, assigned to the Western District, are career Government employees, not political appointees.


Tom Kite 1, Hackensack C.C. 0
Jim McGovern played so soundly this week that total strangers in the gallery began calling him "Jimbo."
He entered today's last round of the Nissan Los Angeles Open with the same cumulative score as Tom Kite -- three-under, one stroke off the lead and focused on by CBS's Ken Venturi -- but then he and Kite went in opposite directions.


No Headline
"If we did everything we're supposed to do, probably nobody even knew we were there. Nothing at all was shot at us." -- CAPT.
JIM SMITH, Air Force pilot who flew on Bosnian relief mission.  [ A6:2. ]


Books of The Times; Battles Lost in a War That Is Far From Over
Computer Wars How the West Can Win in a Post-I.B.M.
World By Charles H. Ferguson and Charles R. Morris 272 pages.
Times Books. $23.


Review/Dance; The Dancers at Purchase, In an Annual Spring Rite
One of New York's best-kept dance secrets is the Purchase Dance Corps.
It is common knowledge that the dance division of the State University College at Purchase, N.Y., produces some of the best performers around, and that many of them may be seen without much trouble by dancegoers in Manhattan.
But the students' annual spring concert, presented only in Westchester at the college's theater complex, is more difficult to get to.
And that is a pity.
The performances can be eye opening when they feature revivals of familiar dances.
The dancers are skilled and fresh, and perform without a trace of affectation.
This year's program, which will be repeated Thursday through Sunday at the college's Performing Arts Center (735 Anderson Hill Road, Purchase), opens with "Forest," an exquisite modern dance piece choreographed by Robert Cohan, the director of the London Contemporary Dance Theater and a former Martha Graham principal.
Bodies move through dim light in soft-colored leotards.
The eager attack is Graham.
The look of limpid suspension is Merce Cunningham.
The nine dancers bring a simplicity to the choreography that reveals but does not stress the dance's many small surprises.


Schott Bids Hail and Farewell to Reds
The Reds' owner, MARGE SCHOTT, mingled with Cincinnati players yesterday for the last time before starting her one-year suspension.
She signed autographs for fans, hugged players and helped children get Manager TONY PEREZ's autograph during an hourlong visit to the team's spring training complex at Plant City, Fla.
It was her last chance for a while to act like a team owner.
Under terms of the suspension that begins today, Schott is barred from going on the field or into the clubhouse.
Schott, suspended for using racial and ethnic slurs, also is barred from the Reds' offices at Riverfront Stadium.
She made her final appearance there last week.


Buckner Said to Have Mavericks' Job
QUINN BUCKNER, a former Indiana University and National Basketball Association player with no coaching experience, will be offered the coaching job of the woeful Dallas Mavericks this week, according to a report yesterday in The Dallas Morning News.
The News quoted team sources as saying that club officials are confident Buckner will accept the offer.
But the 38-year-old Buckner would not take over as coach until next season, the sources said, leaving interim Coach GAR HEARD in charge for the rest of this season.


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Garage; Panel Warned in 1985 of Vulnerability of Center's Parking to Bombing
An anti-terrorist task force for the World Trade Center told the Port Authority eight years ago that the center's parking garage was vulnerable to a bomb attack and should be closed to the public.
Although the recommendation was rejected then, Stanley Brezenoff, the Port Authority's executive director, said yesterday that the agency would consider restricting public access to the garage as well as other measures to increase security.
"Everything is on the table," he said.


Review/Theater; Long Ago, Far Away: Ragtime's Flowering
Pairing Eric Overmyer's linguistic virtuosity with Scott Joplin's scintillating syncopation sounds like a promising theatrical idea.
As it turns out, "The Heliotrope Bouquet by Scott Joplin and Louis Chauvin," the work that results from this cross-century partnership, vitiates the efforts of both the playwright and the composer.
This is a dreary, downbeat attempt at musical biography.
In his play (at Playwrights Horizons), Mr.
Overmyer barely taps Joplin's extraordinary life.
The story of how this itinerant turn-of-the-century musician moved out of saloons and bawdy houses and became the king of ragtime is told more evocatively in the 1950 book "They All Played Ragtime," by Rudi Blesh and Harriet Janis, and there is also an interesting historical collage of facts and photographs in the lobby of the theater.


METRO DIGEST
CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: STEALTHY DETONATION AND PUBLIC CHAOS
As officials announced that the twin towers of the World Trade Center would be closed at least seven days from the effects of Friday's bomb blast, executives and workers turned their aplomb and ingenuity to finding ways to carry on business.
The five commodities exchanges are reopening in a smaller building and big brokerage houses have arranged alternative locations.
But other tenants face uncertainty and possible large financial losses, even though state and city officials do not expect lasting economic damage or a flight of panicked tenants.
A1.
BOMB REPORTED MADE OF DYNAMITE
Law-enforcement officials say that the bomb that devastated the World Trade Center apparently was made of conventional dynamite, not a tightly controlled military explosive like the plastic favored by terrorists.
And Police Commissioner Kelly disclosed that investigators believe more than one person was involved.
A1.
SUDDEN TRAUMA AND SLOW RECOVERY
As they gain a clearer sense of the obstacles they face, from the lack of heat to water in the basement, Port Authority officials say it will be more than a week before the World Trade Center is fully revived.
B5.
Since attention is a main goal of terrorism, investigators are baffled by the silence following the explosion.
None of the more than 50 callers who have claimed responsibility has presented convincing proof.
B4.
Eight years ago, an anti-terrorist task force told the Port Authority that the trade center's parking garage was vulnerable to a bomb attack and should be closed to the public.
Additional safety systems were also suggested.
But most of the key recommendations were never adopted.
B5.
With a tiny blue hard hat perched atop his head, Stanley Brezenoff has been forced to occupy the very hot seat at the helm of the disaster reaction effort.
His long experience in city government has proven to be good training.
B4.
Service on PATH and New York City subway lines should be fully restored, making for a fairly normal rush hour in lower Manhattan.
B5.
NEW YORK CITY WINNERS AND LOSERS ON ST.
PATRICK'S DAY
A Federal judge's decision about the sponsorship of this year's St.
Patrick's Day Parade appears to hand total victory to the Ancient Order of Hibernians, giving them control of the parade on their own terms, and equally complete defeat to Mayor Dinkins and the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization.
But on closer inspection the lines between winners and losers become blurred in the shifting ethnic and political mix of New York City.
B3.
LIBERAL IMAGE IN DISPUTE
A larger proportion of New Yorkers now own their homes or apartments than at any other time in the 20th century.
Owners tend to be more politically conservative than renters, which may help explain the city's recent conflicts over traditional social values.
Metro Matters, B3.
A foundation fills the wishes of hundreds of seriously ill children.
B2.
REGION HOSPITALS NO, BUT JOBS YES
As New York State struggles to close down its sprawling mental hospitals and move the resources into smaller community programs, legislators who favor the policy in theory sometimes balk when it means loss of funds to their home districts.
One hospital with fewer than a dozen patients is to be closed this year, and two others are on the list for closing -- bringing angry lobbying from workers and local legislators.
B7.
AWAITING THE CALL IN HARTFORD
If Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut is thinking about accepting a job in the Clinton Administration, he isn't discussing the idea with his lieutenant governor, Eunice S. Groark.
She's the one who would succeed him.
In Hartford, state officials say they've heard talk that the governor's wanted in Washington, but nothing's definite.
B7.
Snowmobilers are splitting residents of Lewis County, N.Y., as tourist dollars compete with a desire for winter quiet.
B7.
Chronicle B8


White Has a Home. What He Wants Is the Ball.
When Dillard High was host to Boyd Anderson High here on Saturday night in a state basketball tournament game, the gym was packed with nearly 3,000 fans, and they were buzzing with the special pitch that always accompanies this matchup.
The schools are only two miles apart, and their sports rivalry is full of memorable moments.
The players from the teams know one another.
Fans from both sides find that their lives intertwine at church, at work, at play.


Turgeon Unwilling to Let Islanders Give One Away
The Islanders, getting the winning goal in overtime from Pierre Turgeon, picked up 2 more points in their quest to earn a playoff spot with a 7-6 victory over the hapless Hartford Whalers tonight.
The victory came when Turgeon took a drop pass from Steve Thomas just inside the Hartford blue line, skated fiercely toward the Whalers' net and smoked a wrist shot through the goaltending pads of Sean Burke with 2 minutes 21 seconds left in overtime.


Sports of The Times; McGirt and His Obstacles: One Savvy Boxer, One Sore Shoulder
IN the ring at Bufano's gym, Buddy McGirt, wearing a red T-shirt and tight royal blue sweat pants, had been using his left jab easily, peppering his left-handed sparring partners for six rounds.
Now, in the seventh round, he suddenly threw a left hook.
"The doc," McGirt said, peeking out of his headgear toward Al Certo, his manager and trainer, "told me to throw the hook with my body."


Review/Television; A Thriving Black Neighborhood in 1920's Tulsa
Tonight is your chance to learn about Greenwood, a neighborhood in Tulsa, Okla., that flourished in the 1920's and 30's, with prosperous stores, a bustling main street, good schools and plenty of community spirit.
The only thing that set it apart from similar neighborhoods around the country was that it was all black.
"Goin' Back to T-Town" tells what it was like to grow up in Greenwood in a period of strict racial segregation.
The evocative pictures we have come to expect from "The American Experience" series, the detailed and generally happy memories of people now in their 70's, the jazzy background music and a solid narration delivered by Ossie Davis blend into an hourlong documentary with plenty of resonance for today.


Rangers Receive a Body Blow as Messier Injures Ribs
Most of the New York Rangers would do anything for their captain, Mark Messier.
Usually, Messier doesn't take advantage.
Today, he didn't have a choice.
Messier, who is suffering from what he calls "the worst pain of any injury in my career," was forced to call upon his teammates to carry his luggage through customs at Edmonton International Airport this morning.
Hit from behind by Edmonton's Igor Kravchuk in the closing seconds of the Rangers' 1-0 victory over the Oilers on Saturday night, he suffered trauma to the right side of his rib cage and has become the latest in a long list of Rangers to be sidelined by injury.


A No Confidence Vote for Minnesota
If the Minnesota North Stars move to Dallas, the club owner, NORM GREEN, wouldn't support bringing a National Hockey League team back to Minneapolis.


Reeves Will Talk With Simms, Then Pick No. 1 Quarterback
Dan Reeves, the Giants' new coach, said yesterday he had still not decided whether Phil Simms or Jeff Hostetler would be his quarterback, and would not make that decision until he talked to Simms.
Reeves is spending 11 days in Denver before moving permanently to northern New Jersey.
He met with Hostetler at Giants Stadium last week and plans to meet with Simms when he returns.


Orioles to Meet With Hispanic Group
The Baltimore Orioles' president, LARRY LUCCHINO, said he will meet with officials from an Hispanic group to discuss comments about Mexicans made by a team scout.
"We're going to sit down with them, have a dialogue with them and address their concerns," Lucchino said.


Two Children Hurt in Fire
Two young children who the police said had been left alone in an apartment in Corona, Queens, were seriously injured yesterday when fire swept through their home.
The children, a 3-year-old girl and a 2-year-old boy, suffered smoke inhalation and were taken to Booth Memorial Hospital, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Nicholas Vreeland.
The names of the children were not released.
Sergeant Vreeland said the children's mother was away with a third child when the fire occurred.
Firefighters responded to the fire, at 109-16 Corona Avenue, just before 1 P.M. and brought it under control within about 20 minutes.


Judith Bamberger, Richard Cogen
Judith Grace Bamberger, a daughter of Rabbi Henry and Sheila Bamberger of Utica, N.Y., was married yesterday to Richard Mark Cogen, a son of Roberta Cogen of New Hyde Park, L.I., and the late Sanford Cogen.
The ceremony was performed by the bride's father at Temple Shaaray Tefila in New York.
Mrs.
Cogen, 29, is the manager of global strategic planning at Avon Products Inc., the cosmetics manufacturer, in New York.
She graduated from Boston University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.


No Headline
HOCKEY  Loney Leads Penguins Over Capitals Troy Loney revived a stagnant Pittsburgh offense with two goals as the Penguins defeated the Washington Capitals, 4-2, yesterday in Landover, Md.
Pittsburgh goalie Tom Barrasso made 24 saves, Rick Tocchet got a goal and two assists, and rookie Martin Straka had three assists, his first multipoint game in the National Hockey League.
The Penguins had scored only 19 goals in their last seven games, five of them losses.
The victory enabled the Patrick Division leaders to stretch their lead over second-place Washington to 14 points. (AP)


Mets Have a Headache: It's Kent's Right Shoulder
The announcement, like so many Mets announcements last season, contained language of hope and understatement: minor discomfort, precautionary exam, cautious optimism.
Jeff Kent, the second baseman who stands to be a critical component of any formula for success for the Mets in 1993, will undergo a magnetic resonance imaging examination Monday to find out the cause of trouble in his right shoulder, which is the one he throws with.


Lillian Gish, 99, a Movie Star Since Movies Began, is Dead
Lillian Gish, the last of the great silent film stars, who performed for more than 85 years in movies, theater and television, died in her sleep on Saturday evening at her home in Manhattan.
She was 99 years old.
Her personal manager, James E. Frasher, said the cause was heart failure.


Robert C. Lewis Jr., Red Cross Leader, 82
Robert C. Lewis Jr., a former vice president of the American Red Cross, died Thursday at his home in Charlottesville, Va.
He was 82.
A family friend, Susanne Palmer, said the cause was a heart ailment.


Black Roots on a Brooklyn Farm


Gambler Bets, Drinks, Loses and Then Sues
Where is Susie the casino waitress with the free helpings of Scotch and water now when Leonard H. Tose, one of American gambling's most fabulous losers, needs her most?
Mr.
Tose, a notoriously unsuccessful blackjack player with a penchant for playing seven $10,000 hands simultaneously and signing a million dollars in credit markers in a single night of ill fortune, lost most of his personal and corporate wealth of tens of millions during feverish years at the high-roller tables of Atlantic City.


Antoinette Troy, Charles Damiano
Antoinette M. Troy, the marketing-support manager for the Family Channel cabletelevision network, was married yesterday to Charles Jeffrey Damiano, the executive vice president of the New York Health and Racquet fitness clubs, both in New York.
The Rev.
Mario Marzocchi performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Andrew in New York.
Mrs.
Troy-Damiano, 27, graduated from Hunter College, as did her husband.
She is a daughter of Blanche Voss of Manhattan and Thomas Troy of Jersey City.
The bride's father is a retired carpenter.
Her mother is a registered nurse in Manhattan.


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Puzzle; A Lack of Definitive Claim For Attack Baffles Officials
What is still baffling the investigators trying to determine whether terrorists were behind the World Trade Center bombing is the effective silence that has followed it.
Since attention is a main goal of terrorism, the people responsible for such acts usually find a way to make it clear that they were the ones who carried them out.
But in the aftermath of the bombing on Friday at the World Trade Center, none of the more than 50 callers who have claimed responsibility have presented convincing proof.


Michael F. Adubato, 58, Ex-New Jersey Legislator
Michael F. Adubato, a former New Jersey Assemblyman who sponsored a bill that changed the way the state's motorists pay for automobile insurance, died on Saturday at Claramaass Hospital in Belleville, N.J.
He was 58 and lived in Newark.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said his nephew, Stephen Adubato Jr.


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Waiting Line; Tenants Escorted Back Into Offices
Trade Center tenants hustled yesterday to find alternative spaces, and by last night it was apparent that in spite of the bomb, many would be back in business today.
For some companies, like Fuji Bank Ltd., the task of setting up for today was under way before employees vacated their trade center space Friday.
Katsuma Ohara, general manager of the financial company's Americas division, said 150 of the 450 people in the trade center operation would be in a computer center in North Bergen, N.J. where the Fuji Bank had previously arranged for backup space.
The rest would be in branch offices in Manhattan.


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Good News; Office Suppliers See Silver Lining
If there are any winners from the bombing in the World Trade Center, they may be office-supply vendors who provided the equipment for the temporary quarters being set up.
The First Boston Corporation bought $400,000 worth of computers over the weekend so that 200 of the 950 employees based in its 5 World Trade Center back office could move into its midtown office.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Fernando Valenzuela, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.


Starks's Voice Is Loud But Can't Carry Team
When John Starks talks, people listen, usually because he's in their face.
Thus, they have no choice.
Before the Nets laid a 102-76 statement of a beating on the Knicks yesterday, Starks could be found inside the Knicks' locker room ragging on Doc Rivers before taking it outside to the Byrne Meadowlands Arena court to the Nets' Drazen Petrovic.


Review/Music; Surrealism Translated Into Mistaken Identity
The music of Francis Poulenc plays at the edge of the trivial.
Amid a farrago of ditties and dances, detritus of early 20th-century popular culture, Poulenc announces himself by stealth, in dissonant spasms and general stylistic disorientation.
In a Wednesday night double bill of "Les Mamelles de Tiresias" and "La Voix Humaine," two short operas composed in 1944 and 1958, the Juilliard Opera valiantly tried to capture this elusive voice but fell short.
"Mamelles" was especially problematic: taking words and music at face value, it plunged headlong into banality.
The greatest challenge of "Mamelles" is its text, a "Surrealist drama" by the turn-of-the-century poet Guillaume Apollinaire.
The tale of Tiresias originally appears in Ovid's "Metamorphoses": a man is transformed into a woman, then finds himself a man again and informs the curious gods that womanhood was preferable.
Apollinaire wove this androgynous parable into a wildly absurd operetta plot.
Empowered by the rhetoric of sexual liberation, a woman named Therese wills herself into manhood (her breasts float away as balloons); her frustrated husband consequently turns himself into a woman and gives birth to dozens of babies, all for France's glory.


For a Game, Stastny Fills Nicholls Void Nicely
The Devils' drive to the playoffs was dealt a severe blow today when Bernie Nicholls's left foot was put in a cast because of a broken bone.
He will be out for at least four weeks.
Nicholls suffered the injury blocking a shot against Philadelphia on Feb. 14, but played six games with the fracture.
The Devils had not announced until today that he was hurt.


For Some Sick Children, Wishes Come True
Any wish might have seemed reasonable, but Jennifer wanted to swim with dolphins.
Jennifer spends her days struggling with kidney failure, which drags her in and out of hospitals and burdens her with dialysis.
Through the Starlight Foundation, a nonprofit organization that attempts to fulfill the wishes of critically, chronically or terminally ill children, 18-year-old Jennifer was flown from New York City to Miami, where she swam in the ocean with dolphins supervised by an animal trainer.


Ruby Keeler, Tap-Dancing Actress, Is Dead at 82
Ruby Keeler, the innocent-faced tap-dancing sweetheart of nine Warner Brothers musicals in the 1930's, died yesterday morning at her home in Palm Springs, Calif.
She was 82 years old.
The cause of death was cancer, said her daughter Kathleen Lowe.


The Braves Can Brag: Not One Stiff on the Staff
Bobby Cox of the Atlanta Braves sat at his desk with his feet up, pondering the early questions of spring training, as any major league manager might.
Has outfielder Ron Gant bulked up? "No."


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Explosion; OFFICIALS STUDYING BOMB CLUES SEEK SEVERAL FOR QUESTIONING
The bomb that devastated the garage under the World Trade Center in lower Manhattan on Friday apparently was made of 500 to 1,500 pounds of conventional dynamite available at many construction sites, not a tightly controlled military material like the plastic explosive frequently used by terrorists, a Federal official said last night.
On a day that saw several developments in the investigation, one official told of witnesses who had seen vehicles moving suspiciously near the trade center before the blast, and investigators last night were reported to be seeking a number of people for questioning.


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Commute; PATH and Subway Service Is Being Restored
Service on PATH and New York City subway lines should be fully restored by this morning's rush hour, making for a fairly normal rush hour for most commuters traveling into lower Manhattan, transit officials said.
"It's not going to be pristine," Peter Yerkes, a Port Authority spokesman, said of the PATH station at the World Trade Center.
"But basically it has been restored and cleaned up."


Boddicker May Need Knee Surgery
Kansas City Royals pitcher MIKE BODDICKER has a possible cartilage tear in his left knee that could require surgery this week.
Trainer NICK SWARTZ said Boddicker could be pitching again in two weeks if the tear is small, as suspected. (AP)


Candelaria Charged With Drunken Driving
Pittsburgh Pirates reliever JOHN CANDELARIA was arrested on a charge of drunken driving after his auto was stopped at 12:20 A.M.
Saturday in Sarasota, Fla., for following another car too closely, according to the Florida Highway Patrol.
He was released on his own recognizance. (AP)


Review/Television; Calling This Family 'Dysfunctional' Is a Compliment
This week's Television Oddity Award surely must go to NBC's "Bloodlines: Murder in the Family," a four-hour movie being shown at 9 P.M. today and tomorrow.
A based-on-fact story about two California brothers who, for business reasons, arranged to have their parents murdered has pointlessly been turned into an interminable yarn about a family losing its lines of credit.
The story is told from the vantage point of Melody Woodman (Mimi Rogers), a mother of three who suddenly finds her husband, Stewart (Elliott Gould), and his brother Neil (John Pleshette) being charged with paying for the killing of their parents, Gerald and Vera (Sam Wanamaker and Kim Hunter).
Initially believing Stewart to be innocent, Melody enlists the help of a lawyer (Joe Spano), who encourages her to review the past and put her thoughts on tape.
The flashbacks begin with a vengeance.


Review/Dance; Contemplating the Pebble as It Drops Into Water
The modern dance of Erick Hawkins may not be to everybody's taste.
Some dancegoers are puzzled or put off by the seemingly low energy level and contemplative nature of many of his dances and dancers.
But Mr.
Hawkins is a master of theatrical abstraction and distillation.
And those unlikely dance qualities informed an inspired program presented by the Erick Hawkins Dance Company on Thursday night at the Joyce Theater.
"Death Is the Hunter," created in 1975 and set to music by Wallingford Riegger, is a perfect example.
The dance is stunning in its simplicity and its quietude.
A man in a shadowy leotard and tights walks forthrightly out into the center of the stage, claps wooden blocks together suddenly as if announcing the start of a ritual, then moves behind a grove of stylized reeds and trees.
A masked figure in a purple robe, carrying a long, heavy bow, follows him onto the silent, still stage, his walk both slow and urgent.
Chillingly, he twists to stare out at the audience for a moment, then moves on to take his place behind the trees.


Cracow Philharmonic As an Orchestra In Painful Transition
Like so many other Eastern European cultural institutions, the Cracow Philharmonic, now making a North American tour that will end on March 3 at Avery Fisher Hall, finds itself in an awkward, sometimes painful transition.
The American journey, its first since the fall of Communism, has come at a crucial time for the orchestra, and its sponsors hope that box-office income as well as charitable contributions inspired by its presence will alleviate some of its more pressing problems.
The musicians' wages, like those of all Polish orchestras and formerly state-supported educated professions, are well below the national average, which is itself grievously below Western standards in an economy crippled by a half-century of Communism and today's soaring inflation.
In addition, the Cracow Philharmonic's concert hall was burned to its outer walls in December 1991, destroying its beloved pipe organ (a melted mass of metal, on display in the lobby, which makes a handsome if eerie sculptural statement) and its library of scores.


Today's Forecast: Hurricane George
The news release was copied and quickly distributed to reporters early this morning, establishing the guidelines for the return of George Steinbrenner to the Yankees on Monday.
The release might as well have been gold-embossed: It "invited" the news media to chronicle the event and "encouraged" them to be at the spring training complex by 10:30 A.M.


Hockey's Red-Hot Buffalo Wing Is a Sharpshooter From Siberia
Here's how hot Aleksandr Mogilny of the Buffalo Sabres has been while leading the pack of goal scorers in the National Hockey League:
During a game against Montreal on Friday night, he tried to send the puck to a Sabres teammate on the other side of the Canadiens' goal crease.
Lyle Odelein, the Montreal defenseman, thrust his stick in the path of the pass.
The stick hit the puck, and accidentally knocked it into Odelein's own net.


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Aftershock; Trying to Relieve Trauma and Stress
Last Friday, Glenn Ganey lived his nightmare.
"I was working at a desk when the explosion hit," recounted Mr.
Ganey, who works in Dean Witter's data processing department.
"Like everyone else, we didn't know what to do, since communications were knocked out and there was no guidance." It took 90 minutes for Mr.
Ganey to make it down from the 67th floor.
Mental health professionals, who have already started to provide post-disaster counseling, worry about how long it will take people like Mr.
Ganey and thousands like him to recover from the trauma of the explosion.


Dehere Is Only 28 Points From the Peak
Although much has been said about Terry Dehere, there is going to be a lot more notice taken of him before this season ends.
The Seton Hall star, with 1,263 points, needs only 28 more to break Chris Mullin's Big East career-scoring record, and he is likely to do it either on Wednesday against Boston College or on Saturday against St.
John's.


Businesses Plan to Carry On After Explosion
Officials announced yesterday that the twin towers of the World Trade Center would be closed for at least a week, and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo asked the Federal Government to make low-interest loans available to small businesses affected by the bombing in a center garage on Friday.
In a race to prepare for the work week, executives and workers at the huge financial center in lower Manhattan yesterday turned their aplomb and ingenuity to finding ways to carry on business in temporary quarters.


New York Sets Rules to Curb Auditors' Zeal
New York has long had a reputation as one of the nation's most aggressive states in trying to get people to pay the taxes it thinks they owe.
Now, even James W. Wetzler, the state's tax commissioner, concedes things have gotten out of hand.
Last week he issued guidelines aimed at reining in overly zealous state tax agents who try to prove that people who say they live elsewhere are actually state residents -- at least for tax purposes.


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Building; Repair Crews Struggling To Revive Vital Systems
As they gained a clearer sense of the obstacles they face, from the lack of heat to the 1.8 million gallons of water in the basement, officials of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said yesterday that it would be more than a week before they fully revive what amount to the heart, lungs and nervous system of the World Trade Center.
Last night, the heating, ventilation, communication and fire alarm systems of the massive complex were still dead.
The Vista Hotel, perched on slender columns above the blast area, was still unsecured -- although engineers said they had assembled all the materials and plans they needed to begin the job by yesterday morning.


Bridge
The literature of bridge includes thousands of books, and it is quite surprising that there is not one titled "Play or Defend." There are many fascinating deals on which a reader can be challenged to decide whether the declarer can succeed after a given lead.
A good example is the diagramed deal.
South reaches six diamonds after his partner has opened an old-fashioned one heart.
West leads a spade, since his partner has overcalled in that suit.
Would you choose to play or defend?
South is obviously in danger of losing a heart trick and a club trick.


Calling All Yankee Fans: 'I'm Boss and I'm Baaack'
George M. Steinbrenner III barged joyfully and loquaciously into his post-exile life early this morning with a midnight-to-2 A.M. appearance on WFAN Radio, promising patience for Yankees Manager Buck Showalter and a surprise entrance at the Yankees' spring training complex in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., today at 10:30 A.M.
"It'll be different and it'll be poking fun," he said.


Weicker Ducks Questions About Becoming U.S. AIDS Policy Head
If Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut is thinking about accepting a job as "AIDS czar" in the Clinton Administration, he isn't discussing the idea with Lieut.
Gov.
Eunice S. Groark.
Mrs.
Groark said yesterday that she had asked the Governor last week about reports that President Clinton was considering him for a new post as the coordinator of Federal efforts to combat AIDS.


Chess
One mark of a great player is his ability to surmount calamity, a trait impressively shown by Anatoly Karpov in the 55th running of the Hoogoven International Tournament in Wijk-aan-Zee, the Netherlands.
The event, which finished on Jan. 31, combined a series of knockout matches with a Swiss-system tournament for those who were knocked out.
In one of the worst blunders of his career, Karpov lost a piece on the 12th move against the American grandmaster Larry Christiansen.
The former world champion from Russia resigned at once.
Yet he leveled the score in their second encounter and disposed of Christiansen in the rapid-play tiebreak games that followed.
He then went on to defeat the English grandmaster John Nunn in the next round, and, in the semifinal round, Valery Salov, a former Russian grandmaster now living in Spain.


Nerve Growth Finding
The long-held view that spinal nerve cells grow only from their tip may be revised after a study found evidence of growth along the entire length of the long, thin neuron.
The study, published recently in the journal Science, was of nerve cells that branch from the spinal cord of the South African water frog, a regular laboratory animal.


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Port Authority; Complex Insurance Issues In Aftermath of Explosion
The Port Authority will most likely face substantial legal claims stemming from the explosion at the World Trade Center, as lawyers try to argue that it showed negligence in failing to take safeguards against the bombing, litigation experts said yesterday.
Officials with the Port Authority say that insurance policies will cover most claims, and that it can withstand revenue losses associated with the closing of the World Trade Center complex, which accounts for almost 15 percent of its annual revenues.


Books of The Times; From Macho Mambo World to a Softer One of Sisters
The 14 Sisters of Emilio Montez O'Brien By Oscar Hijuelos 484 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.
Like his first two books, "Our House in the Last World" (1983) and "The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love" (1989), Oscar Hijuelos's latest novel, "The 14 Sisters of Emilio Montez O'Brien," is a family saga, one of those commodious, emotionally generous books that immerse us in a well-upholstered fictional world.
Once again, we are given a richly colored portrait of immigrant life in the United States; once again we are shown how familial hopes, dreams, yearnings and sadnesses are handed down generation to generation.
Whereas "Mambo Kings," which won the 1990 Pulitzer Prize for fiction, was an insistently male book, focusing on the sexual and romantic adventures of two Cuban immigrant brothers, "The 14 Sisters" is a novel about women, a novel examining the lives and loves of the Montez and O'Brien women.
Though many of its central characters suffer from a lingering melancholy reminiscent of that possessed by Nestor, one of the two brothers in "The Mambo Kings," the book is less concerned with loss and missed opportunities than its predecessor.
Death, divorce and illness all take their toll here, but "The 14 Sisters" takes a longer view of family life than "The Mambo Kings," and its vision is ultimately more redemptive, concerned in the end, like Gabriel Garcia Marquez's "Love in the Time of Cholera," with the cyclical nature of time, and the enduring possibilities of love.
Moving back and forth in time, "The 14 Sisters" begins, more or less, with the story of Nelson O'Brien, a young Irish boy, whose dreams of America are based on the penny novels he has read about Wild Bill Hickok and Jesse James.
In time, Nelson emigrates to the United States, settles in a small Pennsylvania town and, in 1898 after the death of his beloved sister Kate, goes to Cuba to take photographs of the Spanish-American War.
There, Nelson meets the beautiful, dreamy 16-year-old Mariela Montez, and for 27 Sundays in a row he pays her court.
He tells her about his house in Pennsylvania "deep in the heart of America, where people could do as they pleased and there was no war," and she dreams of a good life with this earnest, sad-eyed man.
For their wedding, Nelson gives her a telescope so that she might gaze upon the stars, and he introduces the shy young woman to the unexpected pleasures of his bed.
Their passion is enthusiastic, and almost mythically fecund.
In the ensuing years in America, Mariela will have 14 daughters, and finally, after all these girls, a son.
Though we wonder how Mr.
Hijuelos will ever be able to keep so many siblings clearly sorted out in his mind, he's able to implant a firm sense of each and every one of them in our imaginations.
There's Margarita, the oldest and in many ways the novel's presiding spirit, who makes an early, unfortunate marriage, and spends years regretting her mistake, only to discover, late in life, the joys of love and independence.
It is Margarita who will keep the members of this huge, sprawling family in touch with one another, and Margarita who will imagine her parents' lives together, and preserve them, along with the lives of her siblings, through the willful exercise of memory.
After Margarita, there's Isabel, the blond, Irish-looking sister, plump and enamored of food, who will find a husband and a home in Cuba.
Maria, the third sister, and the twins, Olga and Jacqueline, are the musically gifted ones -- the family's "Three Nightingales" -- who will find fulfilling careers in show business.
Then there's the beauteous Helen, appropriately named after a bottle of Helen of Troy Beauty Pomade; plump little Irene; the angry, pensive Sarah, and Patricia, the sister born with a gift for second sight.
Veronica, named after the saint, will live up to her name and marry a homeless man she has helped find shelter.
Marta and Carmen will remain homebodies for many years, before finding happiness in California.
The promiscuous Violeta will eventually abandon her hectic social life to become a minister's wife.
And Gloria will struggle for years with her incestuous love for her brother, Emilio, a handsome, introspective boy who will grow up to become a small-time movie star.
In relating the tangled history of the O'Brien-Montez clan, Mr.
Hijuelos moves confidently from one character's story to the next, leaping ahead in time to foreshadow the future, then jumping backward in time to show us the seeds of hope and despair.
He subtly reveals the ways in which the sisters' choices echo -- or counterpoint -- the choices of their siblings, and he demonstrates, as well, the ways in which their lives both embody and contradict the dreams of their parents.
Toward the end of the book, Mr.
Hijuelos's narrative becomes a little rushed, and his quickening litany of developments in the sisters' lives -- alcoholism, addiction to Valium, subscriptions to spiritist newsletters, affairs with younger men -- can sound suspiciously like an inventory of topics on a talk show.
The reader, however, never really minds, so persuasive and generous is his delineation of the family's life.
Indeed, one finishes "The 14 Sisters" reluctantly, the way one finishes a long letter from a beloved family member, eager for all the news not to end.


On My Mind; The Alchemists Of Murder
This huge stew of a metropolis, so long so proud of being India's greatest city, is in a condition of shock and shame, but it is searching.
Its political chieftains, its business and intellectual elite, its artists and movie stars -- and its victims -- search for answers to questions they never believed they would face.


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: Vignettes; Going Back to Work, or Then Again, Maybe Not
The chic wore "I Survived Terror at the Towers" T-shirts.
The disgruntled waited on hourlong lines to retrieve winter coats, wallets and keys under escort from offices in the twin towers.
The cognoscenti at the commodity exchanges trafficked in rumor.
"Saddam Hussein is behind this," a man called to a friend in an elevator.
"That's what's circulating on the oil floor."
And then there were people like Cynthia Ortiz.


Angelika to Run 57th Street Cinema
The Biograph Theater, the West 57th Street revival house that closed its doors in 1991, is to open again as a first-run movie house operated by Angelika Film Centers Inc., which has a six-plex cinema in SoHo.
The theater, at 225 West 57th Street in Manhattan, is to be renamed Angelika 57, and will open this month or early next month "as soon as we find the right film to open there," said Eva Saleh, a vice president of Angelika.
The theater will show American independent films and foreign movies "similar in programming and style to those at the Angelika Film Center downtown," she said.


Nicaragua Continues to Make Strides
To the Editor:
"Feuds and Killings in Nicaragua Mar Democratic Rule" (front page, Feb. 16) describes events in Nicaragua inaccurately.
For example:


Fewer Stories and More Sky on Upper East Side
Demolition crews are cutting an Upper East Side apartment tower down to size -- the size required by New York City's zoning rules.
The removal of the top 12 floors from the 31-story building at 108 East 96th Street, which has never been occupied, ends a seven-year battle that pitted the developer, Laurence Ginsberg, against city officials and local leaders who noticed that the tower plans exceeded zoning limits.


Alexander Liepa, 78, Retired Book Editor
Alexander E. Liepa, the retired editorial director for general religion for Doubleday &amp; Company, died on Sunday at his home in Weston, Conn.
He was 78.
His son, Paul Liepa, said the cause was cancer.


Let's Stop Guessing About Women's Health; Avoiding Mastectomy
To the Editor:
The options for most women after diagnosis of breast cancer are mastectomy (removal of the whole breast) or lumpectomy (removal of the malignant nodule) and radiation, not chemical therapy as Douglas S. Dodge writes (Op-Ed, Feb. 20).


Court Orders Confinement Of Drug User
A New York State appeals court ruled yesterday that a man who has long frightened Upper West Side residents through his bizarre and sometimes violent behavior is mentally ill and "invariably" dangerous and should remain in a mental institution.
Overruling a lower court that held that the man, Larry Hogue, was "defensive" but not mentally ill and not a danger to himself or others, the appeals court said that "there is simply no fair interpretation of the evidence that can support" that finding.


Man of Steel, and Plastic
In the distance, Bo Jackson walked to one of the several baseball fields here, carrying two black bats on his broad shoulder.
He walked easily, without a limp -- and without the need to convince himself and others that he had no limp, as he tried to do last year at this time.
Last Wednesday, a sunny spring-training day in the Chicago White Sox complex here, Bo Jackson walked like almost any other player, with even a little saunter.
Ron Schueler, the general manager of the Chicago White Sox, stood at a far end of the training complex here and observed the ballplayer with the white No. 8 on the back of his black baseball shirt.
"It's amazing what Bo's done, how far he's come, but every day with Bo's an adventure," said Schueler.
"Every day is uncharted waters."


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: Other Cities; In Every 'Hub' and Skyscraper, Edgy Guards and Endless Drills
It was just an ordinary shopping bag -- with a bit of a bulge.
A week ago, perhaps, no one would have noticed it.
But yesterday, when it was left on the sidewalk outside the world's tallest building, the 1,454-foot Sears Tower in Chicago where 6,000 people work, it drew attention right away.
Building guards were summoned.
Word spread.
Jittery office workers fluttered and fretted.
The police were called.
The bomb squad was alerted.


Sports of The Times; The Big Man Basically Low-Keys It
HE says he just might be different this time around.
Not getting any younger, heh-heh-heh.
He says he just might be a kinder, gentler George, reviewing what his trusted assistants have proposed.
This was first-day-back talk.
This was lull-'em-into-submission talk.
George M. Steinbrenner 3d, who has emerged from his sanctuary in the midnight hours to terrorize his staff, materialized in the broad daylight yesterday, and asked for a clean slate.


No Matter What the Decision, Hasty Is in Win-Win Situation
Even though the Jets made cornerback James Hasty one of their transition players, that designation did not dampen interest in the free agent.
Ultimately, the Jets might be forced into a bidding war if they want to keep Hasty.
The free-agency season officially opened yesterday, and National Football League teams have until July 15 to negotiate contracts with unrestricted free agents -- players with five or more years of experience whose contracts expired after last season.


Petrovic's Fluency Goes Beyond 1-2-3
Pucaj tricu.
It is Croatian for "shoot the 3." They are probably Drazen Petrovic's favorite words in any language: Shoot the 3.
At a restaurant not too far from his New Jersey home, Petrovic is nursing an iced tea and telling a funny story about "pucaj tricu" (pronounced "POOS-eye TRIZ-zoo").
It seems Rick Carlisle, a Nets assistant coach, has taken the time to learn a little Croatian.
Every now and then during a game, when Petrovic bounces off a screen, he'll hear Carlisle yell those words so appealing to his ears.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary on Feb. 13 about Dr.
Howard A. Paul, developer of a robotic surgical system, misstated his age.
He was 44.


CHRONICLE
A 6-pound 12-ounce daughter was born on Friday to WOODY HARRELSON, 31, the television and film actor, who plays Woody the bartender on "Cheers," and LAURA LOUIE, 28.
Nancy Seltzer, a spokeswoman for Mr.
Harrelson, said Ms.
Louie is an associate in the actor's production company.


Digital to Show New PC's, Expanding a Product Line
The Digital Equipment Corporation, continuing its effort to become a major competitor in personal computers, will display a new family of machines today.
The new DECpc MT line extends the family of computers the company introduced last summer -- machines that Digital is designing and building itself.
In some of its previous efforts to sell personal computers, Digital bought and resold machines from other companies like Tandy and Olivetti.


When an Accent Becomes an Issue; Immigrants Turn to Speech Classes to Reduce Sting of Bias
When Carmen Friedman, an immigrant from Colombia, began dating the man who would become her husband, she felt embarrassed because she mispronounced his first name, Joseph, as "Yoseph."
When she started a job as a substitute teacher a year ago, she dreaded going to work, becoming nauseated at the thought of having to speak in front of a new class.


Recipients Named For the Polk Awards
The Los Angeles Times won the George Polk Award in local reporting for its coverage of the Los Angeles riots, it was announced yesterday by Long Island University, which administers the awards for excellence in journalism.
The newspaper was cited for "eye-opening and thorough" coverage of the aftermath of a jury's acquittal of four policemen charged in the beating of Rodney King.


Miami Journal; Dissenting Voice Fights to Stay on Air
The Cuban exile establishment here has never liked radio station WWFE, even though the station's owner, Emilio Milian, has impeccable anti-Castro credentials.
On the air since 1989, "Radio Fe" has made its mark by skewering not just the Castro dictatorship but also the foibles and pretensions of Miami's Spanish-speaking political and business elite.
But unless Mr.
Milian can produce about $2 million by Thursday, the 50,000-watt voice of Radio Fe could be silenced.
Forced into bankruptcy by what he describes as a "concerted effort to drive me out of business," Mr.
Milian is trying to head off an auction.


USA Today Says Photograph On Gangs Was 'Misleading'
In an unusual entire-page account, USA Today acknowledged yesterday that its use of a photograph of Los Angeles gang members brandishing guns was "misleading" with an article last month about the possibility of renewed racial violence in the city.
The photograph, printed in color on the national newspaper's front page on Feb. 16, accompanied an article about the potential for violence in Los Angeles if there was another acquittal of the four police officers accused of civil rights violations in the videotaped beating of Rodney G. King.


Innovator Quits Kidder To Head a New Venture
Richard L. Sandor, an executive managing director with Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company who is widely credited with inventing the market for interest-rate futures, is setting off for a new horizon at the intersection of the capital markets and the insurance business.
Mr.
Sandor, who has made his career by exploring the financial implications of risk, said yesterday that he was leaving Kidder to become president and chief executive of a newly created entity, Centre Financial Products.
The new firm will be focused largely on developing hybrid products that bridge the markets for capital and insurance.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13 BOSNIA AIRDROP MISSES TARGET
Two-thirds of the cargo of American relief supplies dropped into Bosnia and Herzegovina overnight Sunday failed to reach hungry civilians, and may have fallen into the hands of Serbian fighters.
A second airdrop was carried out early Tuesday.
A1 VILLAGERS ANTICIPATE AID
People from the Bosnian village of Gorazde were excited at the prospect of receiving airdropped food and medicine.
A8 Bosnia's President seeks a U.S. role in a cease-fire.
A8 KAZAKHSTAN DRAWS BUSINESSES
In the vastness of Kazakhstan, the smell of money is attracting increasing numbers of Western and Asian business executives hoping to tap into an enormous treasure house of oil, gas and minerals.
A3 MAFIA TRIAL OPENS IN SICILY
The murder trial of Italy's most wanted mobster, Salvatore (Toto) Riina, began in Palermo.
He is accused of being the boss of all bosses of the Sicilian Mafia.
A10 THORNBURGH LEAVES U.N.
POST
Dick Thornburgh stepped down from his United Nations post, though not without a final barbed exchange with the man who dismissed him.
A12 STABBING RAMPAGE IN TEL AVIV
A young Palestinian went on a knife-wielding rampage on Tel Aviv streets, stabbing two Israelis to death and wounding eight others before being caught.
A11 LITTLE CHANGE IN HAITIANS' PLIGHT
Six weeks after the Clinton Administration promised to increase sharply its refugee processing in Haiti, asylum procedures there remain largely unchanged, immigration specialists say.
A13 CLINTON FILLS LATIN AMERICA POST
Administration officials say President Clinton will appoint a career diplomat to a top Latin American post, hoping to end a split between blacks and Cuban-Americans over the original choice.
A13 A Swiss doctor has created a modern hospital in deprived Cambodia.
A4  National A14-19 FOOD STAMP ROLLS RISE
The number of food stamp recipients surged in 1992, with more than one person in 10 now receiving the Federal assistance.
A1 STANDOFF IN TEXAS CONTINUES
Nearly 400 Federal agents and local police officers massed near a religious cult compound where a shootout left six people dead.
A1 Many in Waco were not aware of the sect until the shootout.
A16 An editor in Waco defended his newspaper's series on the sect.
A16 NORTH LOOKS INTO POLITICS
Oliver North is looking to see if there might be an opening for him in Virginia's 1994 Senate race.
A14 NEWSPAPER EXPLAINS A MISTAKE
USA Today used a full page to acknowledge that its use of a photograph of gang members brandishing guns was "misleading." A14 DECISION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT
The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether workers suing employers for sexual harassment must prove that they were not only offended, but also psychologically injured.
A17 THE QUESTION OF INVESTMENT
The President has spent a lot of time emphasizing investment.
But many social programs calling for similar investments have had spotty records in recent decades.
A18 PLAN FOR NATIONAL SERVICE
The President outlined a plan that would allow college students to repay their loans through community service.
A18 G.O.P.
READIES FOR CLINTON
Congressional Republicans will lack a cohesive economic plan when they meet today with the President.
A19 NO BUDGING ON DRUG PRICES
Clinton's Secretary of Health and Human Services met with vaccine makers, but she got no commitment from them to curb prices.
A19 Miami Journal: A criticized radio station could go off the air.
A14 Metro Digest B1 RECOGNIZING GAY COUPLES
On the first day the city of New York officially granted "domestic partner" recognition, 109 couples registered, and received in return an official acknowledgement of their untraditional lives.
A1 'SIN TAXES' NOT AS LUCRATIVE
To the dismay of lawmakers who have religiously depended on revenue from "sin taxes" on tobacco and alcoholic beverages to help balance state budgets, people are sinning less.
A1 LEADS IN TRADE CENTER BOMBING
Officials leading the investigation into the bombing of the World Trade Center reported the first leads in the case as they sifted parking receipts and tips from witnesses outside the parking garage.
A1 BACK TO SCHOOL AFTER THE CHAOS
A group of Brooklyn students who were trapped by the explosion at the World Trade Center returned to school, and the counseling provided them was welcomed more by the parents than by the youngsters.
A1 Science Times C1-12 The Moon's role in keeping Earth on an even keel.C1 Seeing the larger ecosystem in time to save it.
C1 Understanding how teen-agers make decisions about risks.
C1 The Doctor's World: Handling a blood-flow problem in the heart.
C3 Fashion Page B9 A catalogue user turns dealer.
Obituaries D21 Eddie Constantine, actor.
Business Digest D1 Arts/Entertainment C13-18 Young Bavarian dance troupe.
C13 Preparing "Jelly's Last Jam" for life after Gregory Hines.
C13 Music: Les Arts Florissants.
C13 Sports B10-15 Baseball: Steinbrenner returns to the Yankees.
B11 Basketball: Kenny Anderson has a broken wrist.
B11 Petrovic speaks the language of basketball.
B11 Column: Vecsey on Steinbrenner.
B11 Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21 Editorials Hope in the rubble.
Right parade ruling, but . . .
Secret ways of state Republicans.
Lillian Gish's face.
Letters A. M. Rosenthal: The alchemists of murder.
Russell Baker: Fork in the logic.
Mark D. W. Edington: Suddenly, America is a World Trade Center.
Lucy S. Danziger: New York, car theft capital of the world.


Review/Fashion; At 10, Anne Klein II Has an Edge
Because it is the 10th anniversary of Anne Klein II -- a long time for a subsidiary -- the company introduced its fall collection at a bona fide fashion show last month.
Lower priced than its parent, Anne Klein II had not had a show in a year and a half because it was changing its image, making clothing that was "a little younger and had a more hip attitude," said Maurice Antaya, who has been in charge of design since the company started.
After three years, Mr.
Antaya was joined in his design duties by Richard Assatly.
At the end of the show last month, the two men took their bows with their five assistants and walked down the runway to the applause of store buyers.
A Hint of Grunge
The clothes were a little sharper and a little livelier than they had been.
There were echoes of grunge, the rock-inspired style that captivated some audiences at the spring fashion shows in November.
But these grunge elements were grace notes, like the stocking caps many models wore with their well-tailored suits, or the high-laced shoes that met the hems of longer skirts.


Surgery for Boddicker
Royals pitcher MIKE BODDICKER will undergo arthroscopic surgery in Kansas City tomorrow to repair torn cartilage in his left knee.
Boddicker, 35, was examined Sunday night at the Royals' camp in Haines City, Fla.
A minor tear in the meniscus cartilage in the knee was confirmed. (AP)


A Catalogue User Turns Dealer
Carolyne Roehm admits, without looking a bit furtive, that she is a catalogue junkie.
She uses catalogues as bedside reading, marks them up and actually orders from them.
"The most precious thing we have is time," she said, explaining her addiction.
"Shopping takes too long." She is willing to buy clothes without trying them on, and says she she has rarely been disappointed.


By Design; Shielding the Sheer
The idea behind the new "see through" styles is to appear tantalizingly bare but, in truth, to be decently attired.
Unless you feel utterly confident with your normal undies on view, you need some other kind of body camouflage before layering on a sheer blouse, a dress or pants.
One answer, first suggested by Ralph Lauren, is to start with a clingy, striped body sweater or T-shirt.
Under a misty shirt or blouse, the stripes look wavy yet sharp.
And no one can possibly think you're nude.
The Ralph Lauren boutique at 867 Madison (at 72d Street) has long-sleeved cotton and spandex sweaters for $220.
A.B.S.
Collections' short-sleeved T-shirts are $98 at Bloomingdale's and Saks Fifth Avenue.


Mourning Is Fined
Center ALONZO MOURNING of the Charlotte Hornets was fined $3,500 by the National Basketball Association yesterday for hitting Indiana's RIK SMITS Friday night.
The incident occurred during the third quarter of the Pacers' victory over the Hornets at Indianapolis. (AP)


Knicks' Sentence: 3 Hours' Hard Labor on Floor
Alarmed after two pathetic performances, Coach Pat Riley put the Knicks through a three-hour-plus practice today, intent on finding a cure for the malaise.
After being embarrassed by the Detroit Pistons (108-80) Friday and the Nets (102-76) Sunday, the Knicks were happy that Riley didn't send them directly to the practice floor immediately after the second debacle.


Optimism Riding on Kent's Shoulder
The medical report told of minor damage to the rotator-cuff tendon.
The Mets, breathing easier, termed the findings positive and then offered this forecast:
Second baseman Jeff Kent will not be available for the exhibition-season opener; he is, however, expected to be in the lineup at Shea Stadium on April 5 for the start of the regular season.


The Bitter Memories Remain for Winfield
While the southeast coast of Florida was buffeted by a maelstrom known as Hurricane Steinbrenner yesterday, a quieter storm stirred on the Gulf Coast of the Sunshine State.
Dave Winfield professionally went about his business in this shore resort as a member of the Minnesota Twins, the forgotten man who has not forgotten, the injured party who has not forgiven.


Nassau County Asks to Truck Sludge to West Virginia
Nassau County today asked a Federal judge for permission to truck millions of tons of its sewage sludge to West Virginia, despite indications that state officials there are trying to scuttle such arrangements.
Questions also were raised at the hearing about whether the company selected to handle the job, J. P. Mascaro &amp; Sons of Harleysville, Pa., can extricate itself from several lawsuits and other controversies and follow through on its $250 million contract to transport and process the waste for the next 25 years.


Incinerator Foes Unleash a Secret Weapon: Children


Stanley P. Rock, Chemist, 57
Stanley P. Rock, a chemist and food-industry executive, died on Friday at his home in Fort Lee, N.J.
He was 57.
His death was a result of natural causes, said his son, Dr. Craig Rock.


Tainted Meat Deaths Teach Obvious Lesson
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 9 Science Times article seeking lessons in the outbreak of illness from tainted meat in Washington State misses the most important lesson: avoid meat entirely.


Congress, Do Your Job
To the Editor:
"Congress, Untie Yourself" (editorial, Feb. 10) calls for Congress to "stop micromanaging government." You say Congress's laws are unnecessarily detailed.
I strongly disagree.
The number of statutes passed in the last 10 years that deliberately fail to resolve areas of contention in favor of allowing the decision to be made by the courts through litigation is outrageous.
Before calling for Congress to stop micromanaging, we need to call on it to do the job, rather than abdicating their power to avoid controversy.
PETER D. ASPLIN Newark, Del., Feb. 15, 1993


20 Years Later, Iraqi Faces Trial in Case of 3 Bombings That Fizzled
On March 4, 1973, powerful bombs were timed to go off in rented cars parked outside two Israeli banks on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan and at a terminal of the Israeli airline at Kennedy International Airport.
But faulty wiring kept the three bombs from exploding, the F.B.I. said when the devices were discovered several days later.
The agency quickly issued a warrant for Khalid Duhham al-Jawari, who it said had planted the bombs and whom it identified as an Iraqi linked to Black September, the Palestinian group that killed 11 Israeli athletes at the 1972 Olympics in Munich, Germany.
But no arrest was made until January 1991, when a Cyprus-based official of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Khaled Mohammed El-Jassem, was taken into custory in Rome and accused of being "al-Jawari."


Observer; Fork In the Logic
"White man speak with forked tongue," observed several generations of Hollywood Indians, all of whom seemed to know what they were talking about even though present-day moralizers would probably convict them of political incorrectness in the first degree.
To this day the words come back to me whenever I contemplate the history of American racial relationships.
All unwhite Americans would surely be better equipped for survival if they had grown up in homes with that antique Hollywood-Indian wisdom framed in needlepoint over the velveteen settee.


METRO DIGEST
'SIN TAXES' EARNING LESS
To the dismay of lawmakers who have religiously depended on revenue from "sin taxes" on tobacco and alcoholic beverages to help balance state budgets, people are sinning less.
Across the Northeast and much of the nation, revenue from taxes on tobacco and alcohol has fallen.
A1.
CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: LOOKING FOR CLUES AND NORMALCY
Federal and local authorities combed parking receipts, reviewed videotapes from an underground garage and examined intelligence data for clues to the explosion that killed at least five people at the World Trade Center.
A1.


Teen-Agers Called Shrewd Judges of Risk
ADOLESCENCE, that time of awkward changes, has itself undergone a metamorphosis.
Today's teen-agers face a reality far more grim and risky than the teen-age years remembered by their parents and grandparents.
In trying to help teen-agers deal more successfully with the perils they face, psychologists are undertaking a search to better understand the ways adolescents think and view their world.
In the process, the research is challenging many common assumptions about teen-agers that have long guided parents, educators and policy makers.


Bridge
A team with a lot of ground to make up would be wise to pray for a slam that hinges on a guess, with its declarer guessing better than the opposition.
The first half of this scenario developed correctly on the diagramed deal at the conclusion of the Long Island Regional Swiss Teams in Smithtown, L.I., Sunday, but the second did not.
Leading the field into the final round were Jim Becker, Jim Krekorian, Bob Blanchard, all of Manhattan, and Howard Chandross of Long Beach, L.I., and they needed three victory points out of a possible 20 in the final match to win the title.
The fates, aiming to make life exciting, provided the diagramed deal, and both teams arrived in a borderline six-spade contract that hinged primarily on the location of the club ace.


New York, Car Theft Capital of the World
Here's the thing about crime: It pays.
When our Nissan Pathfinder was stolen in December, I thought my husband and I had enough evidence to give the police a pretty solid lead.
We were walking up to the car just as it backed out of its parking space on East 79th Street and sped away.


Officer Hit by Bullet After a Robbery
A New York City police officer was grazed in the elbow last night during a shootout with two Brooklyn teen-agers suspected of robbing a gas station in Canarsie, the police said.
Police Officer Francis Byrne of the 69th Police Precinct was grazed in the right elbow just after 7 P.M. at the intersection of East 92nd Street and Avenue D, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.
The officer was treated for minor injuries at Brookdale Hospital and then released.


Just Like That, It's Monday in Park With George
After devising elaborate plans to distract the news media today with a helicopter carrying a Marilyn Monroe look-alike and a limousine transporting a George Bush look-alike while he himself sat in disguise in the stands, George Steinbrenner changed his mind.
He scrapped his publicity stunt and simply strolled into the parking lot of Fort Lauderdale Stadium to trumpet his official return to baseball.
Actually, the Yankee owner made it to within 30 feet of the stadium entrance near first base before being besieged by photographers, reporters and television crews who stopped him and forced him to answer questions for an hour while he was flanked by two Fort Lauderdale police officers.


Mystery Surrounds Global Decline Of Flying Robin-Size Predators
THEY call it the butcher bird.
Named for its gruesome habit of skewering prey in a trophy-like array on sharp spikes and thorns around its territories, this keen-eyed hunting bird known as the shrike appears to be disappearing the world round.
From the English heath to the Russian steppes to North America's grasslands, researchers are finding these birds to be in a precipitous decline.


Restoring an Ancient Landscape: An Innovative Plan for the Midwest
INTERIOR SECRETARY BRUCE BABBITT'S announcement two weeks ago that he would try to prevent endangered-species crises by promoting the long-term health care of whole ecosystems may signal a new era in Federal conservation policy.
But the concept is already built into a number of ambitious ecosystem protection efforts that have lately been undertaken across the country.
Almost as Mr.
Babbitt spoke, in fact, scientists, conservationists and government officials from throughout the Midwest gathered in Chicago for a long-planned three-day meeting to develop a recovery plan for one of the nation's largest and most threatened ecosystems: a vast expanse of oak-studded savanna that once intertwined with the open prairies in a diverse mosaic of biological wealth reaching from the Great Lakes to Texas.


Women Turned Down
The San Diego Yacht Club yesterday refused to sanction a women's group that wanted to sail in the next America's Cup race series, scheduled for 1995 in San Diego.


No Headline
As much as I feel the pain of the loss of life, I'm in the business of leasing space.
I don't pretend to be benevolent. -- RONALD BOWMAN, rental agent at Newport Financial Center in Jersey City.  [ B4:2. ]


Softening the Blow Of a Star's Departure
For the producers and marketers of "Jelly's Last Jam" who were in attendance at a recent meeting at the Serino Coyne advertising agency in Manhattan, the good news was that audience surveys showed that most people leaving the show would recommend it to their friends and that what they liked about the show were things like the music, the story, the energy.
In other words, it wasn't just the star, Gregory Hines, that made the experience worthwhile.
The bad news was that the reason most people said they came to see "Jelly's Last Jam" in the first place
was
Gregory Hines.


Bruno to Face Williams
British heavyweight FRANK BRUNO, hoping to position himself for a third shot at the world title, will fight CARL (THE TRUTH) WILLIAMS in Birmingham, England, on April 24.


Bloody Sunday's Roots In Deep Religious Soil
Like a vein of ore in solid rock, religion runs through the heart of this city, which is sometimes known as Jerusalem on the Brazos River.
But in this city of 100,000 people, where almost everyone belongs to one of some 200 churches, the sect at the Mount Carmel compound 10 miles east of town lived in a world so insular that most people never knew it existed until Sunday's bloody shootout.


CBS Ties Promotion To Miller Draft Beer
The Miller Brewing Company, CBS and MCA Universal Merchandising said yesterday that they had teamed up to present the first consumer promotion involving the CBS television series "Northern Exposure."
The promotion, which will begin in July, will include store displays for Miller's Genuine Draft and Genuine Draft Light and coupons for an album of rock music taken from the TV series and the Genuine Draft commercials.


Patterns
Off, Far Off, the Avenue
The center of American fashion seems to be shifting decidedly south of Seventh Avenue.
Pilgrimages have begun in force to the West Chester, Pa., headquarters of QVC Network, the 24-hour telemarketing cable network that Barry Diller recently joined as a partner.
Saks Fifth Avenue visited six weeks ago, and executives disclosed yesterday that Saks would be the first department store to market its private-label collection, Real Clothes, on QVC, beginning in May.
"It's still being worked on," said Philip Miller, the store's vice chairman.
"But it will be a collection of casual weekend clothes for women that we've designed and produced for Saks."


COMPANY NEWS
W.
R.
GRACE &amp; CO., New York, announced the acquisition of American Homecare Equipment Inc. by NMC Homecare, a Grace subsidiary, by a merger involving the issuance of about 116,000 shares of Grace stock.
KNIGHT-RIDDER INC., Miami, has acquired Data-Star, an on-line information service in Switzerland, from Motor-Columbus, an engineering technology firm.
Terms were not disclosed.


New Magazine For Visitors
The New York Times Company yesterday introduced Critics' Choice, a weekly publication of arts and cultural entertainment reviews and listings from The New York Times.
The glossy four-color publication is aimed at visitors to New York City who are seeking information about restaurants, plays, films and other events.
Each Monday, 100,000 copies of Critics' Choice will be distributed without charge at hotels, airports, restaurants, museums and cultural centers.
It will be distributed separately from the newspaper and will carry four-color and black-and-white advertising.
The first issue has 32 pages.


Guerlain Beginning An Account Review
Guerlain Inc. of New York, the cosmetics and fragrance company, said yesterday that it had placed its American account in review after seven and a half years at J. Walter Thompson New York.


CHRONICLE
They may look as if they never ingest a morsel of food, never mind prepare it, but if truth be told, many ballet dancers like to cook as much as anybody.
That will be evident at a benefit on March 25 that the dancers of American Ballet Theater have organized to help their financially pressed company.
The title of the evening will be "Not Just Another Gala," and dinner will be prepared by members of the company.


Mother in Girl's Kidnapping Case Faces Legal Troubles Over Son
Marilyn Beers appeared in Family Court today to press for custody of her 10-year-old daughter, Katie, but was greeted with new legal troubles.
She was charged with neglecting her 16-year-old son, John, by not sending him to school.
Katie is the child who the police say was kidnapped by a family friend, John Esposito, in December and held captive in an undergound bunker for 16 days.
She has been in foster care on eastern Long Island since Jan. 14, the day after the police freed her.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the unofficial returns in the special election to fill a City Council seat on the East Side of Manhattan incorrectly listed the number of votes separating the top two candidates in some copies.
The number was 67; Jane R. Crotty received 4,617 and Andrew S. Eristoff, 4,550.


Irresistible Events, Immovable Networks
When the International Olympic Committee holds negotiations in the third or fourth week of July to sell network TV rights to the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, a timetable that was announced yesterday, Olympic cash requirements will clash with radically altered network fiscal realities.
And the outcome will probably be a bellwether for how tightwaddish the networks will be in their coming talks with major league baseball, the National Football League and National Basketball Association (unless one of the three beats the Olympics to the negotiating table).


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices to Decide if Psychological Injury Is Needed to Prove Sex Harassment
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether workers suing their employers for sexual harassment must prove under Federal law that they were not only offended, but also psychologically injured.
The case is potentially important for defining the protection that Federal law provides against sexual harassment on the job.
The law at issue is Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the general Federal prohibition against discrimination in the workplace.


Review/Music; Stripping The Action But Not The Brio
Opera-ballet seems destined to remain one of the last great frontiers in early music.
The pervasive use of dance adds yet another layer of conjecture to the demanding imaginative exercise of reviving Baroque opera in general, and yet another, peculiarly French level of refinement to a rarefied and long-lost sensibility.
Even William Christie and his enterprising Paris company, Les Arts Florissants, when they staged Rameau's "Indes Galantes" in 1990 at the Aix-en-Provence Festival, evaded the historical issue with an updated staging.
Mr.
Christie and Les Arts left the production behind when they visited the Brooklyn Academy of Music over the weekend with two Rameau operas, "Les Indes Galantes" and the lyric tragedy "Castor et Pollux," both performed in concert.


States Have Problem With 'Sin' Revenue: There's Less Sinning
To the dismay of lawmakers who have religiously depended on revenue from "sin taxes" on tobacco and alcoholic beverages to help balance state budgets, people are sinning less.
Across the Northeast and much of the nation, revenue from taxes on tobacco and alcohol has fallen by millions of dollars in recent years, driven down by health concerns, changing social mores and the opportunity to make cheaper purchases elsewhere -- legally or illegally.


Gastineau Pleads Guilty
Former Jets defensive end MARK GASTINEAU pleaded guilty yesterday to a reduced charge stemming from a 1991 drug-possession arrest.
Gastineau, 36, pleaded guilty in Maricopa County (Ariz.) Superior Court to possession of drug paraphernalia.
A stipulation in Gastineau's plea agreement with prosecutors requires that he be sentenced to a probation term but no jail time if Judge GREGORY MARTIN accepts the agreement at the March 29 sentencing.
The judge would decide at the end of the probation term whether to make the charge a felony or a misdemeanor.


Where Mice Fear to Go
THE phrase "input device" sounds intimidating to the uninitiated, but one does not have to be very initiated at all to realize that it is just a fancy generic term covering things like keyboards, mice, modems when they are sending information, styluses on pen-based computers and a variety of devices for getting information into a computer.
Here is another, a rather odd and interesting one, the Twiddler.
The name Twiddler does not sound serious, but the Handykey Corporation of Mount Sinai, L.I., is in dead earnest about it.
Handykey's president, Christopher S. George, hopes a sizable number of people will soon be twiddling instead of keyboarding or mousing around.


Classical Music in Review
North/South Consonance Ensemble Christ and St. Stephen's Church


Moon May Save Earth From Chaotic Tilting of Other Planets
IF there is a kind of music of the spheres, as Kepler suggested centuries ago, it could be thought of as the accompaniment to the solar system's stately cotillion of planets gliding around the Sun, spinning and sometimes nodding, most with partners, each responding in subtle ways to all the others.
Orderly and predictably harmonic this may seem, and in the short term it is, but scientists analyzing the motions of planets with powerful computers are realizing that there is a certain cacophony, as it were, to the music of the spheres.
In the new scientific lexicon, the solar system is chaotic.


Clinton Offers Tuition Aid Linked to National Service
President Clinton today outlined a plan for a national service program for college students that combined broad ambitions, high ideals and a modest beginning.
The program, which would begin with a 1,000-student pilot project this summer and expand to 100,000 by 1997, would allow students to help pay off their tuition debts by working as teachers or police officers, or with the homeless.


A Former Ballerina Breathes Life Into a Youthful Bavarian Troupe
New York balletomanes know everything there is to know about dance.
So there was a decidedly ho-hum attitude toward the unfamiliar young Bavarian National Ballet when it quietly sidled into the New York State Theater last week.
The first performances were something of a letdown.
But by the end of the week, the first of two in this New York debut season, ovations greeted the company at its curtain calls, and word began to spread.
There were compelling foreign principals like Kirill Melnikov and Evelyn Hart.
The repertory was interesting and wide-ranging.
But the big discovery was the engaging, skillful troupe itself, filled with well-trained, fresh young performers who are steadily winning New Yorkers' hearts.
The Bavarian dancers are bringing vibrant new life to the repertory of modern European ballets that will be seen this week: Ray Barra's "Don Quixote," John Cranko's "Eugene Onegin" and one-act dances by Hans van Manen, Uwe Scholz and Jiri Kylian.


Classical Music in Review
Leif Ove Andsnes Pianist 92d Street Y


G.O.P. Struggles To Unify Attack On Clinton Plan
When President Clinton returns to Capitol Hill on Tuesday, this time as the invited luncheon guest of Congressional Republicans, he may feel as though he is eating in the Tower of Babel, with everyone speaking a different economic language.
Traditional Republican conservatives argue for reducing the Federal deficit by making specific cuts in programs they consider wasteful, like rural electrification.
Reaganite supply-siders steam about proposed tax increases, arguing for growth over austerity.
And still other lawmakers say they are content to criticize the broad outlines of the Clinton economic policy and hope that the fractious Congressional Democrats will themselves pick apart the details of the package.


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Children; Blast Trauma Lingers, but Mostly for Parents
It was clear from the crisis counseling and tearful faces yesterday that trauma had hit Public School 95.
But the counseling was not necessarily to help the Brooklyn kindergartners, who, in a sign of youthful resilience, colored and sang away the morning -- their first day back at school after being trapped by the explosion at the World Trade Center in lower Manhattan last week.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
3.18
4.37
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.97
2.93
4.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.04
4.10
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.56
5.64
7.05
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.84
6.90
7.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.79
7.79
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.84
5.90
6.73
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Maxwell's Overseer Finds Profit for 1991 Was Inflated
Price Waterhouse in London, the administrator overseeing the bankruptcy case of the Maxwell Communication Corporation P.L.C., said in court papers made available yesterday that Maxwell Communication overstated its pretax profit for 1991 by $:36.9 million, or about $64.2 million.
Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the Maxwell Communication auditor during the fiscal year that ended on March 31, 1991, said yesterday in a statement from London that it stood by its numbers.


Concern Over Post's Mortgage Postpones Completion of Sale
The sale of The New York Post to Steven Hoffenberg was further delayed yesterday when the Securities and Exchange Commission raised concerns over who would guarantee the mortgage on the paper's South Street headquarters.
At a hearing before Judge Whitman Knapp in Federal District Court in Manhattan, S.E.C. lawyers said they wanted to study the mortgage guarantee and its underlying documents to make certain that they did not jeopardize the interest of Mr.
Hoffenberg's company, Towers Financial Corporation, in The Post property.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about the effects of the World Trade Center explosion on businesses described an appeal for Federal assistance incorrectly in some copies, as did the headline.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo asked for low-interest Federal loans to be made available to small businesses; he did not ask the Clinton Administration to declare New York an economic disaster area.


Corrections
A news analysis article on Saturday about the Clinton Administration's trade policies misidentified the chairman of the National Economic Council.
He is Robert E. Rubin.
The article also misstated the position held by Robert B. Reich.
He is the Labor Secretary.


T.W.A. and Amtrak emphasize creature comforts, not prices.
THIS selling proposition will no doubt prompt sneers from the legions of people who hate to travel, but two underdogs of transportation, Trans World Airlines and Amtrak, are promising to make trips less stressful, even relaxing.
In their new advertising campaigns, the two companies aim to shift travelers' attention away from the dizzying fare wars of the big airlines.
"We're trying to separate ourselves from the pack," said Robert B. Cozzi, senior vice president of marketing for T.W.A., whose message echoed that of Amtrak officials.


HORSE RACING: KENTUCKY DERBY '93 -- In the Running; No Limping to Louisville: Gilded Time Is Withdrawn
The punishing road to the Kentucky Derby claimed its most prominent victim today when Gilded Time, the undefeated juvenile champion of 1992, was withdrawn from contention because of a persistent foot injury.
"We want to give him time to heal," said David Milch, the television writer who is one of the colt's owners.
"He worked out Saturday at Santa Anita, and it was perfectly fine. But he did not react well afterward."


Gay Group Plans Protest On Irish Parade Route
The gay group that was denied admission to the St.
Patrick's Day Parade announced yesterday that it will hold a protest march on the parade route shortly before the main event, and called on New Yorkers to boycott the parade.
Members of the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization drew a sharp distinction between their plans for March 17 and what happened last year, when they and their supporters held their own parade before the larger event.


Don't Make Messier Laugh
After a further evaluation, Mark Messier of the Rangers has been found to be suffering from bruised and strained muscles in his right rib cage, and the team is continuing to describe his status as day-to-day.
Messier, who sustained the injury in a game Saturday night against the Oilers in Edmonton, is certain to miss the Rangers' game against the Buffalo Sabres tomorrow night and is likely to miss at least a few more games after that.
Messier said Sunday that his ribs were extremely tender, and yesterday morning he did not make an appearance at the Rangers' training facility in Rye, N.Y.


Guilty of Fraud? Try Using Too-Frequent-Flier Defense
In a world where criminals have been known to blame their acts on everything from rock music to Twinkies, it was only a matter of time before someone accused of financial misconduct would come up with the ultimate white-collar defense: too much business travel made him do it.
Cheeky?
Sure.
But this was no ordinary case of fraud.
The accused, a prominent Chicago lawyer, is also an accomplished certified public accountant who ran the Chicago office of Laventhol &amp; Horwath until the year before the accounting firm went bankrupt.


Fallen White Plains Firefighter Is Buried


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: Relocation; Displaced Brokers Find Cooperation in the Jungle
While it was far from the largest company abruptly displaced from its World Trade Center offices by Friday's explosion, Cantor Fitzgerald, a dealer in stocks, treasury notes and corporate bonds, was among the most vulnerable.
All of its 800 New York City employees were on upper floors of Tower One.
By yesterday, however, after deploying dozens of its executives to branches in other cities, scouring lower Manhattan for emergency office space and -- in contrast to Wall Street's take-no-prisoners reputation -- benefiting from generous help from other firms, Cantor was returning to work.


No One Said Lorenzo's Oil Could Prevent Rare Nerve Disease; Earned a Valid Place
To the Editor:
I am the pediatric neurologist who initially diagnosed Lorenzo Odone as having adrenoleukodystrophy in 1984 and was in close contact with him and his family in subsequent years.


Bertha Mather McPherson, Historical Society Founder, 86
Bertha Mather McPherson, founder and first president of the Darien (Conn.) Historical Society, died Friday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
She was 86 and lived in Darien at the Mather Homestead, an historic landmark her family has called home since 1778.
She had suffered a long illness, her family said.


Pepsi Tries New Diet Cola Abroad
No matter how entrenched diet sodas have become in North America, consumers elsewhere have found the stuff hard to swallow.
But to Pepsi- Cola International, that harsh reality of the world marketplace poses a challenge with huge financial potential and a chance to cut into Coca-Cola's international leadership.
The company announced yesterday that it would begin overseas sales of Pepsi Max, a sugar-free carbonated drink that took three years to be developed.
Pepsi Max has a taste virtually indistinguishable from regular Pepsi.


Hope in the Rubble
As investigators pursue leads about Friday's blast at the World Trade Center, a spooky scenario begins to emerge.
Apparently unchallenged, persons unknown assembled hundreds of pounds of high explosives and wheeled them into a parking garage, then stationed the huge bomb next to a major support column, perhaps hoping to topple the whole skyscraper.
Three days after the deadly explosion that turned the buildings that symbolize New York into national symbols of urban vulnerability, two questions persist: Can authorities do more to prevent terrorists and other sociopaths from getting their hands on explosives?
Are there ways to detect such an enormous weapon before it goes off?


Critic's Notebook; Playing the Games of TV's Cops and Robbers in a New Climate of Cynicism
Not too long ago, in what many of us like to think of as simpler times, law enforcement on television entertainment was generally a tidy exercise.
On shows like "Perry Mason" or "Columbo," both still being churned out periodically today, a crime was committed, the perpetrators were brought to justice and viewers went to bed assured that all was for the best in this best of all possible worlds.
But Panglossian optimism is at a premium in today's newer series, particularly shows like "Law and Order," "Homicide" and, making its debut this week, "Crime and Punishment." All three happen to be on NBC.
No doubt reflecting the real world around them -- a world of big lies, deal-making and Presidential pardons -- these series openly traffic in ambivalence, ambiguity and cynicism.
In one "Crime and Punishment" episode, a wife declares that a suggestive photograph of her kidnapped husband is a lie because he is intentionally wearing his phony "George Bush smile."


Let's Stop Guessing About Women's Health; Making Decisions Alone
To the Editor:
Re "Our Breast Cancer" (Op-Ed, Feb. 20) by Douglas S. Dodge, on his participation in the treatment of his wife's breast cancer:


Right Parade Ruling, Wrong Message
The Ancient Order of Hibernians, sponsors of New York's St.
Patrick's Day parade, have won the important right to decide who may march with them.
A Federal court has upheld what the Dinkins administration refused to acknowledge: that private citizens have a constitutional right to express publicly, in a parade, their own message about their own values without interference by government.
That First Amendment right to decide the content of one's own message includes the right to make a wrong decision -- a right the Hibernians seem bent on exercising to the fullest.
Celebrating a saintly festival day in their fashion, they have chosen to exclude openly gay Irish from their heritage and religious vision.
Many Americans, including many Roman Catholics, are cruelly hurt by that message, even though the Constitution protects the right to deliver it.


Review/Television; The Impetus for Havoc in Apartheid's Demise
South Africa's President, F. W. de Klerk, is the target of "Apartheid's Last Stand," tonight's "Frontline" report on his country's tense present and dangerous future.
With the help of vivid news clips, the hourlong program recalls the hopes raised by what the narrator calls "a special relationship" between Mr. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela, the leader of the African National Congress.
But critics make a case that for several years the white Government has been stalling negotiations and encouraging clashes between black groups to discredit Mr.
Mandela and his movement.


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: Repairs; Damage to the World Trade Center Is Called Limited
Sub-surface damage to the World Trade Center will be tricky to fix but represents only "limited, local damage" from a structural standpoint, the Port Authority's chief engineer, Eugene J. Fasullo, said yesterday.
But the authority said it would not know for a couple of days when the towers could be reopened, a problem not related to the structural damage.


CHRONICLE
Gen.
H.
NORMAN SCHWARZKOPF will return to the scene of his early military career on April 2 when he goes to Vietnam to work on a documentary that he will co-host with DAN RATHER.
General Schwarzkopf, who commanded the United States forces during the Persian Gulf war, started his military career in South Vietnam and served two combat tours there.


Q&amp;A
Out Like a Light
Q.
If the Sun went out like a light, what would happen on Earth?


Drexler Out 10-14 Days
CLYDE DREXLER will be sidelined for at least 10 days to two weeks with a strained tendon in his left hamstring, the Portland Trail Blazers said yesterday.
Drexler, 30, suffered the injury early in the fourth quarter of the Blazers' loss at Boston on Sunday. (AP)


THREE TOP OFFICERS RESIGN AT BELMAC
Three top executives of the Belmac Corporation abruptly resigned on Friday after a dispute at a board meeting over whether the company should focus more on short-term profits.
The new management said yesterday in a conference call with securities analysts that the company, based in Tampa, Fla., would concentrate more on operations than on research and development to show a profit this year.
Belmac is an international pharmaceutical company whose main product is Biolid, an antibiotic that is sold in Europe.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Company News column of Business Day on Saturday about the surge in the stock of LDDS Communications Inc. gave an incorrect location for the headquarters of Resurgens Communications Group, which is merging with LDDS and the Metromedia Communications Corporation.
Resurgens is based in Atlanta; LDDS has its headquarters in Jackson, Miss.


Cost Cutter Lifts Ax Over G.M. Plants
The cost-cutting ax of Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua is likely to fall heavier this year on the General Motors Corporation than on its outside suppliers.
G.M. has scheduled about 1,000 cost-cutting workshops this year for the outside suppliers, Mr.
Lopez announced today at a luncheon here in his honor; he will hold 1,300 workshops inside G.M. manufacturing plants, including final-assembly plants.
The workshops on how to increase efficiency may result in changing the layout of machines, consolidating jobs or altering the flow of raw materials.


Corrections
A picture in some copies yesterday with an obituary of Lillian Gish, showing a scene from "Life With Father," was published in error.
It showed Dorothy Gish.


Cyclicals Fall, as Dow Slips 15.40, to 3,355.41
Transportation stocks and other cyclical issues fell sharply yesterday as investors struggled to spot the implications of the latest economic statistics against the backdrop of President Clinton's budget proposal.
After an initial rally, apparently animated by gains in the bond market, the Dow Jones industrial average retreated, ending the day with a decline of 15.40 points, to 3,355.41.
The Dow transportation average, meanwhile, plummeted 33.44 points, or 2.2 percent, to 1,484.66.


Japan Rebuffs U.S. and Cray On Computer
In a rebuff to the United States, a Japanese research institute said today that its Japanese-made supercomputer was performing all the tasks required of it, justifying the institute's decision to pick the machine over one from Cray Research Inc. of the United States.
An official at Cray's Japanese subsidiary, however, said Cray would like to test the Japanese machine itself or have neutral parties do it, rather than accept the word of the research institute.


Health Secretary Meets With Makers of Vaccine
Donna E. Shalala, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, met today with vaccine manufacturers, but she got no commitment to hold down prices as President Clinton has demanded.
The meeting resulted from Mr.
Clinton's assault on the prices that drug companies charge and on the profits they earn.
In a speech on Feb. 12, he said the companies were pursuing "profits at the expense of our children," and he instructed Dr.
Shalala to meet with pharmaceutical executives to discuss the price and distribution of vaccine.


INSIDE
It's Official: He's Back
Amid more circumstance than pomp, George Steinbrenner ended a 2 1/2-year exile and regained the Yankee spotlight by walking into training camp.
SportsTuesday, page B11.
Decision on Harassment
The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether workers suing employers for sexual harassment must prove they were psychologically hurt.
Page A17.
Clinton Unveils Service Plan
The President, visiting Rutgers University, announced his plan to allow students to repay their college loans with community service.
Page A18.
Health Costs Still Surging
Managed health-care programs restrained medical inflation last year.
But health costs per employee still rose 10.1 percent.
Page D1.
North Looks to Politics
Oliver L. North is traveling around Virginia, seeing if there might be an opening for him in the state's 1994 Senate race.
Page A14.
Oil Rush in Kazakhstan
In the vastness of Kazakhstan, the smell of oil and mineral money is attracting Western and Asian business executives.
Page A3.


Treating Aspin's Heart Condition
THE heart ailment that put Defense Secretary Les Aspin in the hospital last week is a genetic one that although uncommon, is being diagnosed with increasing frequency in all age groups, from newborns to octogenarians.
Newer therapies, some developed only in the last three years, are adding to the benefits of drugs that have long been used to relieve the shortness of breath, chest pain, heart palpitations, fainting and other symptoms the ailment can produce.


No-Names From Queens Still Alive
In a season of remarkable overachieving, St.
John's has been very good at taking commanding leads, but not as good at keeping them.
They were great at both last night, though, and thrashed Syracuse, 90-70, in a Big East Conference game before 14,737 at Madison Square Garden.


Social Investment Programs: Comparing the Past With the Promised Payoff
Were Bill Clinton to place a personal ad to support his vision of government, it might read something like this:
"Dynamic young President seeks contributions for social investments. Pay now, prosper later. Data to prove it on file."


Review/Dance; A Reawakening for 'Onegin'
Rarely have dancers triumphed so totally in every aspect of a performance as Kirill Melnikov and Judith Turos did on Sunday night in the Bavarian National Ballet's production of "Onegin." No one interested in great dance acting can afford to miss this new cast's profoundly persuasive interpretation when it appears again in the matinee on Saturday at the New York State Theater.
Things, in fact, went remarkably better than on Wednesday, when the opening night made obvious the weaknesses in John Cranko's 1965 treatment of Pushkin's tale of missed connections in love.
Mr.
Melnikov, last seen in New York with the Kirov Ballet in 1989, and Miss Turos, trained in her native Romania and in Moscow, danced spectacularly and with forceful passion in the Soviet-style duets that distill the relationship of their characters.


Let's Stop Guessing About Women's Health
To the Editor:
"Cholesterol at 20," a "Health Watch" item (Health page, Feb. 17), ends with this statement: "Although the study did not include women, the researchers believe on the basis of other reports that their findings apply equally to young women."


Multiple Sclerosis Vaccine Shows Early Promise
AN oral vaccine against multiple sclerosis has proved promising enough in a small pilot trial to merit broader testing, scientists have reported.
The novel approach plays upon the unique way that immune cells in the stomach respond to food.
If the ingested vaccine can be fine-tuned to heighten its effectiveness, it could result in a cheap, safe and easy way of treating the degenerative central-nervous system disorder, as well as other autoimmune diseases like juvenile diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis or uveitis, an eye disorder, the researchers suggested.


Classical Music in Review
The Music of Frank Zappa Avery Fisher Hall


North Ponders a Senate Run in Virginia
Looking as fit and rested as a combat marine just back from a week of R &amp; R on China Beach, Oliver L. North is reconnoitering the front lines of Virginia politics, probing to see if there might be an opening for him in the state's 1994 Senate race.
He is traversing his adopted state from the mountains to the sea, chatting up the Republican rank and file and hawking his chest-full-of-ribbons brand of red, white and blue conservatism.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Promoted Mitch Bibb, trainer with Frederick of the Carolina league, to Bowie of the Eastern League.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Signed Mike Fetters and Chris George, pitchers; Dave Nilsson, catcher, and John Jaha, first baseman.


A Legal Threshold Is Crossed By Gay Couples in New York
Some came as if headed to a formal event, dressed in tuxedos or party dresses.
Many had to go to work and wore business suits or casual slacks.
All of them -- the first 109 couples to register as "domestic partners" in the City of New York -- left with something long withheld, an official acknowledgement of their untraditional lives.
Six weeks after Mayor David N. Dinkins signed an executive order enabling heterosexual and homosexual couples to register as unmarried "domestic partners" and receive some of the rights of married couples, the City Clerk's office yesterday began conducting the registration.
In a short process in the Municipal Building, couples filled out a few forms, presented identification and received a certificate similar to a marriage license.
Demonstration of Support
"This makes us happy, because it is the closest thing we can get to the kind of acknowledgement couples get in the straight world," said Manny Lacayo, a 26-year-old accountant in an advertising firm.
Mr.
Lacayo and his partner, David Vega, a 29-year-old hospital clerk, said they would celebrate later in the evening with a bottle of Champagne "and a toast to the future."


Tonight's the Night For Lemieux's Return
MARIO LEMIEUX will play tonight in Philadelphia if there are no complications earlier in the day from his final radiation treatment for Hodgkin's disease, the Pittsburgh Penguins announced yesterday.
Lemieux, 27, will undergo the last of two low-dose radiation procedures at a Pittsburgh hospital, then fly to Philadelphia hours before the game.
He completed four weeks of full-dose therapy last Friday.
The National Hockey League scoring leader until as late as a week ago, he hasn't played since Jan. 2.


Insight; Playing Safe
While some traders, barred from the World Trade Center, scrambled to find alternative offices, others scrambled to find bomb-scare plays.
They came up with Pinkertons Inc., Wackenhut Corporation and several other security services, which had healthy gains yesterday despite the broader market's decline.


METROPOLITAN COLLEGE REPORT
Manhattan
Keith Bullock has become the school's career scoring leader, and the Jaspers are the top-seeded team in the Metro Atlantic Conference tournament, which will begin Friday at the Knickerbocker Arena in Albany.
A tournament victory would send the Jaspers (20-6, 12-2) into the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, where they have not been since 1958 under Ken Norton.
Manhattan has won 12 of its last 13 games, including last night's 79-62 victory over eighth-place Loyola in the Jaspers' final regular-season contest.
Fordham  Both the men's and women's teams finished third in the Patriot League standing and neither had a player named to the all-league first teams.


More Money Found in Coffers Of L.I. Armored Car Company
A Federal trustee said this evening that there appears to be more money than originally believed in the deposits of the armored car company whose owners have been accused of stealing millions of dollars from their own coffers.
Jeffrey Stark, the trustee, said at a hearing here before Federal Judge Arthur Spatt that as much as $55 million had been retrieved from the warehouse of Revere Armored Inc. of Bohemia, L.I.
The estimate given at a hearing last week was $47 million.


After Gunfire Dies Down, Questions Arise on Newspaper's Role
The editor of the local newspaper seemed shaken yesterday in the aftermath of the gun battles between Federal agents and religious cult members in Waco, Tex., that killed six people and left 16 wounded.
"I'm under siege," said Bob Lott, editor of The Waco Tribune-Herald.
"There has been the suggestion that somehow we are responsible for this tragedy."


The Secret Ways of State Republicans
The New York State Assembly and both houses of Congress routinely reveal precisely how much public money lawmakers spend on postage for their self-promotional mass mailings.
But despite a state court ruling last week vindicating the public's right to know, the State Senate, dominated by Republicans, still won't disclose the figures.
That insults taxpayers who are asked to foot the bill for a dubious perk that discourages competitive elections by giving incumbents an unfair leg up.
The ruling stemmed from a lawsuit brought by a losing Democratic Senate candidate, Michael Siris, who said he was aware of at least 16 publicly financed mailings last year by his Republican opponent, Senator Michael Tully Jr. of Nassau County -- an apparent violation even of the Senate's overly generous limits on mail.
When the Senate rejected a request for basic data on Mr.
Tully's mailing habits -- unsurprising, since members themselves are denied such records -- Mr.
Siris brought suit under the state's Freedom of Information Law.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.  Pistons' Mills Gets 41
Terry Mills's 3-pointer with 55.6 seconds left finished off a 41-point performance and helped give the Detroit Pistons a 99-95 victory over the Boston Celtics at Auburn Hills, Mich., last night.
Detroit trailed by 93-91 before Mills hit just his fourth 3-pointer of the season.
Mills's point total was 13 more than his previous career best, set last month against Miami. (AP) N.H.L.
Bure Paces Canucks
Vancouver right wing Pavel Bure scored his 50th and 51st goals in the Canucks' 5-2 victory over the Buffalo Sabres at Hamilton, Ontario, last night. (AP)


CRISIS AT THE TWIN TOWERS: The Overview; INQUIRY IS PRESSED ON CAUSE OF BLAST AT TRADE CENTER
Federal and local authorities combed parking receipts, reviewed videotapes from an underground parking garage and examined intelligence files yesterday for clues to the explosion that killed at least five people at the World Trade Center on Friday.
Although investigators were still unable to answer the two central questions -- what kind of bomb caused the blast and who set it off -- Federal officials said they were beginning to focus more heavily on the possibility of the explosion being the work of foreign terrorists.


Max Perlow, 90, Dies; 1940's Labor Leader
Max Perlow, a labor leader of the 1940's, died on Saturday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 90 and lived in the Bronx.
The cause was cancer of the esophagus, said his family.


Lillian Gish's Face
What one can see at the movies is astonishing.
The earth splits, mountains fall, oceans rise up, entire cities disappear.
But sometimes the most astonishing sight of all is an actor's face.
That was especially true when films were silent.
Sure, there were subtitles but it was the face -- the curve of a lip or the lift of an eyebrow or the suggestion of a frown -- that really delivered the text.
If the face belonged to a Charlie Chaplin or a Lillian Gish, the audience would remember its message forever.


Agents and Players Group Huddle on Free Agency
It was Day 1 of National Football League free agency, and while no signings were immediately announced, several agents indicated yesterday that interest in their unfettered players was intense.
Ralph Cindrich, a Pittsburgh-based agent, said there was "a flurry of interest" in some of his players, including Steve Bono, the San Francisco 49ers' backup quarterback who has done well in relief of Steve Young and Joe Montana; San Diego Chargers running back Rod Bernstine, and Washington Redskins wide receiver Gary Clark.


Let's Stop Guessing About Women's Health; Support Groups
To the Editor:
As directors of Self-Help for Women With Breast Cancer, which provides peer support, education and advocacy services for women with breast cancer, we congratulate Douglas S. Dodge for being caring, thoughtful and, perhaps most important, public about his wife's illness (Op-Ed, Feb. 20).
We know well the need for this kind of support.


Louis Benito, 78, Head Of Advertising Agency
Louis Benito, who owned Louis Benito Advertising and was a leader in business and civic affairs throughout Florida for 50 years, died in Tampa early Sunday.
He was 78.
Jack Painter, a friend of Mr.
Benito and his successor at the advertising agency, said Mr.
Benito became ill just before Christmas, suffering from a hereditary blood disorder.
He entered the hospital more than a week ago.


No One Said Lorenzo's Oil Could Prevent Rare Nerve Disease
To the Editor:
"Lorenzo's Oil: A Movie Outruns Science," (Science Times, Feb. 9) is patently misleading on three fronts, potentially lethal on one: (1) the effectiveness of Lorenzo's Oil as a therapy for adrenoleukodystrophy; (2) the intellectual authorship of the therapy; (3) the credibility of ourselves as lay people in the world of science.


Grappling With Fear Of Magnetic Fields
ON Ledge Avenue, wedged awkwardly among houses, a substation owned by the Connecticut Light and Power Company hums into the night as its three transformers break down the current from 27,600-volt feeder lines and send it out to power the progeny of Sony and General Electric.
The hum is annoying, the transformers are unsightly, and it is time for the utility to make good a 21-year-old promise to move the substation.
"We haven't been the best of neighbors," said Robert E. Carberry, the manager of transmission line and civil engineering for Northeast Utilities, Connecticut Light and Power's parent.
"They want us out, and we understand."


Sex-Trial Defense Objects To a Singing Summation
The Glen Ridge sex-assault trial resumed after a week's delay today, with defense lawyers repeatedly objecting to points that a prosecutor was making in the fourth day of his closing argument to the jury.
Twice the defense team interrupted Glenn D. Goldberg and appealed at length for a mistrial.
The first came after Mr.
Goldberg called the case of one defense lawyer, Michael Querques, a silent, "dark empty space," and then accentuated his point by singing the first stanza of the Simon and Garfunkel 1966 hit song, "The Sound of Silence."


U.S. Plans No Big Borrowing Shift
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said yesterday that he was not planning any drastic shift to short-term Government borrowing.
Although he did not provide any precise details of the Government's future borrowing plans, Mr.
Bentsen's comments might prove disappointing to some traders and investors.
Some of the recent surge in the price of the 30-year bond has been based, traders said, on expectations that the Treasury would further reduce the size of the regular quarterly 30-year auctions, shifting Government borrowing to shorter-term issues.


Miami, Anaheim In Debut Next Fall
The National Hockey League surged full speed ahead with its Sun Belt expansion yesterday as new franchises in Miami and suburban Los Angeles announced that they would begin play next season.
The announcements were made by Wayne Huizenga, chief executive of Blockbuster Video in Miami, and Michael Eisner, the chairman of the Walt Disney Company in Anaheim, Calif.


Broken Wrist Sidelines Anderson and Angers Nets
The bad blood between the Knicks and Nets worsened today when Nets guard Kenny Anderson was placed on the injured list because of a broken bone in his left hand and will miss at least two weeks.
The injury occurred on a flagrant foul by Knicks guard John Starks during the Nets' victory on Sunday, and according to a National Basketball Association official, the Nets have asked the league to suspend Starks for at least one game.
Anderson has a fracture of the navicular bone, a boat-shaped bone in the wrist.
The fracture was described as nondisplaced, which means the alignment of the bone was not disturbed and the recovery should not be complicated.
Still, Willis Reed, the Nets' senior vice president, said that because the injury is to Anderson's shooting hand, a two-week absence is "very optimistic."


District Bars AIDS Curriculum
A Queens school district that has clashed repeatedly with Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez over a multicultural teaching guide announced yesterday that it was barring classroom use of an AIDS curriculum written by Mr.
Fernandez's staff and approved last year by the central Board of Education.
Mary A. Cummins, the president of School District 24, said in a letter to Mr.
Fernandez that her board was rejecting the AIDS curriculum in part because of its references to anal sex in passages aimed at fifth and sixth graders.
Mrs.
Cummins said the passages, which describe how the disease can be transmitted, were inappropriate for elementary school students.


CHRONICLE
A new building will begin to rise near the heart of the Yale University campus by next fall: the Center for International and Area Studies, made possible by a $10 million award from the Henry Luce Foundation.
HENRY LUCE 3d, the foundation's chairman and chief executive officer, announced yesterday that the architect of the new building, Henry R. Luce Hall, will be EDWARD LARRABEE BARNES, best known for towers like the I.B.M.
Building in Manhattan and museums like the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis and the Dallas Museum of Art.


Officer Is Shot in Struggle
A plainclothes police officer was shot in the hand in Brooklyn last night when he tried to wrestle a gun from a man, the police said.
The officer, Anthony Burgos, confronted the man on a Williamsburg street, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.
As they fought for control of the man's .32-caliber semiautomatic, Officer McInnis said, a shot was fired, grazing the officer's hand.
He was taken to Bellevue Hospital Center and was in stable condition.
The man, whom the police identified as Mario Baez, 28, of South Third Street, was charged with criminal weapons possession and assaulting an officer.


CHRONICLE
The author SALMAN RUSHDIE, who has spent four years under a death sentence proclaimed by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, was granted a divorce from the American writer MARIANNE WIGGINS by Britain's High Court yesterday, Reuters reported from London.
Mr.
Rushdie, who is 45, sought the divorce from Ms.
Wiggins, also 45, on the basis of more than two years' separation.
The couple, who were married in 1988, were not present at the brief hearing.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Investigation; After Frenzy, Agents Turn To Methodical Routine
Federal agents have stepped up surveillance of suspected terrorists in the United States as investigators press their search for a possible terrorist link to Friday's deadly bombing at the World Trade Center, officials said yesterday.
While the officials highlighted recent threats from several groups in the Middle East, they said they had increased the monitoring of a wide range of people -- "seeing how they behave," as one official put it.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Baltimore Gas and Electric Co. is offering $125 million of 7 1/2 percent debentures due in 2023 at 99.126 to yield 7.573 percent through First Boston Corp.
Callable in five years, the debentures are rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service, A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's and AA- by Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, a unit of Bell Atlantic Corp., is offering $225 million of 7 3/8 percent debentures due in 2033 at 99.047 to yield 7.45 percent through First Boston Corp.
Callable in 10 years, the debentures are rated Aa-1 by Moody's, AA by S.&amp; P., and AA+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


U.S. Envoy to Somalia Says American Mission Has Been Achieved
For more than three months, Robert B. Oakley, the United States envoy to Somalia, has cajoled and threatened the country's warlords on the issues of disarmament and peace talks and of allowing food and aid to reach those in need.
He has played the warring Somali clans against each other in much the same way the ousted dictator, Mohammed Siad Barre, played the Soviet Union and the United States.


Utility Bond Has Top Yield of 5.51%
The Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia is offering $521.9 million of tax-exempt bonds through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
Underwriters said after the initial pricing on Monday that they added a 2009 maturity to the serial bonds being offered; shortened a long-term maturity to 2012, from 2013, and lowered the yields on a number of other bonds.


Campus Journal; For a Black Woman, Space Isn't the Final Frontier
As the first black woman to venture into outer space, Dr.
Mae C. Jemison knows how it feels to boldly go where no one like herself has gone before.
The astronaut, who is also a medical doctor and a chemical engineer, has spent most of her 36 years entering arenas traditionally dominated by white men.


Carter Brown to Ovation, New Arts Cable Network
J.
Carter Brown, who was the director of the National Gallery in Washington for 22 years until his retirement last fall, has been named chairman of Ovation, a new fine-arts cable network that is to start broadcasting in the fall of 1994.
"I will be Ovation's godfather," said Mr.
Brown.
"My role will be one of making connections and looking at the quality of the programming." Dr.
Harold E. Morse, founder of the Learning Channel, will be in charge of the day-to-day operations as Ovation's president and chief executive.
The network is based in Alexandria, Va.


William James, 52, Airline's Chief Pilot And Vice President
William A. James, the chief pilot of American Airlines, died Saturday in a skiing accident in Park City, Utah.
He was 52 and lived in Colleyville, Tex.
He was killed when he veered off course, struck a tree and suffered head injuries, a company spokesman said.


Turgeon Lifts Islanders Into Tie for 4th
Pierre Turgeon is the first player in three years to score more than 100 points for the Islanders and tonight he proved one more time that he truly is the heart of the Islander offense.
Turgeon scored his team's last two goals and assisted on one by Vladimir Malakhov as the Islanders notched a 3-2 victory over the Detroit Red Wings at Nassau Coliseum.


Bullets Lose Ellison
Washington Bullets center PERVIS ELLISON will miss at least six weeks because of a knee injury.
Ellison was placed on the injured list Monday after being examined by the team doctor.
He sprained his left knee in the first quarter of Friday's game against the Orlando Magic.
Ellison was averaging 17.4 points and 8.8 rebounds a game.


Corrections
A report in the Guide column in the Westchester Weekly on Sunday, about a lecture series at Caramoor in Katonah, N.Y., misstated the opening day.
The series, on American country houses, will begin at 10:30 A.M. on Friday, not Saturday.


Defense Denounced In Sex Assault Trial
A prosecutor in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial today denounced the legal arguments and trial tactics of defense lawyers as he neared completion of his closing argument to the jury.
In his 13-hour summation, the prosecutor, Glenn D. Goldberg, condemned the defense assertion that the mentally retarded young woman at the center of the case initiated the sexual activities at issue in the trial.


Tarkanian Doing Well
JERRY TARKANIAN was reported doing "very well" yesterday after an angioplasty procedure to clear a heart artery that was 70 percent clogged.
"He came through with flying colors," said PAULA CORREIA, associate director of public relations at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
"He had a very good night, and he's doing very well."


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the explosion at the World Trade Center referred incorrectly to the the White House's monitoring of developments in the investigation.
Communications were monitored in the White House situation room; no "war room" was established.


Judge Rejects Move to Delay Bombing Trial
A Federal judge in Brooklyn refused yesterday to delay the trial of a Palestine Liberation Organization official charged in an attempted bombing.
The defendant argued he could not get a fair trial because the explosion at the World Trade Center on Friday had prejudiced the jury against his 20-year-old case.
Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in Brooklyn said he would not declare a mistrial and dismiss the jury, as the defense had requested.
But the judge reserved the option of changing his mind tomorrow, when he will question the jury that has been selected for the trial of Khaled Mohammed El-Jassem.


More Unites Than Divides India and U.S.
To the Editor:
I read "India at the Edge" (editorial, Feb. 24) with shock and surprise -- shock at your apparent advocacy of the Bharatiya Janata Party's "peaceful protest march" and surprise at your disapproval of the Indian Government's ban on it.


Brokers' Bliss
Huge volumes of stock and bond deals, heavy trading, ardent interest by individual investors -- it's still paradise for brokerage firms, especially Merrill Lynch.
The industry's leading underwriter had record profits last year, and 1993 has been another busy year for Wall Street so far.
But some analysts question whether the party will continue much longer.


Movie Promotion To Soar Into Space
Columbia Pictures said yesterday that it would purchase advertising space for its coming movie "Last Action Hero" on a rocket to be launched as part of America's first commercial space mission, called Commercial Experiment Transporter, or Comet.


New Bobsled's First Bump
There was a promising development last week for the bobsled designed by stock-car racers that the United States bobsled team thinks could be its ride to a medal at the Winter Olympics next year.
It was banned from its first race.


Prof. Philip Klein, 83, Historian Who Wrote on James Buchanan
Philip S. Klein, a professor and historian who was an authority on President James Buchanan, died Feb. 15 at his home in State College, Pa.
He was 83.
The cause of death was heart failure, his family said.


NBC News Chief Stepping Down Amid Troubles
The president of NBC's embattled news division, Michael G. Gartner, announced yesterday that he was resigning.
In a memorandum to employees, Mr.
Gartner said he hoped his departure, which follows several highly publicized embarrassments for NBC News, would "take the spotlight off of all of us."
Mr.
Gartner's announcement came three weeks after "Dateline NBC," a newsmagazine program under his supervision, issued an extraordinary on-the-air apology to the General Motors Corporation for using deceptive film of a vehicle crash.
The "Dateline" report and apology, in which NBC admitted it had attached "incendiary devices" to a G.M. truck to make sure it would explode on impact, have drawn widespread ridicule.
Resignation Called Voluntary
In a memo to NBC news division employees, Robert C. Wright, the president of the network, characterized Mr.
Gartner's resignation as voluntary, and Mr.
Gartner, 54, insisted yesterday that he had long planned to leave sometime this year.
But in an interview yesterday, Mr.
Wright suggested that he had played a crucial role in hastening Mr.
Gartner's decision.


Ex-Legislator Joins Governor Race in Trenton
A West Point graduate and businessman who served 16 years in the Legislature offered himself today as a conservative alternative to the two front-running Republican candidates for governor, both moderates battered by admissions that they hired undocumented aliens as domestic help.
Jim Wallwork's late-breaking candidacy was draped in some of the trappings of the Presidential campaign of Ross Perot, like a toll-free telephone number for volunteers and an attempt to position himself as a businessman who knows how to make government work efficiently.


Mets Cool to Fernandez Pitch
Sid Fernandez's first pitch for a contract extension was what the Mets feared and expected: very high and very much outside where they intend to go to sign the left-hander.
After General Manager Al Harazin met with Fernandez's representative for nearly two hours today, he grimly declared himself pessimistic concerning an extension in the near future.
Harazin, terming Tom Selakovich's written proposal an aggressive approach, said the sides were so far apart that he declined to make a counteroffer and indicated he would not in the future.


Court Backs Minority Voting Districts
Ruling that a Federal court had improperly invalidated the redistricting of the Ohio Legislature, the Supreme Court today strengthened the power of states to shape voting districts with overwhelming majorities of black and other minority voters.
The unanimous ruling, one of several redistricting decisions the Court will issue this term, could bolster a national Republican Party strategy of packing black voters into heavily black, inner city districts, leaving surrounding suburban districts more white and presumably more Republican than they were when more racially mixed.


Russia to Join Bosnia Airdrop
Moscow said it would contribute transport planes for the Bosnia airdrop.
But there will be a pause in the effort, Washington said.
Page A12.


AT THE GYM WITH -- Bill Irwin; Just Clowning Around With Intellect
FOR anyone who saw "Largely New York," Bill Irwin's 1989 Broadway show about a clown encountering the city's mundane technology, watching Mr.
Irwin climb aboard the treadmill at his gym in Chelsea yields a tickle of anticipation.
It's a perfect gadget to engage Mr.
Irwin's comic sensibility -- modern but ordinary, simple to operate but a little threatening and maybe even dangerous for a newcomer.
This is just an everyday workout -- "Not
every
day," Mr. Irwin says, guiltily -- but he admits that he's long had it in mind to do a routine set in a gym, and so he begins experimenting. What would happen, he wonders aloud, if he took the warning on the machine to heart -- if you feel faint or short of breath stop exercising immediately.


Franco Brusati, Italian Director Of Movies and Plays, Dies at 66
Franco Brusati, the director of "Bread and Chocolate," "To Forget Venice" and other award-winning films, died on Sunday in Rome, where he lived.
He was 66.
The cause of death was leukemia, said Teri Kane, a Manhattan press agent.


Food and Design Magazines Are Bought by Conde Nast
In the most closely watched magazine deal in months, Conde Nast Publications announced yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Knapp Communications, which publishes Architectural Digest and Bon Appetit.
Both Conde Nast and Knapp are privately owned companies and did not discuss the terms of the sale.
But a person involved in the negotiations said that Conde Nast had paid about $175 million in a cash deal -- a surprisingly high price these days in an industry that is only just coming out of its worst slump in decades.


Day 2 A Time For Quiet Discussion
George Steinbrenner treated his second day back in baseball with much less fanfare.
The Yankees' principal owner drove himself to work at Fort Lauderdale Stadium today and was not mobbed.
He declined to park his car in a spot marked GMS and later dodged about a dozen reporters who sought to question him about his short introductory speech to the Yankees.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The World Trade Center Crisis
Damaged World Trade Center buildings may have to remain closed for a month, which would intensify problems for 350 banks, brokerage houses, law firms and other tenants.  [ Page A1. ]


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
I had the pleasure of attending a performance of the Vienna Philharmonic when it came to town recently.
As the musicians filed on stage, a woman directly behind me could be heard above the loud ovation: "I don't see any women in the orchestra. Do you see any women?"


With 'Falling Down,' Director Savors A New Success
It has been a long, arduous journey for Joel Schumacher, a journey that began and almost ended in New York City's drug culture in the 1960's.
As the director of "Falling Down," the film starring Michael Douglas that is No. 1 at the box office this week, Mr.
Schumacher seems to be the epitome of the successful Hollywood director.
He lives in Bel Air, his shimmering black Mercedes with the requisite car phone is parked outside his office on the Warner Brothers lot in Burbank, the new scripts are piling up.


Defectors Stall Bid to Repeal Weapons Ban
Only a week after the New Jersey Assembly voted to repeal the state's ban on military-style semiautomatic weapons, the repeal effort appeared to collapse today amid defections by Republican state senators.
Two Senators from Monmouth County, John O. Bennett and Joseph A. Palaia, said today that they would vote against overriding Gov.
Jim Florio's veto of legislation to repeal the ban on all but two semiautomatic weapons.


Burglars Take Islamic Art From a Manhattan Gallery
A rare Persian goblet valued at $500,000 and other precious works of Persian and French art were stolen yesterday from a midtown Manhattan gallery, the police said.
Investigators said the burglars took an estimated $1.1 million in artwork from the Alex Gallery at 11 East 57th Street after using a sledgehammer to break down the front door.
The year-old gallery specializes in Islamic art and antiques from around the world, including Egypt and the Middle East, said its director, John Aryeh.


Allied Signal Has New Converter
Allied Signal Inc. said yesterday that it had developed a catalytic converter for automobiles that uses less-expensive palladium to help reduce emissions from exhaust systems.
Allied, based in Morris Township, N.J., said the new system, which uses palladium instead of platinum, would reduce the precious metal costs of converters by 30 to 50 percent, as well as help car makers meet increasingly tough state air pollution standards.
Metals Trading Affected
Allied Signal shares closed today up 62.5 cents, to $65.625 on the New York Stock Exchange.
But the news had more impact on the precious metals markets.
Palladium for March delivery closed up $6, the top increase allowed on the New York Mercantile Exchange, to $108.70 a troy ounce, while April platinum fell $4.80, to $341 a troy ounce..


Suffolk Executive Proposes State Park for Pine Barrens
The Suffolk County Executive today proposed the creation of a 134,000-acre state forest preserve in the Pine Barrens of eastern Long Island, the largest remaining undeveloped area on the Island.
In his State of the County address, County Executive Robert J. Gaffney said the preserve would insure that much of the surviving Pine Barrens, an expanse of pitch pines and scrub oaks, remained in a natural state as "a lasting legacy for future generations."


Citrus Glut Leaves Growers Gloomy
In the orange and grapefruit groves that stretch for miles along U.S. 27, tree branches are sagging from the weight of ripe, fragrant fruit just waiting to be picked.
After six killer freezes in the 1980's, the Florida citrus industry is finally enjoying warm winter weather and harvesting a bumper crop.
But there is little celebrating here in the Citrus Belt, as the huge supply of fresh fruit and juice concentrate has pushed prices paid to producers to less than a third of that of a year ago.


OPENING OF TOWERS UNLIKELY TO OCCUR UNTIL NEXT MONTH
Port Authority officials yesterday all but abandoned their hopes of a quick reopening of the twin towers of the World Trade Center, saying the buildings, damaged in a powerful explosion on Friday, may now have to remain closed for a month.
The revised estimate comes as officials have gained a greater understanding in recent days of the length of time it will take to complete the painstaking task, step by step, of shoring up foundations, repairing other structural damage and restoring emergency power and fire control systems.


Bridge
The Long Island Regional Championships ended on Sunday in Smithtown, L.I., with a victory for Jim Becker, Jim Krekorian, Bob Blanchard, all of Manhattan, and Howard Chandross of Long Beach, L.I., in the Swiss Teams.
Skillful defense on the diagramed deal helped them to add to their large collection of titles.
South reached three no-trump after a limit response of two no-trump.
Blanchard as West led a heart to his partner's ace, and Krekorian, East, returned the ten, averting a block in the suit.
South tried the jack, won the third round with the king, and ran five club winners.
The ending was this:


We Have a Real Chance for Lobbying Reform
To the Editor:
You have run three editorials this month criticizing my lobbying registration bill, which the public interest group Common Cause "strongly urged" us to pass just last year.
As Common Cause then explained, this bill is "a comprehensive approach to reform," which "would bring the process of organized professional lobbying into the sunlight, following the well-established principle that government should be conducted under the eye of the public."


The Cleanup; Repair and Investigation: Dual Tasks in Conflict
It will take 1,300 workers to clean the World Trade Center of the smoky grime from last Friday's explosion.
But they are unable to start work until there is a working smoke-detection system and backup power supply.
Those systems cannot be fixed until workers can have access to the bomb crater so they can repair smashed conduits and pipes.
First, though, the F.B.I. and other law-enforcement agencies have to look for clues.


More Unites Than Divides India and U.S.; To Right the Wrongs
To the Editor:
I was very much distressed by "India at the Edge" (editorial, Feb. 24).
Your description of the Bharatiya Janata Party as fundamentalist, and of victory for it as "bad news for India and for the world," is outrageous and born out of ignorance of the party's platforms, policies, resolutions and performance.
Bharatiya Janata is a democratically functioning party wedded to ideals of democracy, equality, free enterprise and uniform civil and social laws for all people and regions of the country.
The party simply desires to right the wrongs perpetrated by disastrous policies and programs of prolonged one-party rule in India.


Sports of The Times; Hard Fouls? How About Hard Time?
IN the National Basketball Association's own words, it's known as a "flagrant" foul.
That's flagrant, according to Webster, as in "extremely, flauntingly or purposefully conspicuous," as in "glaringly evident," as in "notorious." As in the Knicks' John Starks mugging Kenny Anderson into Byrne Meadowlands Arena's parquet floor Sunday and putting the Nets point guard's broken left hand into a cast for at least two weeks, if not longer.


Cellular Telephone Industry Counts 11 Million Customers
The cellular telephone industry, growing furiously despite a persistently weak economic recovery, announced yesterday that the number of subscribers rose to a record 11 million in 1992, while revenue rose to a record of nearly $8.8 billion.
The data mean that people were signing up for wireless telephone service at the rate of 11,500 a day in the second half of the year.
But the industry's latest figures, for the six months ended December 1992, were for a period before a widespread health scare in January.


Bensonhurst Sentence Cut
A New York state appeals court yesterday reduced the sentence of Keith Mondello, 23, who was found guilty of riot and other crimes in the 1989 killing of a black teen-ager, Yusuf K. Hawkins, 16, by a group of white youths in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn.
In its ruling, the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court in Brooklyn upheld the conviction of Mr.
Mondello, who was acquitted of murder.
The court said his sentence of 5 1/3 to 16 years in prison should be reduced to 4 to 12 years because some counts should run concurrently.
He will be eligible for parole in 1994.


Blood Tests for Skiers?
The International Olympic Committee's medical commission yesterday recommended the introduction of blood tests as a drug-control measure for skiers in the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway.
The panel said it resolved unanimously to recommend that the I.O.C. executive board approve the blood tests, which would be used in addition to urine tests.
Blood tests are intended to identify banned substances that cannot be detected by standard urinalysis, including the hormone Erythropoietin, or EPO, which experts say can help build endurance.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about taxes on alcohol and tobacco misstated the financing of a report by the Council of State Governments.
It was supported partly, not fully, by Philip Morris, the tobacco company.


THE TWIN TOWERS: Bomb Threats; The Delicate Art of Deciding When a Scare Is Just That
It was frightening and all too familiar.
At 1:38 P.M. yesterday, a bomb threat was called in to the World Trade Center, leading to the evacuation of hundreds of scared commuters from the PATH train station, concourse and a building in the sprawling complex.
Once again, nerves were frayed.
Once again, urban terrorism was a real threat.
"I'm having nightmares," said Vernon Boone, a salesman at the Tie Rack in the World Trade Center.
"I'm sick of it. I don't even want to work here no more."


Review/Music; Casting a New Mold For the Philadelphia
Wolfgang Sawallisch has been designated the future music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra since 1990.
But this season, he actually bears a title: music director-designate.
The suffix will finally drop next fall.
In Avery Fisher Hall on Monday night he showed some of what we can expect from future collaborations between this sleek American ensemble and the Munich-born conductor (who is currently music director of the Bavarian State Opera).
They are no strangers; Mr.
Sawallisch first conducted the Philadelphia Orchestra in 1966 and has already recorded with it.
But after he takes the helm, these two strong musical profiles are bound to merge.


Karl's Pact Extended
GEORGE KARL, who has transformed the Seattle SuperSonics from a .500 team into one of the N.B.A.'s elite clubs in a little more than a year, was given a four-year contract extension yesterday.
The 41-year-old Karl is now under contract through the 1996-97 season.


Nebraska Power Revenue Bonds
In another offering through First Boston, the Nebraska Public Power District is offering $253 million of power supply system revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 5.65 percent for an issue due in 2013.
The taxable equivalent yield for the issue is 8.18 percent for those in the 31 percent tax bracket.


In Barrage of Ads, Stein Strives for Surge in Polls
Stuck so far behind in early polls that he is fending off speculation that he may abandon the race, City Council President Andrew J. Stein is planning to open his bid for mayor with an extravagantly expensive media campaign that will bring the era of talk show politics to New York City.
The barrage of campaign commercials, Perot-style "infomercials" and audience participation specials -- which a Stein strategist said was likely to cost as much as $2.5 million over the next three to four months -- will coincide with the City Council President's formal announcement of his candidacy later this month.
It promises to be one of the most expensive early openings to the New York mayoral race ever.


Personal Health
BY now your skin has probably had it with winter.
Assaulted by hot and dry indoor air, cold and dry outdoor air, wind and, yes, sun, it has become dry, shriveled, flaky, perhaps even cracked and sore and, worst of all, itchy.
Chances are you have had this problem for years and have bought all kinds of lotions, creams, soaps, bath oils and other products advertised to keep your skin baby soft and pliable, despite winter's assaults.
But even those "gourmet" skin products with two-digit price tags have let you down time and again.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.65
3.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.97
4.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.05
4.15
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.54
5.56
7.11
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.83
6.84
7.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.79
7.79
8.92
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.79
5.84
6.75
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Pop Life; NBC Drops Rapper and He Recants
Shabba Ranks, the Jamaican dance-hall rapper, will not be on the "Tonight" show this evening.
The producers of the show canceled his guest appearance after the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation announced that it was planning a national protest against media that publicize the singer's music "without addressing the issue of his homophobia."
In December, on a British television show called "The Word," Mr.
Ranks was asked to comment on the song "Boom Bye Bye," by the reggae artist Buju Banton, which advocates shooting gay men.
Mr.
Ranks said that Mr.
Banton was "most definitely right," adding that "if you forfeit the laws of God Almighty you deserve crucifixion."


Beating Trial Enters a Crucial Phase
After three days of testimony setting the scene in the Federal civil rights trial of four police officers charged in the beating of Rodney G. King, lawyers today battled the central issue of the case: Whether excessive force was used to subdue Mr.
King.
The first person to take the stand for the prosecution today led the way in what will be a crucial series of witnesses from both sides who will offer contrasting interpretations of the videotaped beating.
Prosecutors say the officers intentionally used excessive force when they repeatedly clubbed, kicked and shocked Mr.
King, while the defense contends that Mr.
King provoked the beating by refusing to obey orders after a high-speed chase.


Nutrition Campaign Draws a Complaint
The McDonald's Corporation said that it had joined with the American Dietetic Association to introduce a nutrition education campaign.
A physicians' group, however, asked the Government yesterday to investigate a portion of the campaign that tells children that meat "can make it easier to do things like climb higher and ride your bike farther."
As part of the campaign, which begins Friday, McDonald's will distribute pamphlets with toy food characters in its Happy Meals for children.
Jane Hulbert, a McDonald's spokeswoman in Oak Brook, Ill., said yesterday that television commercials, created by Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago, were scheduled to run in support of the promotion.


U.N. Authority Says It Has Found Few Hanoi Soldiers in Cambodia
Officials of the United Nations say that for the first time since it arrived in Cambodia to enforce the Paris peace agreement of 1991, it had identified soldiers from Vietnam in the country.
The soldiers are three Vietnamese who served with the Vietnamese Army that invaded this country in 1978 and later became members of the army organized by the Vietnamese-installed Phnom Penh Government, according to Eric Falt, spokesman for the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, as the peacekeeping operation is called.
He said two of the three still served in the Cambodian Army.


CHRONICLE
JONATHAN DEMME, the film director, and SUSAN SARANDON, the actress, are planning to attend the first American Forum on Haiti at noon tomorrow at the Rayburn Office Building in Washington.
"We hope President Aristide will be able to clarify before Congressmen, the Administration and the country the cost of the failure to restore democracy," said RANDALL ROBINSON, the executive director of the TransAfrica Forum, which is sponsoring the Haiti forum with the Congressional Black Caucus.
The main speaker will be JEAN-BERTRAND ARISTIDE, the deposed President of Haiti, who will be asked to outline his plans for a democratic Haiti.


With Full Agenda, F.D.I.C. Is Shorthanded
As the Clinton Administration prepares to substantially change the rules for examining the books of the nation's banks, there is a vacuum at the top of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, one of the main agencies that regulate banking.
No new chairman for the agency's five-member board has been nominated, and the death of an F.D.I.C. board member, C. C. Hope Jr., on Monday has left the agency with a bare quorum of three members, none of whom is expected to stay long.


Board Fails To Charge Principal
A Bronx school board last night again declined to begin disciplinary proceedings against a principal accused of brutally questioning and humiliating an 8-year-old girl who said a custodian had raped her.
The action by Community Board 12 in the central Bronx came after it had promised Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez that disciplinary action would start.
It set the stage for a confrontation with Mr.
Fernandez, whose staff said he was likely to move today to assume the powers of the board and bring the charges himself.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  CITY FALLS AFTER AIRDROP  Cerska in eastern Bosnia was reported to have fallen to Serbian nationalist forces hours after United States planes dropped supplies to the people there.
The Serbs' action appeared to be a direct rebuff to President Clinton.
A1  RUSSIA PROMISES CARGO PLANES  Russia agreed to send transport planes to join the airdrop to Bosnia, and nine other countries offered to donate supplies.
A12


Late Rally Sends Dow Up by 45.12
Stocks surged broadly higher yesterday in a late rally said to reflect the belief of some money managers that the bond market's gains may have nearly run their course.
The Dow Jones industrial average jumped 45.12 points, or 1.3 percent, to 3,400.53, with Big Board gainers overwhelming losers by 1,273 to 656.
Volume was a moderately heavy 275.9 million shares.


'Messiah' Fond of Bible, Rock and Women
Years before he began ordering the Branch Davidians to arm themselves for the apocalypse, before he told them he was Jesus Christ, David Koresh built up his following in a far more ordinary way: by playing rock music with them, sharing an occasional beer, and, most of all, by preaching Scripture with unwavering conviction.
Even some sect members who came to conclude that he was dangerously unstable, and who managed to shake free of his cult, described him as having first lured them with his fondness for good times and a gentle promise of truth.


Kenneth J. Stuart, 87, Magazine Art Director
Kenneth James Stuart, an illustrator and former art director for The Saturday Evening Post and Reader's Digest, died Saturday at Norwalk Hospital.
A resident of Wilton, Conn., he was 87.
His family said the cause was complications following surgery.


Book Notes
Roots Revisited When booksellers received the William Morrow spring catalogue earlier this year, they read the description of "Alex Haley's Queen" and assumed it was an autobiographical, historical book that would be shelved in their nonfiction sections.
The catalogue reads in part, "Alex Haley's Pulitzer Prize winning masterpiece, 'Roots,' told the story of his maternal forebears; 'Alex Haley's Queen' depicts the five interracial generations of his father's family."


No Letup in New Municipal Issues
The tax-exempt municipal market withstood another rush of new issues yesterday, with prices showing little change.
About $2 billion of new bonds were sold yesterday as the pace of sales seemed to show little slack after new issues set a record of $16.37 billion in February.
That record total, however, barely surpassed the $16.04 billion set in February of last year, according to the Securities Data Company.


Wine Talk
SOME expenditures are indefensible on any grounds other than sheer indulgence.
For example: a bottle of 1990 Romanee-Conti at $800 and, as they say, change.
But even if you've got $800 to spare and have always dreamed of spending that kind of money on a bottle of wine, don't get your hopes up.


Radio-Frequencies Bill Advances
The House of Representatives today approved a bill that would require the Federal Government to free a big block of radio frequencies for commercial technologies like wireless pocket telephones and palm-sized computers.
The measure sailed through by a vote of 410 to 5.
A similar measure has been introduced in the Senate, but Congressional Democrats may still find themselves on a collision course with President Clinton over how the new frequencies are handed out.


Starks Is Fined But Isn't Banned
John Starks of the Knicks was fined $5,000 by the National Basketball Association yesterday, but he was not suspended for his flagrant foul against Kenny Anderson of the Nets.
Anderson, the Nets' starting point guard, broke a bone in his left hand trying to break a nasty fall after a midair collision with Starks while driving to the basket in the Nets' victory on Sunday.
Anderson will miss at least two weeks, but he could be out much longer.


Bernard S. Myers; Art Historian, 84
Bernard S. Myers, an art historian and editor who wrote on German expressionist and Mexican art, died on Sunday at Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 84 and lived in Brooklyn Heights.
The cause was pneumonia, said his son, Peter, also of Brooklyn.


RJR to Issue $1.5 Billion In New Stock
In an effort to attract new shareholders, some of whom might be more willing to invest in Oreo cookies than Winston cigarettes, the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation announced yesterday that it would issue a new class of common stock tied to the performance of its food businesses.
The move was applauded yesterday on Wall Street.
On the New York Stock Exchange, RJR Nabisco Holdings was the most actively traded stock and closed at $9 a share, up 62.5 cents.
Nearly 13 million shares traded hands.


Motivation Upon Arrival for Henderson
Tony La Russa, the wily manager of the Oakland Athletics, knew his remarks would get back to Rickey Henderson.
He just didn't realize how quickly his enigmatic left fielder would hear them.
"My goal for Rickey is to be the first $10 million man," La Russa said today, speaking clearly for Henderson's motivational benefit.
"With the kind of season he's capable of having, with his desire for immortality -- he's going to play into his 40's -- this is his opportunity to make up for what he feels he didn't get."


Neediest Cases Drive Ends With Surge
Despite a grinding recession that has provoked fears of growing hardship, The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund ended its 81st annual campaign on Sunday with its second-highest total ever.
Nearly 14,000 donors from around the world helped the appeal raise $4,469,034.47.
The fund initially fell sharply behind the last campaign's pace, but it gained ground over the last month.
The surge is a testimony to the compassion of readers who responded to predictions that thousands of people might go without food, clothing, shelter and health care if the campaign did not reach its goal.


It's Back to the Future for Mets' Johnson
The speeds were all wrong.
The feet moved too slowly.
The baseball off the bat was on top of him too quickly.
In its initial moments, Howard Johnson's return to third base had plunged him into a crazy warp of physical phenomena and personal history.
Johnson, after an outfield odyssey that became as much a public psychodrama as a baseball experiment for the Mets, was back at the position he had begun at in New York in 1985, when he became the 78th third baseman in franchise history.
The return, if weird, wasn't beyond overcoming.


G.O.P. Serves Clinton Familiar Doubts
He ate birthday cake with the House Republicans.
The Senate Republicans fed him a Big Mac and fries.
It was all smiles on both sides of the aisle today as President Clinton made his first trip to Capitol Hill to confer with Republican lawmakers, and they expressed their gratitude with his beloved junk food.


Three-Way Pact for Fiber Test
A.T.&amp; T. has teamed up with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Digital Equipment Corporation to build a communications network far faster than current fiber optics.
The experimental network, which is being built with an $8.4 million grant from the Pentagon and was announced today, could make it far cheaper to transmit television images, book-length computer files and even entire libraries in the blink of an eye than current fiber-optic technology can accomplish.


Good Stats, Good Grades and a Second Chance
If Kermit Dingle's life were a book, it would be one you might judge by the cover.
Here he stands, a 25-year-old wearing a black hooded jacket, black wool cap, jeans and black combat boots.
He wears three gold rings on his right hand, and around his neck hangs a thick gold chain.
Dingle would probably excuse you if you mistook him for a drug dealer, because that's just what he says he used to be in the Paterson Projects in the Bronx.


Albany at Odds Over Revenue Figures
Only 29 days before the start of the new fiscal year, the Governor, the Assembly Speaker and the State Senate majority leader have yet to agree on how much money the state has to spend, much less how to spend it.
All three now believe that the state's economic prospects are improving somewhat and that revenues for the 1993-94 fiscal year will exceed the original projection made in January by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


Women's Group Foiled
The San Diego Yacht Club refused Monday to sanction a women's group that wanted to sail in the next America's Cup race series, scheduled for 1995 in San Diego.
LYNDA CORRADO of Sausalito, Calif., founder of the women's Pegasus Syndicate, said that she was unable to show enough monetary support to pass the yacht club's financial hurdle.
Corrado said she showed cup officials three letters from potential sponsors, but conceded that "they weren't very strong letters."


What, No Food Fights? That's Etiquette!
ACCOMPANIED by sometimes stern, sometimes smiling grown-ups, 15 youngsters scampered out of nifty-looking autos, most of them with New Jersey license plates.
For the next two hours on a recent Saturday afternoon, the children were to see more than their share of other plates -- the dinner variety -- in a class instructing them on the essentials of dining-table etiquette.
This inaugural class, for ages 5 to 8 at $50 a child with escort, started a series that will continue through the spring in the Dining Room, a posh club-like restaurant at the Hilton at Short Hills, N.J.
The purpose, said Susan Nordell, who coordinated the etiquette event, is "to give the children an idea of what food is like in a fine dining room." Judging by the reactions of the courteous, curious and occasionally crabby sold-out crowd of kids, they were rather intrigued by, and vaguely suspicious of, it all.
At least of the first course, Cream of Asparagus Soup.


Market Place; Rayonier Timberland L.P. offers a dividend play that isn't.
THE folks at Rayonier Timberland L.P. are struggling with a unique problem: They can't seem to get some investors to quit putting their money into the company's securities.
In recent weeks, the price of the timberland company's securities have been booming, jumping from a low of $27 each in the last week of December to more than $42 last month.
Yesterday, the securities closed at $40 each, down 12.5 cents in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


Senators Hear Retirees Whose Health Benefits Were Cut
As a design engineer with the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, Kazimer J. Patelski spent 28 years on projects like the Saturn moon rocket and was managing director of Houston Mission Control for the Apollo program.
Late in his career he spurned another company that offered to double his salary because, he said, it offered no health benefits.
When he retired in June at the age of 62, Mr.
Patelski said, he was told that his health benefits would continue for his life and that of his wife.
But in October, the aerospace company announced that it would end its health benefits contributions for nonunion retirees, beginning this year.


Standoff in Texas Goes On After Cult Chief's Broadcast
The leader of the heavily armed religous cult locked in a three-day standoff with hundreds of law enforcement officers said Tuesday that he and his followers would surrender if a 58-minute recorded statement from him was broadcast over the radio.
The statement, mainly a rambling discourse on the Bible, was broadcast beginning at 1:30 P.M., but after midnight today there was no sign of surrender, and the tense standoff at the group's fortified compound dragged through the night.


Russia Declares It Plans to Join Bosnia Airdrop
The Clinton Administration said today that Russia had agreed to send military transport planes to join the airdrop of relief supplies to Bosnia and Herzegovina, and that nine other countries had offered to donate food and medicine.
Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev, speaking in Moscow after meeting with Foreign Minister Roland Dumas of France, said the Russian operation could begin "pretty quickly" after technical questions like guaranteeing the security of Russian aircraft had been resolved.
Russia has been an ally of Serbia in the past.


We Have a Real Chance for Lobbying Reform; A Special Interest State
To the Editor:
The defense of lobbyists by the superlobbyist Tommy Boggs (Op-Ed, Feb. 16) is an example of the sophisticated deceptiveness that the public has come to expect from special-interest pleaders.


Funds for Journalists From Abroad Dry Up
To the Editor:
Your commendation in "From Rhodes to Reuter" (Topics of The Times, Feb. 16) of Oxford University for bringing journalists within its walls as Reuter Fellows, in a program patterned after the Nieman Fellows, is welcome.
It should be balanced with a less cheerful report on a different but equally admirable program, the 10-year-old Alfred Friendly Press Fellowships.


Sociological Musings on Some Women's Search for Fellowship
IN this age of collapsing sexual stereotypes we are about to tread on dangerous ground, examining the rise and glory of Wowee, which stands for Women of the World Eating Everything.
It was almost three years ago that Eve Bigelow and her old Harvard roommate, Lucy Dineen, decided that what they needed was a forum where women could meet regularly and talk about the world.
"Ever since college it seemed that our men friends had club lives, with eating clubs and sports teams," said Ms.
Bigelow, a fund-raiser for the American Civil Liberties Union.
She got the idea soon after she came to New York from Egypt, where she had tried to teach poor farmers to raise rabbits.
"We felt we needed something of our own."


C.D.'s and Money Market Accounts Lower
The average yields offered by banks on money market accounts and certificates of deposit for the week beginning today are down modestly compared with those offered the previous week, particularly among accounts with the shortest maturities and those at commercial banks.
According to The Bank Rate Monitor, the average yield on a six-month C.D. in the New York area has fallen a little less than the average decline for the same maturity at 20 big banks nationwide.
The average decline for a New York money market account is also less than the decline at the 20 banks nationwide.


Warren Ellsworth 3d, A Dramatic Tenor, 42
Warren Aldrich Ellsworth 3d, an opera singer known for dramatic tenor roles, died on Thursday at Methodist Hospital in Houston.
He was 42.
The cause of death was lymphoma, said his wife, Caroline.


60-Minute Gourmet
THERE are few classical recipes today that young chefs do not tamper with to suit their own tastes or those of their customers.
That was not so in my day as a young cook.
We would no sooner think of modifying, say, a pommes de terre a la dauphinoise -- that sublimely rich blend of sliced potatoes, milk and grated cheese -- than we would do laps in the Seine in January.
But now, the rules change every day.
To a certain extent this is good; that is, if chefs respect the base from which dishes originate and maintain each recipe's essential character.


Going Beyond Batteries to Power Electric Cars
When an engineer named Steven M. Misiaszek set out to test a lighter-weight alternative to batteries for powering electric vehicles, he chose a suitable candidate: a small submarine.
The device worked, but Mr.
Misiaszek (pronounced me-SHAH-zek) lost a lot of his enthusiasm for the project after a test dive that required him to crouch in the dark, windowless rear of a tube-shaped hull a little bigger than a sewer pipe, 950 feet under water, with condensation running down the walls.
So now he is working on a car.


Yeltsin Issues Warning to Russian Congress
President Boris N. Yeltsin said today that he was prepared to take unspecified "extreme measures" if the Russian Congress rejects his proposals for an agreed separation of powers.
Speaking to members of the Democratic Choice faction, which broadly supports his reform programs, Mr.
Yeltsin renewed a warning to the Congress of People's Deputies, which has become a powerful force against him.


Parents Face Questions on Vaccinating Infants for Hepatitis B
MORE than a year after public health groups and medical societies recommended that every infant be vaccinated against hepatitis B, many pediatricians are defying this wisdom.
Rebelling pediatricians point out that the hepatitis B virus, which causes a potentially fatal liver infection, is generally acquired in the late teens or early adulthood and no one knows whether immunity through a vaccine delivered in infancy will persist 15 to 20 years later.
They say the recommended strategy will immunize children who are unlikely to be exposed to the disease.
And they add that on top of all that, the vaccine, though safe, is relatively expensive.


Front Office to Blame For Nets' Instability
The Nets have two choices on whom to blame for the mess they think they're in.
While suffering through what promises to be a prolonged loss of Kenny Anderson, they could miss the point and pin the rap entirely on John Starks.
Or they could see this sudden crisis exactly for what it is: an indictment of the Nets' organization.
How shocking that a 6-foot-1-inch, 160-pound (so they say) point guard who spends half his court time inside the lane has gone down for at least two weeks, probably more.
How typical of the Nets to be stocked in reserve with one point guard, Tate George, who had to be surgically removed from Chuck Daly's doghouse and another, 36-year-old Maurice Cheeks, who is three months older than Bernard King.
Anyone seen Vinnie Johnson?


Promise of the Millenium Has Long Driven Cults
Sunday's bloody gun battle between a peculiar religious sect in Texas and 100 Federal agents followed a script centuries old.
From the slaughter in 1535 of the Anabaptists who set up a polygamous "Davidic Realm" in the German city of Munster to the 1978 mass suicide of Peoples Temple members in Jonestown, Guyana, that script has frequently been deadly.


What's White Worth? Eagles to Fight It Out
The agreement on free agency negotiated after years of litigation between National Football League players and owners has left at least one unhappy team: the Philadelphia Eagles, who are certain to lose the league's most feared pass rusher, Reggie White.
Now, the question is, what will they get for him?


Alabama Releases Man Held On Death Row for Six Years
Walter McMillian walked out of a courtroom here today a free man after prosecutors conceded that he had spent six years on Alabama's Death Row because of perjured testimony and evidence withheld from his lawyers.
Whether he was also put there for being a black man who violated the racial and sexual taboos of the small-town South is only one of the issues swirling around a case that has evoked not only distinctly Southern but also far broader questions of race and justice.


2 Israelis Urge Consideration of Gaza Pullout
A day after two Israelis were stabbed to death in Tel Aviv by a young Palestinian from Gaza, two Cabinet ministers said that Israel should consider a unilateral withdrawal from the coastal strip it has occupied since 1967.
Health Minister Haim Ramon, considered a possible future leader of the Labor Party, was insistent that Israel must leave Gaza, even if there is no peace agreement with the Palestinians, because "our presence there is a disaster from any point of view."


Messier Out for 7 to 10 Days
Mark Messier, the Rangers' top scorer with 76 points, will be out for 7 to 10 more days with strained and bruised muscles in his right rib cage, the Rangers announced yesterday.
Messier, who has 21 goals and 55 assists, will miss his seventh game of the season tonight when the Rangers are host to the Buffalo Sabres at Madison Square Garden.
He sat out six games just before the All-Star Game break last month with a fractured right wrist.
His most recent injury occurred when Igor Kravchuk checked him from behind during the Rangers' 1-0 victory over the Oilers in Edmonton, Alberta, Saturday night.


College Hockey Report
Harvard  The Crimson clinched first place in the ECAC by defeating Vermont, 3-1, on Saturday, a victory that came a night after an upset loss to Dartmouth, 4-3, at Hanover, N.H.
That was the first Green victory over a Harvard hockey team since 1981.
The Crimson's first-place finish was its sixth in the last eight seasons.
The next goal will be to win the league tournament, which will culminate at Lake Placid, N.Y., on March 19 and 20.
Like Harvard, Rensselaer has clinched home ice for the early rounds of the tournament.
The other two home teams will be decided this weekend in the final regular-season games among Brown, Clarkson, St.
Lawrence, Vermont and Yale.
How important is home ice?
ECAC home teams have won more than two-thirds of the tournament games.
The event begins next Tuesday.
Brown  The Bears, largely ignored through much of the season while hovering around the .500 mark, have a six-game winning streak, the longest since the 1975-1976 Brown team won 13 in a row in a 23-7 campaign.
This surge has taken Brown past slumping Yale and into third place in the ECAC with two important contests at home ahead, against St.
Lawrence on Friday and Clarkson on Saturday.
The big player for Coach Bob Gaudet's squad has been Derek Chauvette, a senior forward from West Warwick, R.I., who is seventh among ECAC scorers with 9 goals and 23 assists.
His career assist total, 95, is the second-best in Brown history.
Minnesota-Duluth
Known as Duluth Normal for the first half of its 91 years, this college now has its third Western Association regular-season championship team.
The other two big years for the school were in 1984 and 1985.
The McNaughton Cup, larger than the National Hockey League's Stanley Cup, is the Bulldogs' prize after they clung to first place for most of the season.
Another prize is home ice and top-seeding for the W.C.H.A. 10-team tournament, which starts March 12.
The Bulldogs have won six of their last seven games and were 15-1-0 at home.
Derek Plante, the center on the first line, was the foremost player as anticipated and he leads the conference in scoring with 27 goals and 42 assists in 29 games.
Plante will be the choice of many of the electors for the Hobey Baker Award as the sport's best college performer this season.
But Minnesota-Duluth has not impressed all the voters in The Albany Times Union's weekly poll.
The Bulldogs (21-8-1 over all) are ranked fifth after Maine (31-1-2), Michigan (24-5-2), Miami of Ohio (24-7-3) and Boston University (24-7-2).
The loss to Dartmouth dropped Harvard (19-3-2) from third to sixth this week.
ECAC Women  Providence, as expected, won the first ECAC women's tournament with a 3-0 victory over New Hampshire.
Cammie Granato had the winning goal.
She is from Downers Grove, Ill., and is the sister of Tony Granato, the former New York Ranger who is now with the Los Angeles Kings.
Many of the women were first brought to hockey by older brothers.
"It's a story I've heard from other women," said Kathy Linstad, the Northeastern coach.
"My brothers stuck me in the goal to have someone to shoot at."
Hockey East  There are five regular-season games to be played this week before the tournament begins March 12 at campus sites.
All eight teams will participate.
Maine, Boston University and New Hampshire have clinched home ice and Lowell or Providence will claim the fourth-seeded spot.
Lowell may have the best of it, meeting seventh-place Merrimack at home on Saturday after the Friars have taken on B.U. the night before at home.
Central Association  Alaska-Fairbanks, which has an impressive 21-10-2 record, will play in the C.C.H.A. tournament as an affiliate member.
That will make the event a 12-team affair, and home ice will go to Miami, Michigan, Lake Superior State, Michigan State, Western Michigan and Ferris State.
Iona  The Gaels, seeded third in the ECAC North-South playoffs among Division III teams, will take on Fitchburg State tonight on their home ice, the Playland Ice Casino at Rye, N.Y.
Although its overall record was only 11-10-1, Iona won its last six league games to capture first place in the South division.
A freshman, Patrick Lyons from Providence, R.I., was the Gaels' leading scorer, with 31 points in 22 games.
Middlebury (18-3-2) is seeded first in the ECAC East eight-team tournament, which began last night.
Middlebury was followed by Babson (17-5-1), Connecticut (18-5-2) and Williams (17-6-0).
Semifinals are Friday and the championship game comes Saturday at a site to be determined.
Plattsburgh State  The Cardinals will play host to Cortland State, a team they have beaten twice this season, in the championship game Saturday of the SUNY tournament.
Cortland defeated Fredonia to reach the final, and Plattsburgh crushed Oswego by a combined score of 17-7 in two games as Lenny Pereira stretched his scoring streak to 23 games.
Plattsburgh now awaits the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III tournament, while Elmira plays host to the ECAC West tourney Friday and Saturday.
The Soaring Eagles (21-5-0) will play Hobart (14-11-0), and Canisius (17-10-1) will meet Mercyhurst (18-7-0).


INSIDE
Clinton and Republicans Talk
The President met with Republican lawmakers, who seemed pleased with his attention but no less antagonistic to his economic program.
Page A20.
Repeal of Gun Ban Falters
A move to repeal New Jersey's ban on military-style semiautomatic weapons appeared to fail amid defections by G.O.P. senators.
Page B1.
Trafficker Seeks U.S.
Help
Pablo Escobar, a Colombian fugitive known for his empire of drugs and terrorism, says he will surrender if the U.S. protects his family.
Page A3.
Ferry Accident Kills 147
Zairians expelled from Congo crowding onto a small river ferry to Kinshasa were thrown into the river when the gangplank snapped.
Page A5.


Morgan Stanley Changing Its Leadership
John J. Mack, a former bond salesman turned administrator, was named president of the Morgan Stanley Group yesterday, replacing Robert F. Greenhill, an investment banker known for his close ties with the executives who run the country's largest businesses.
The change is a reminder that Morgan Stanley's traditional strength as a financial adviser to large corporations has been heavily supplemented in the last two decades by its securities sales and trading.


Books of The Times; Where Terror Is Total, Betrayal Has Many Facets
Terrorism again is in the air in several corners of the world and no country seems immune from fanaticism rooted in religion and nationalism.
After a few years or a few centuries, the cause becomes obscured but the habit of revenge and the need for enmity remain.
When the Kalashnikovs are firing and plastic explosives are blowing up men, women and children, we know that we're reading another terrifying novel by Gerald Seymour.
In "The Journeyman Tailor," Mr.
Seymour, one of Britain's most authoritative thriller writers, again uses the struggle for control of Northern Ireland as the setting for his story.
We've been here with him before, notably in "Harry's Game," but even when he changes his locales to London, Haifa or Berlin, the idea of Belfast always hovers in the background.


Hunt and Barrett Elected to Hall of Fame
ANGELA MORTIMER BARRETT, who won French, British and Australian championships in the genteel era of amateur tennis, and LAMAR HUNT, who helped transform the game into the big money business it has become, have been elected to the International Tennis Hall of Fame in Newport, R.I.
They will be inducted on July 10.
Hunt, the Kansas City Chiefs owner, who helped found the old World Championship Tennis, the first pro circuit, in 1967, will become the first person to be inducted into the hall who is a member of two other sports halls of fame.
As a founder of the American Football League he was inducted to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1972, and as a founder of the North American Soccer League, he was elected to the National Soccer Hall of Fame in 1982.


Dublin Journal; On the Kingmaker's Agenda, Ulster Looms Large
In the mid-1970's, when Dick Spring was tending bar at the Mad Hatter on Second Avenue in Manhattan, he was just another Irish visitor, better known on the Upper East Side than in Dublin.
By 1979 he had married an American and returned home to become a star rugby player for the national team.
But in a crucial game against Wales, he dropped a kick, Wales recovered it behind the Irish goal for a 4-point try and won the game by 3 points, and Mr.
Spring won himself a most unwanted place in national sports history.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page in some editions of Business Day yesterday about a bankruptcy court audit of the Maxwell Communication Corporation P.L.C. included an incomplete quotation from Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accountant for Maxwell during 1991, the period when Maxwell is accused of having overstated its profits.
The firm's comment was, "We know of no reason from the information available to us to suppose that the accounts upon which we reported did not give a true and fair view."


New York Must Save Historical Society Before It's Too Late
To the Editor:
I have never been ashamed of New York before.
I am ashamed that while every city of any size treasures its historical society, New York City cannot keep one of the finest and richest institutions of the type alive -- that the collections, documents, library and incomparable treasury of resources of the New-York Historical Society, the heart and history of this city, are up for grabs.


For Schwarzenegger, a Defusing
Sensitive to the fact that New Yorkers are just a bit skittish about dynamite blockbusters these days, the producers of a new Arnold Schwarzenegger action film have defused a 75-foot-high balloon of their star that straddles the Armed Forces Recruiting Center in Times Square, replacing two sticks of dynamite in its left hand with a lawman's badge.
"There's not going to be explosives, there's going to be a badge," the chairman of Columbia Pictures, Mark Canton, said yesterday.
"We want to make a strong statement about supporting the right people at this time. After all, Arnold's character is a hero."


Corrections
The mutual funds table in Business Day yesterday carried closing prices from Thursday rather than Monday in some editions.
And in some editions the tables for stock options traded on the New York, Philadelphia and Pacific stock exchanges and the stock-index options included closing prices from Friday rather than Monday.
The errors resulted from data transmission disruptions after the World Trade Center explosion.
The correct tables can be distinguished by the letter "L" alongside the page number; readers wishing copies may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Court Is Asked to Back Haitians' Return
The Clinton Administration argued in the Supreme Court today for the right to continue picking up fleeing Haitians at sea and returning them to their country without asylum hearings, a Bush Administration policy that President Clinton had denounced as "cruel" and illegal when he was running for President last year.
In the absence of both an Attorney General and a Solicitor General, the White House had to rely on a staff lawyer in the solicitor general's office in its appeal.
Last summer, a Federal appeals court ruled that the policy on Haitians violated rights guaranteed to refugees by the country's basic immigration law.


National Service: Ideal vs. Reality
As President Clinton moves to translate his popular campaign promise of a national service program from proposal to reality, he has encountered a number of obstacles that may make it difficult to achieve the goals he originally outlined.
Unresolved issues include how national service workers would be trained and supervised, how much of their educational loans students would be able to work off, how to run the program without creating a new Federal bureaucracy and how to prevent fraud and abuse.
And the President will not have the money to do all that he had originally hoped, even if Congress is enthusiastic.


Ewing Gets Knicks' Offense Humming
The Knicks' offense resurfaced last night and their energy level was rejuvenated.
How long this will last remains to be seen.
But in a performance that was sorely needed, New York snapped a two-game losing streak and a prolonged offensive slump by defeating the Atlanta Hawks, 107-98, at Madison Square Garden.
It was a night when the Knicks (37-18) needed any kind of victory.
They were embarrassed by the Detroit Pistons last Friday (by 108-80) and by the Nets on Sunday (102-76).
They had not reached the 100-point mark in four consecutive games.
And they had not looked like a team with championship aspirations.


C. C. Hope Dies at 73; An F.D.I.C. Director
Clarence Caldwell Hope Jr., a member of the board of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, died Monday in his hometown of Charlotte, N.C.
He was 73.
The F.D.I.C. reported his death today, saying he died of of complications from pneumonia.
He had been in the hospital since Feb. 15.


Nets Shatter Backboard but Find Bulls Tougher
The dunking king is Michael Jordan, of course.
But when Nets forward Chris Morris dunked the ball so hard against the Chicago Bulls at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight, shattering the backboard, he at least made a temporary claim to fame.
The battered and broken basket was carted off the court.
Not too far behind were the Nets.
Chicago 87, New Jersey 80.
It was the lowest point total of the season for the injured and short-handed Nets.
If anyone knows how to speed up the healing process for a broken bone, there is a professional basketball team desperately waiting to hear from you.


Review/Television; Night of Stars, on Different Channels
In a pinch, look to the stars.
Stunt programming during a sweeps period -- when ratings that determine advertising rates are measured -- isn't limited to the commercial networks.
Public television and cable are not just passive bystanders.
They, too, haul out their biggest guns and, more often than not, that means big names.
Tonight alone offers "Sondheim: A Celebration at Carnegie Hall," on Channel 13 at 8 in New York and at 8:30 on PBS; "Larry King Extra: A Very Special Conversation With Elizabeth Taylor," on TNT at 8, and "Maestro Between Two Worlds: Kurt Masur," on Channel 31 at 9.
Taped in June before the kind of adoring audience attracted to any Stephen Sondheim event, the Carnegie Hall occasion is not as consistently electrifying as the 1986 "Follies in Concert" classic at Lincoln Center.
This time, an effort has been made to include some of the composer's lesser-known works, numbers from the stage musical "Assassins" and the film "Dick Tracy." That effort is not always justified.
But when Mr.
Sondheim is good, he is brilliant.
And there are enough stars on hand to make some of his more familiar songs soar: Bernadette Peters with "Not a Day Goes By," Patti LuPone with "Being Alive," Dorothy Loudon with a medley of "Losing My Mind" and "You Could Drive a Person Crazy." Glenn Close's dramatic reading of "Send In the Clowns" comes off far more effectively in television close-up than from a seat in the middle of Carnegie Hall.


Economy Grows, Food Stamps Rise
What's with the United States economy?
It grew at a 5 percent clip at the end of last year.
But an unusually large number of the unemployed have been permanently laid off and have no job to reclaim as the economy recovers.
Consumer confidence is high.
But the number of people collecting food stamps -- 26.6 million, more than 10 percent of the population -- has reached record numbers.


Real Estate; Philadelphia's new convention center draws hotel chains' interest.
HOTEL operators have been maneuvering for position in downtown Philadelphia in recent months in anticipation of the opening of a new convention center this summer.
Several hotel companies new to the city are examining opportunities in a market generally considered underserved, and renovation programs are in progress at two big downtown properties.


Good Choice for Hemisphere Job
After a false start, the Clinton Administration has come up with a sound nominee to be Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs.
Alexander Watson is a seasoned career diplomat who served as U.S.
Ambassador to Peru and most recently as Deputy Chief of Mission at the United Nations.
As important, putting him forward means the Senate confirmation hearings will not be dominated by snarling exchanges about Fidel Castro and the future of post-Castro Cuba.
To avoid that prospect, the Clinton team backed away from a Cuban-American it had initially considered for the same vital post.
Mario Baeza, a Wall Street lawyer who specializes in privatizing state-owned enterprises, was denounced as soft on Mr.
Castro by Cuban-American hard-liners in Miami.
Mr.
Baeza's critics never gave him the courtesy of a hearing, pointing up the deep emotions stirred among Cuban-Americans in Miami and elsewhere.


Clinton Has Candidate for Top Latin Post
Administration officials said on Monday night that President Clinton would appoint a career diplomat to the State Department's top Latin American post, in the hope of ending the debate between Cuban-Americans and the Administration over an early candidate for the job.
The officials said Alexander F. Watson, a former Ambassador to Peru and deputy representative to the United Nations, would be nominated as Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs, a post subject to Senate confirmation.


After 'a Long Two Months,' Lemieux Returns With Style
Hockey's best player finished his 22d and final radiation treatment this morning.
He chartered a private jet when his commerical flight was delayed in Pittsburgh this afternoon.
And he played remarkably as he returned from a life-threatening illness tonight before a welcoming crowd at the Spectrum.
Mario Lemieux, captain of the defending Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins, scored one goal, hit the post once and had one assist and five shots on goal as his team lost a 5-4 thriller to the Philadelphia Flyers.


Accounts
*
Saab Cars U.S.A.
Inc., Atlanta, to Fox Pavlika &amp; Partners, New York, as the first agency to handle its direct response account.
Billings were not disclosed.


THE TWIN TOWERS: Funerals; Survivors Remember the Victims of Randomness
Yesterday was the victims' day.
At four funerals and a wake, family and friends of the five people killed in the World Trade Center bombing came together to rise above the randomness of a despicable act and cherish the victims' memory.
The world of these survivors paused for the length of a prayer and sermon, shuddered with grief, then stumbled on.
Steven Knapp, 48, an air-conditioning and plumbing supervisor for the Port Authority, was mourned on Staten Island.
His secretary, 34-year-old Monica Smith, who was pregnant and had just finished renovating her house in Seaford, L.I., was buried, too; her family, insisting on privacy, would not say where.


Chinese Ingredients In Mexican Wrappers
MOO SHU PORK tortillas are perhaps the ultimate in cross-cultural cooking: Chinese ingredients in Mexican wrappers.
But the dish is solely a matter of expediency.
Most supermarkets carry flour tortillas these days, but they don't carry the traditional Chinese wrappers for moo shu pork.
This recipe calls for grinding a pork tenderloin rather than buying ground pork, which has much more fat.
Flour tortillas do a superb job of gathering up the ingredients, making it possible to eat them without a fork.
The blandness and the texture of the tortillas work well with the highly seasoned pork mixture.


Boxing; Pound for Pound, Who's the Best?
There is something mystical about this fight, something that almost seems to rise above the title or the belt or the weeklong buildup.
It is all about the two fighters, James (Buddy) McGirt and Pernell Whitaker, and the matter they will resolve Saturday night at Madison Square Garden.
McGirt's welterweight title -- the version under the purview of the World Boxing Council -- will be contested, but there is also this thing about becoming the best pound-for-pound fighter in the world.
And that is maybe what is driving both of them, certainly Whitaker.


No Headline
"It was too easy for one person to come into court and frame a man for a murder he didn't commit. It was too easy for the state to convict someone for that crime and then have him sentenced to death. And it was too hard in light of the evidence of his innocence to show this court that he should never have been here in the first place." -- BRYAN STEVENSON, lawyer for Walter McMillan, who was released after six years on Death Row for a murder that he did not commit.  [ A1:5. ]


12 Charged With Stealing $10 Million
Twelve people, all executives or employees of a Manhattan investment firm, have been arrested and charged with stealing more than $10 million from hundreds of investors, prosecutors said yesterday.
Investigators said they used the money to finance their lavish life styles, including a $30,000 wedding at the Plaza Hotel.
The firm, Oxford Capital Securities, and related businesses misused nearly all the money entrusted to them by their clients, said Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney.
Many of the victims were elderly and had only modest assets, he said.


Hampton Wants New Pact
Running back Rodney Hampton has asked the Giants to renegotiate his contract, which has another year remaining.
Last week, Hampton hired Ralph Cindrich, a Pittsburgh-based sports lawyer, to represent him.
Cindrich informed the Giants' general manager, George Young, of Hampton's intentions yesterday.


Web of Scandal: A special report.; Broad Bribery Investigation Is Ensnaring the Elite of Italy
What started a year ago as a modest bribe for a cleaning contract in Milan has grown into one of the most extraordinary scandals of postwar Europe, revealing the vast corruption that cements patronage and power among Italy's political barons.
Italy's many previous scandals have implicated the mob, the generals, the Vatican or the politicians.
But the recent revelations have exposed startling levels of bribery involving the power elite, once an untouchable network of dynasties, family money, state largesse and high-flying entrepreneurs.


A Lifeline Over a Mountain of Death
High in the Jahorina Mountains, where wolves howl and the wind blows like a knife across the snowfields, there is a battleground where Muslims from this town fight to survive "ethnic cleansing."
On a trail that runs above 5,000 feet, the townspeople, including men and women in their 60's and boys and girls barely in their teens, wend their way past Serbian gun positions.
Now and then, the night sky lights up with the flashes of the mortars and artillery and machine guns that fire into the darkness at the shadowy figures staggering along the mountain ridges under heavy loads.
In this merciless landscape, and in others like it that crisscross the mountain ranges of eastern Bosnia, tens of thousands of Muslims are fighting for their lives.
It is not a pitched battle.
But next to combat, it may be the most important part of the struggle for a Muslim future in this former Yugoslav republic.


Defining the Suburban Borders of the Global Village; A Fight for the Soul of Fairfield County Turns on What's on the Cable Television Dial
Are they Connecticut Yankees or displaced New Yorkers?
Consider Peter Justinius of Wilton, a 46-year-old antiques dealer and actor waiting here for his 8:06 A.M. train to Grand Central.
"Without New York, Fairfield County is nothing," he said.
"This is strictly a bedroom community."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Agreed to terms with Doug Henry, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Agreed to terms with Bret Boone, second baseman, on a one-year contract.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Rob Maurer, first baseman, and Roger Pavlik, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Agreed to terms with Doug Linton and Pat Hentgen, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
National League  FLORIDA MARLINS -- Agreed to terms with Bret Barberie, second baseman, on a one-year contract.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Agreed to terms with Ivan Arteaga, Miguel Batista, Kent Bottenfield, Mike Gardiner, Chris Nabholz, Bill Risley and Sergio Valdez, pitchers, and John Vander Wal, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Agreed to terms with Dave Hollins, third baseman, on a two-year contract and Juan Bell, shortstop, on a one-year contract.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Agreed to terms with Ray Lankford and Bernard Gilkey, outfielders; Geronimo Pena, Luis Alicea, Rod Brewer and Tracy Woodson, infielders; and Mike Perez, Omar Olivares, Rheal Cormier, Fidel Compres and Mark Clark, pitchers.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Agreed to terms with Frank Seminara, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Agreed to terms with Rod Beck and Rick Huisman, pitchers; Mike Benjamin, shortstop; and Eric Christopherson, catcher, on one-year contracts.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  NBA -- Fined John Starks, New York Knicks guard, $5,000 for committing a flagrant foul in a game on Feb. 28.
DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Signed Tim Legler, guard, to a 10-day contract.
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Activated Billy Owens, forward, from the injured list.
PORTLAND TRAIL BLAZERS -- Placed Clyde Drexler, guard, on the injured list.
Activated Delaney Rudd, guard, from the injured list.
WASHINGTON BULLETS -- Signed Byron Irvin, guard, and Alan Ogg, center, to 10-day contracts.
Football  National Football League  NFL -- Appointed Bill Polian to the Management Council to advise teams on the free agency system.
CHICAGO BEARS -- Signed Frank Kmet, defensive tackle.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Roland Mitchell, cornerback; Ervin Randle, linebacker; David Grant, defensive lineman, and Terry Beauford, guard.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Named Ray Hamilton defensive line coach.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Announced the retirement of Don Nims, ticket manager.
Named Deborah Campise ticket manager.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Announced that Ray Oliver, strength and conditioning coach, has resigned to become strength and conditioning coach and assistant athletic director at South Carolina.
Promoted Dennis Green, assistant strength and conditioning coach, to strength and conditioning coach.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NHL -- Named Jeffrey Pash senior vice president and general counsel.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Sent Mike Hurlbut and Dave Marcinyshyn, defensemen, to Binghamton of the American Hockey League.
TAMPA BAY LIGHTNING -- Reassigned Chris LiPuma, defenseman, to Atlanta of the International Hockey League.
International Hockey League  PEORIA RIVERMEN -- Signed Devin Edgerton, forward, to a 25-game tryout.
College
CINCINNATI -- Named Tom Roggeman defensive coordinator and outside linebackers coach.
DREW -- Named Jill Herman assistant softball coach.
EAST CAROLINA -- Named Theo Lemon defensive line coach.
FLORIDA -- Announced the resignation of John Reaves, tight end and assistant quarterback coach.
MASSACHUSETTS -- Named Francesca Den Hartog women's lacrosse coach, effective at the end of the 1993 season.


Anderson Expects A Longer Absence
Nets guard Kenny Anderson said tonight that initial speculation that he would miss two weeks because of a broken bone in his left hand was optimistic and that he would probably miss "a lot more time than that."
Anderson said he would like to return, but he quickly added: "I don't know. I'm going to listen to my doctors. What I'm worried about is coming back quickly and in trying to come back quickly, hurt my career. I have to think long term."


Agents' Advice: Attack on a Sunday
Undercover agents penetrated the fortified compound outside Waco, Tex., by posing as members of the Branch Davidian cult, and told officials that Sunday mornings would be the safest time to seize weapons and arrest the group's leader, officials of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms said here today.
They gave this account of the bureau's raid on Sunday, which left four agents dead:


With A Few Tricks, Viola! The Low-Fat Kitchen
THE meaning of the larder has changed.
Larder, another term for pantry, once referred to the place where meat, other foods and especially the precious, fortifying fat of butchered hogs were kept.
Fat today is eaten in what health experts consider to be excessive amounts by a mostly sedentary population and has become a hazard.
The smart larder is now increasingly low in fat.


Reneberg Upsets Edberg And Builds Confidence
Stefan Edberg was eliminated from the Newsweek Champions Cup in the second round today by upstart Richey Reneberg, but Edberg said he planned to stick around for the rest of the week anyway.
Edberg will partake of some rest and recreation and some more practice.
After all, look what it has done for Reneberg.


Layoffs and Factory Closings Shaking the Japanese Psyche
For years the popular mythology in Japan has been that plant closings and corporate layoffs were quintessentially American.
Humane Japanese companies would rather accept losses than cast an employee into the street.
But throughout the country the dreaded phrase these days is "kata tataki," or "tap on the shoulder." Not only are industrial workers getting the tap, but even employees of the richest and seemingly most secure companies.


Texaco Promotes Official to Vice Chairman
Allen J. Krowe, a senior vice president and chief financial officer at Texaco Inc., was promoted yesterday to vice chairman and named to the company's board.
The appointment is effective April 1.
Mr.
Krowe came to Texaco in October 1988 after a long career at the International Business Machines Corporation, where he also served as chief financial officer and was a member of I.B.M.'s board.


Perot Continues His Campaign, On Capitol Hill
Mr.
Perot came to Washington today, trailed by a throng of cheering, laughing, applauding acolytes, to give Congress the road-tested message that when you get right down to it, the Government's problems are all very simple.
It bore all the earmarks of a Frank Capra movie until one lawmaker began suggesting that he was long on pomp and arrogance, and short on solutions.
At that point, the set piece about the common man who takes the political kingpins down a notch got twisted inside out, and Ross Perot's true role as the potent vote-getter who commanded a fifth of the support in the Presidential election became apparent.


Watch two new ads. Note similarities. Just try to understand them.
ON first glance, it looks as if the folks at Wieden &amp; Kennedy and Team One Advertising compared a few notes while developing campaigns for their respective clients, Nike and Lexus.
Not the case, they insist. No more than a head-scratching coincidence.


At the U.N., Hopes Fade For an Early Cease-Fire
A second day of peace talks with leaders of the warring factions in Bosnia and Herzegovina ended today as hopes faded for an early breakthrough on the peace plan prepared by a joint United Nations-European Community team.
Officials here say the most to be expected appears to be agreement by President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia on a cease-fire and the disengagement of forces, which the rival Serbian and Croatian nationalist factions have already accepted.


We Have a Real Chance for Lobbying Reform; Just the Facts
To the Editor:
Thomas H. Boggs Jr. states in "All Interests Are Special" (Op-Ed, Feb. 16) that "Facts are the first source of a lobbyist's power," and "Lobbyists help fill the information vacuum." He must be unaware that Congress in its wisdom provided a rich source of information for itself, the Library of Congress, in particular the Congressional Research Service.


2 Key Reports Show Economy Losing Momentum
More signs of a slackening economic expansion appeared today as the Government's main forecasting index edged up just one-tenth of 1 percent in January and sales of new homes posted their biggest drop in 11 years.
Though analysts were not surprised by the January data because they had regarded the 4.8 percent growth rate during the fourth quarter as too high to be sustained, the figures seemed to confirm other recent reports that economic momentum is already on the wane.


METRO DIGEST
AFTERMATH OF THE BOMBING: A SLOW RECOVERY FOR TWIN TOWERS
Port Authority officials all but abandoned their hopes of a quick reopening of the twin towers of the World Trade Center, saying the buildings, damaged in a powerful explosion on Friday, may now have to remain closed for a month.
A1.
INVESTIGATORS FOCUS ON TERRORIST LINK
Federal agents have stepped up surveillance of suspected terrorists in the United States as investigators press their search for a possible terrorist link to the bombing, officials said.
B7.


Public &amp; Private; Threshold of Pain
Being a reporter is as much a diagnosis as a job description.
It is a strange business, making a living off other people's misfortunes, standing in the rubble with a press card as a nominal shield, writing in a crabbed hand notes no one else can read, riding an adrenaline surge that ends in a product at once flimsy and influential.
"Every day is a fresh beginning," it once said on a mural in the lobby of the New York Times building.
"Every morn is the world made new." It is not unlike the confessional -- a clean slate overnight, to be sullied later with newsprint.


Agriculture Dept. Policy Blamed for Tainted Food
THE Agriculture Department is in the hot seat.
Critics on all sides say the real culprit in the deaths of three children earlier this year from tainted hamburgers sold in the Northwest is the Agriculture Department itself.
It is a charge vehemently denied by the department.
Gerald Kuester, a microbiologist who spent 20 years at the Agriculture Department and at the Food and Drug Administration before becoming the director of food safety for the Center for Science in the Public Interest in Washington, blames "the institutional thinking" at the Agriculture Department for the outbreak of food poisoning from the deadly bacterium, E. coli 0157:H7.


Miscellany
*
The New York Times Co. formed a unit called the Multilingual Newspaper Network, consisting of 50 ethnic newspapers in the United States published in nine languages.
Its first project will be an eight-page advertising supplement, to be published quarterly beginning on May 17, and distributed as an insert in 500,000 copies of 18 Spanish-language newspapers in the metropolitan New York area.


Escobar Says He'll Surrender if U.S. Protects Family
Pablo Escobar Gaviria, the cocaine trafficker who is Colombia's most-wanted fugitive, offered today to surrender to Colombian authorities if the United States gave protection to his family.
"If United States grants protection to my family, I am prepared to accept imprisonment," Mr.
Escobar wrote in a handwritten response to questions submitted to him last week by The New York Times through his Medellin lawyer, Roberto Uribe Escobar.
Sent by fax, each of the three pages of answers carried the trafficker's thumbprint, and the last page was signed Pablo Escobar G.


Twilight in Italy
Almost every day, new disclosures link Italy's political and business leaders to a vast web of organized corruption.
Inflated public contracts awarded in exchange for kickbacks have cost Italy's taxpayers tens of billions of dollars.
The scale of wrongdoing has outraged even the famously cynical Italian public, feeding demands for fundamental changes in the cozy arrangements by which Italy has been run for more than four decades.
Those changes could begin as soon as next month, when a referendum will be held on changing the proportional representation system for parliamentary elections.
The idea is to encourage something like alternating two-party government in place of the permanent coalition rule that has virtually invited financial backscratching.


A Plant Too Big for Germany to Close
When this town was built in 1950, it was named Stalinstadt and proclaimed as "Germany's first socialist city." Constructed in totalitarian drabness around a steel plant, the place was conceived as a monument to the industrial prowess of Communist states, with iron ore coming from the Soviet Union and coke from neighboring Poland.
But two and a half years after German unification and the collapse of the East European trading bloc, the steel mill and the town that depends on it now stand instead as a monument to the destructive energy unleashed when Communist central planning meets the forces of a recession-hit market economy. 9,000 Have Lost Jobs
Already, 9,000 of the 12,000 workers who were employed by the Eko Stahl A.G. steel plant in 1989 have lost their jobs.
And production has plunged by more than 50 percent as the company struggles to compete in a depressed market glutted with steel.
The only thing now arriving from the former Communist states to the east is competition, in the form of cheap steel imports, which is compounding the plant's severe problems.


The Call to National Service
President Clinton struck a chord of idealism and commitment when he called for a new generation of Americans to renew and repair the country block by block in a national service program.
His proposal could also provide welcome help to public service groups that have labored in anonymity for years.
But spirited as it was, Mr.
Clinton's speech at Rutgers University this week was distressingly short on crucial details.
The plan requires careful fleshing out if it is to succeed.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 26
Feb. 19
Feb. 28
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.1
6.7
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.8
2.7
Gasoline stocks
239.3
240.4
229.6
Distillate stocks
114.0
118.3
108.4
Crude imports, daily
6.8
5.7
5.6
Product imports, daily
1.7
2.1
1.8
Crude stocks
333.1
329.0
339.8
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
84.4
86.9
79.2
Source: American Petroleum Institute


The Nonstick Kitchenware Trick
THE technology that has enabled food manufacturers to whirl and thicken their emulsions effectively and to replace unctuous fat with similarly viscous vegetable gums pales in comparison with developments on the cookware front.
Teflon and its cousins have gone from being simply slick-but-fragile coatings to becoming relatively durable chemically bonded surfaces with excellent cooking properties.
The pan itself now provides the slipperiness that once came from the fat that was added to it.


Traditionalist Scholars Plan To Rate Liberal Arts Colleges
Just when it seemed the last word about political correctness on American college campuses had finally been heard, a group of scholars with very traditional ideas about learning have fired a warning shot sure to revive the struggle over what undergraduate students are taught.
Led by academic stars like Jacques Barzun, the author and history professor at Columbia University, and Edward O. Wilson, the Harvard University science professor and Pulitzer-Prize- winning author, a dozen scholars gathered in New York yesterday to announce the forming of an accrediting association to set academic standards for teaching liberal arts in the traditional way.


Review/Film; A Humane Story of Lost Children
"Il Ladro di Bambini" is a small, flawless gem of a film, one whose ideas could not be more simply expressed or deeply felt.
As directed by Gianni Amelio, whose thoughtful, meticulous "Open Doors" was scant preparation for this film's more intimate style, it recalls the power of Italian neo-realism to address political matters with enormous compassion, and without losing track of people.
The people in this case are a shy, decent carabiniere and two children who have been placed in his care.
Moving subtly and carefully, the film takes such a personal, humane view of its three principals that viewers will only gradually consider the larger problems that affect these characters' lives.
Mr.
Amelio is able to tell a sad, touching, all too believable story in bracingly clear terms.
His tale of lost children is, among other things, amazingly free of mawkishness or sentimentality.


Police Kill Doctor, and Inquiry Begins
Freshly showered after a day's work at the Westchester County Medical Center, Dr.
Lenas Kakkouras left his Queens apartment last Friday night and drove toward Yonkers to pick up a co-worker for their first date.
He never arrived.
Dr.
Kakkouras apparently made a wrong turn into this city on the Yonkers border.
Moments later, in a bizarre sequence of events that is far from clear, Dr.
Kakkouras was shot twice, in the shoulder and chest, by a plainclothes Mount Vernon police detective who said Dr.
Kakkouras was trying to run him over after having struck his partner, the police said.


In a Minority District in Maryland, A Magnet School That Reall Draws
Before 1985, Montgomery Blair High School in Silver Spring, Md., had a decent but undistinguished science curriculum, offering its 1,800 students the standard advanced placement courses and producing a modest annual crop of regional science contest winners.
But since Blair began a mathematics, science and computer magnet program eight years ago, the public high school has drawn top-flight students from throughout Montgomery County while gaining national attention.
The school produced three of the 40 finalists in this year's Westinghouse Science Talent Search, the nation's most prestigious math and science competition for high school students, after having two finalists in each of the previous two years.


New York Must Save Historical Society Before It's Too Late; Audubon Treasures
To the Editor:
We are writing to correct misconceptions that may arise from Alice Ford's Feb. 13 letter on the John James Audubon drawings at the New-York Historical Society.
The 431 original watercolors painted by Audubon for "The Birds of America" have been a treasure of the society since 1863, when the society's president, Frederick De Peyster, raised the $4,000 through public subscription to buy them from Audubon's impoverished widow after other institutions had turned her down.


THE TWIN TOWERS: Disaster Relief; Recovery Aid Is Offered, But Not All May Qualify
With 350 businesses displaced by the World Trade Center explosion, local government agencies are preparing to distribute disaster relief in the form of small business loans, but major questions remain over who will qualify for another, Federal program.
New York City and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said yesterday they had dedicated a total of $5 million to help businesses cover the costs of finding temporary quarters through loans of up to $50,000.
Officials said that they intended to approve the applications within 24 hours and that those who applied yesterday would begin receiving checks today.
Program Restrictions
But a larger, Federal program, administered by the Small Business Administration, appeared to exclude financing for many companies operating in relocated offices after the explosion.
The program is intended to provide low-interest financing of up to $500,000 to help small companies pay their employees and cover their expenses during disasters when they cannot operate.


COMPANY BRIEFS
GENERAL ELECTRIC CO., Schenectady, N.Y., said its GE Power Generation unit had received two contracts from the Tennessee Valley Authority valued at $213.4 million.
IN-STORE ADVERTISING INC. a provider of electronic advertising signs for supermarkets, has received an offer for 70 percent of the company from an investor group led by R. L. Richards &amp; Co., Garden City, L.I.
The group said it would buy newly issued shares for $7 million in cash and offer to purchase $7 million principal amount of three-year 12% debentures at par.


FOOD NOTES
Caviar From Azerbaijan
Iron Gate, a company based in Manhattan and later the Bronx that sold caviar and other delicacies, both wholesale and retail, for the last 50 years, has closed.
Gerald Stein, who was the president, has now become the president of Caviar and Caviar Ltd., based in Rockville, Md.


ENCLAVE IN BOSNIA REPORTED TO FALL AFTER U.S. AIRDROP
The latest American airdrop of relief supplies appears to have come too late for the besieged Muslim community of Cerska in eastern Bosnia, which was reported today to have fallen to Serbian nationalist forces only hours after United States military aircraft dropped supplies to the town.
The report of Cerska's fall came from the radio station of the Bosnian Government, whose forces had defended Cerska since the outbreak of war in Bosnia and Herzegovina last April.
The report could not be independently verified, but senior Bosnian military officers had been saying for weeks that Cerska's defenders, mainly reservists with light weapons, were likely to be overwhelmed by the superior Serbian forces.


Russia Leaders Said to Have Exaggerated Inflation
High-ranking Russian officials deliberately exaggerated the risks of hyperinflation in January in an effort to convince a new Russian Prime Minister that financial stabilization must take priority in economic policy, Government officials and advisers say.
In the last two months, while President Boris N. Yeltsin has been struggling over the levers of power with the parliamentary speaker, Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, the Russian economy has been deteriorating -- but not as fast as some in the Government would have the world believe.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Feb. 24 about European reaction to President Clinton's criticism of subsidies to the Airbus aircraft consortium misstated the Boeing Company's involvement in the proposed development of a so-called super-jumbo aircraft capable of carrying up to 800 passengers.
Boeing has agreed to conduct a one-year study on the demand for such an aircraft with the four partners in Airbus Industrie: Aerospatiale of France, Deutsche Aerospace, British Aerospace and Construcciones Aeronauticas S.A. of Spain.


Port Authority Is Unaffected In Bond Sale
Reflecting continued investor confidence in the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey despite Friday's bombing at the World Trade Center, the authority yesterday sold $100 million in new bonds without having to pay higher interest than other large tax-exempt issuers.
The sale, which had been scheduled weeks ago, had been eagerly anticipated this week to gauge Wall Street's feelings about the financial outlook for the Port Authority, which relies heavily on its ability to sell bonds to finance its operations.


Hark! Mellifl'ous Viols Play
At a distance of 450 years and with so much musical evolution in between, it is hard to hope that the modest commemorations of William Byrd now going on will develop into much more than that.
Byrd's wonderful playfulness and his utter confidence in the juggling of complex burdens are qualities still close to the hearts of early-music groups like the New York Consort of Viols, and also of audiences like the one that gathered at St.
Ignatius Loyola Church, on Park Avenue at 84th Street, to hear some of his music last Thursday evening.
Concert life, musical training and listener expectations have changed so drastically that Byrd will remain a far-off figure for most.
He was a prolific parent of the English Tudor school, and Thursday's concert was an attempt to wrap a very few arms around a large body of music.
Louis Bagger played a number of harpsichord pieces.
"Walsingham" showed an elaborate variational style.
A number of fantasies demonstrated the imitative skills.
"The Barley Break" was Byrd in his dancing shoes, both witty and decorous.


A-Plant Security May Rise
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission said yesterday that it would re-evaluate the threat truck bombs pose to nuclear reactors in light of the World Trade Center bombing and an incident earlier this year in which a man crashed his station wagon through the fence at the Three Mile Island plant in Pennsylvania.
Nuclear plants are now designed to withstand assault by people with hand-held explosives and weapons with silencers attacking with the help of a confederate inside.
Although all plants have gates and guard shacks in front, the commission sets no rules on who is allowed into the plants.


A.M.A IS SOFTENING STAND ON CHANGES IN HEALTH SYSTEM
Fearful of being left out of the debate on reshaping the nation's health-care system, the American Medical Association has told the White House that it will drop its long-held and formidable opposition to some proposals favored by President Clinton.
In return, A.M.A. officials said, they are asking for a seat at the table as the policy group led by Hillary Rodham Clinton works out what promise to be sweeping changes in medicine.


Defense May See Evidence Found in Katie Beers Case
John Esposito, in his first court appearance since he was charged with kidnapping Katie Beers, spoke not a word as the prosecution agreed today to provide his lawyers with some of the evidence against him.
Wearing a full beard that he has grown since his arrest on Jan. 13, when Katie, 10, was found in a cramped bunker beneath his garage in Bay Shore, Mr.
Esposito stood with his head bowed before Judge Joel L. Lefkowitz in Suffolk County Criminal Court.


Maybe the Jungle Is More Civilized
TRADER VIC'S? "Apocalypse Now" revisited?
No.
The bamboo room, finished last week, is in a town house on the Upper East Side, the home of Peter Tunney, an investor in biotechnology.
When he asked Samuel Botero, a Manhattan interior designer, to design a home office, both men had the same idea: a jungle.


Forrest Hainline, 74; Was Auto Executive And Tennis Official
Forrest A. Hainline Jr., a former automobile industry executive and longtime national and international tennis official, died yesterday at a hospital in Stuart, Fla., where he lived.
He was 74.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


3 Potential Tenants Reconsidering Move To the Trade Center
Three companies that had planned to move into large offices in the World Trade Center before the explosion last Friday are now reconsidering the move.
The three companies had been negotiating for a total of 690,000 square feet, equivalent to 10 to 15 floors of office space.
The companies -- Rollins Hudig Hall, Bank of America and Fiduciary Trust -- have now postponed those deals, while a construction consultant that was separately hired by all three, Bennis &amp; Reissman, double-checks the Port Authority's own assessment of how long it will take to make the twin towers safe and functional.


Unit Is Oldest and Largest
Founded in 1903, New York City's bomb squad is the oldest and largest municipal bomb squad in the United States.
The group was first set up to counter a wave of extortionist bombings directed against Italian merchants on the Lower East Side.
Its leader then, Lieut.
Giuseppi Petrosino, and its five officers were all Italians.
The squad's success, according to a police history, spurred the recruitment of other ethnic minorities into the Police Department.


Turning the Desktop PC Into a Talk Radio Medium
Talk radio is coming to desktop computers.
Within a few weeks, a Virginia-based entrepreneur plans to begin broadcasting a weekly 30-minute radio talk show on Internet, the global computer network that links together more than 10 million scientists, academics, engineers and high-tech industry executives.


Child Care Takes Skill
To The Home Section:
Your article on the use of undocumented ("illegal") foreign workers in domestic situations, primarily child care (Feb. 4), suggests that workers who have
any
skill (hairdressing, for example) may have their cause advanced by declaring this skill in their immigration petition.
Suggestions for reform in your article focus on either allowing the use of illegal workers in the home or changing the law to speed up applications from "unskilled" workers.


Merchants Ask for Aid to Regain Trade
A meeting held to describe government programs for businesses displaced by the World Trade Center explosion instead turned into a forum in which merchants complained that portrayals of the area as a disaster site were driving customers away.
One official at the meeting, Wallace L. Ford 2d, the commissioner of New York City's Department of Business Services, said he and others in the Dinkins administration would begin today to try to encourage shoppers and diners to return to the area.


Northeast Leads Other Regions of U.S. in Home Foreclosures
The Northeast states continue to lead the nation in the number of people losing their homes for failing to meet mortgage payments, a trade group said today.
California and other Sun Belt states are catching up, said the group, the Mortgage Bankers Association of America, registering some of the sharpest increases in what economists call perhaps the most telling indicator of individual households in economic crisis.


Daly Enters Plea of Not Guilty
Golfer JOHN DALY has pleaded not guilty to an assault charge stemming from a Dec. 20 altercation with his wife, BETTYE DALY, and will stand trial May 25 in Douglas County (Colo.) District Court.
Daly, charged with misdemeanor third-degree assault, filed his plea on Tuesday when he waived his right to appear at a pretrial conference before Magistrate LOUIS GRESH, said STEVE LEE, the chief Deputy District Attorney for Douglas County. (AP)


Mazda Ends Idea of a Ford Pact for Europe
The Mazda Motor Corporation said today that it had given up the idea of establishing joint European automobile production with the Ford Motor Company because the two companies could not agree on a plan.
The decision, the latest setback among hard-pressed Japanese automobile makers, could make Mazda the only major Japanese manufacturer without a plant in Europe and could lead to restrictions on its sale of cars there, in light of increasingly stringent quotas on imported Japanese vehicles.


Police Commissioner to March in Irish Parade
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said last night that he would march in the St.
Patrick's Day Parade despite the decision by Mayor David N. Dinkins, his boss, not to participate.
Mr.
Kelly, the highest-ranking Irish-American in the Dinkins administration, was criticized by some Irish-Americans in January when he issued the permit for the March 17 parade to a group, supported by Mr.
Dinkins, that said it would let gay people march under their own banner.
But that group returned the permit.


Grambling State's Robinson Honored
The Grambling State football coach, EDDIE ROBINSON, has received the Bobby Dodd Award as the 1992 college coach of the year.
"This is just about the greatest thing that has ever happened to me," Robinson said Tuesday.
"I've always said that only in America could something of this magnitude happen."
Robinson, the first Division I-AA coach to receive the award, has coached for 50 years at Grambling and is college football's all-time victory lead with 381.
Grambling was 10-2 last season. (AP)


Corrections
An article and a picture caption in Business Day yesterday about a troubled steel plant in eastern Germany included an incorrect translation in some copies for a sign held by a dummy at the plant gate.
It said, "I want to work here."


High Techs
Motorola has benefitted, along with technology stocks in general, from proposals by the Clinton Administration to stimulate the country's technology sector.
Analysts say Motorola will also be helped by the proposed investment tax credit for business purchases of capital equipment.


N.H.L. Playoffs In Deal With ABC
The National Hockey League announced yesterday that ABC would televise five playoff games on successive Sunday afternoons, starting April 18.
It will mark the first time the league has had Stanley Cup exposure on a broadcast network since May 24, 1980, when the Islanders won their first cup by defeating the Philadelphia Flyers in a game televised by CBS.


Devils Start Slowly; Then It's a Runaway
With Bernie Nicholls out with a broken left foot, the Devils needed to raise their level a notch or two to make up for the absence of their premier center.
They did just that last Sunday in a 6-3 victory over Detroit in New Jersey, as Nicholls sat out his first game.
But they did not do it tonight against the Hartford Whalers at the Civic Center.


Unhealthy Specter for Ailing Nets
Shaquille O'Neal, the Orlando Magic center who has become bigger than life, is bringing his hype and size 20 shoe to New Jersey on Thursday.
Under normal circumstances, the Nets would give the Shaq his due but not lose any sleep over him.
But now?
With so many of the Nets in the sick bed?
"He may score 60 points on us," said Coach Chuck Daly.


Seton Hall Clinches Piece Of the Crown
Seton Hall, playing with a cool efficiency and shifting gears when it had to, clinched no worse than a tie for the Big East championship tonight and set up a showdown with St.
John's on Saturday with a 79-61 victory over Boston College.
In the subplot of tonight's game, Terry Dehere, who came into the game needing 28 points to pass Chris Mullin as the Big East's career scoring leader, fell 7 points short.
Dehere scored 21 points on 8-of-16 shooting, setting up a record-breaking moment Saturday when Seton Hall faces the Redmen.


7 Percent Pentagon Solution
A new Massachusetts Institute of Technology study shows that President Clinton can save hundreds of billions of dollars by reducing the Pentagon budget -- without sacrificing the strength of our military forces.
Helped by a colleague, Philip Morrison, we have found how to save $681 billion (in current dollars) through the year 2000 -- $32 billion in 1993 alone.
That is $21 billion more than the cuts suggested by Defense Secretary Les Aspin.
The $21 billion is the equivalent of 40 million families each paying $525 less in taxes next year.


Books of The Times; Of a Roth Within a Roth Within a Roth
Operation Shylock  A Confession  By Philip Roth  398 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


Explosion May Yield New Building Codes
Troubled by the failure of safety systems after the explosion at the World Trade Center, New York City officials said yesterday that they were considering new building codes to govern the placement of backup generators that power alarms, ventilation fans and emergency lights.
The officials said they were also examining whether some of the city's 1,000 or so high-rise buildings should be required to separate themselves from underground garages to prevent smoke and fire from penetrating into the buildings.
The World Trade Center is exempt from city codes, but officials said they could not ignore the lessons from the disaster.
Backup Generators Disabled
The explosion on Friday in the World Trade Center's underground garage destroyed the complex's emergency command center, disabled its backup generators in the basement and sent thick smoke up into the two 110-story towers.
With few instructions to guide them because loudspeakers had no power, tens of thousands of workers had to flee down dark stairways.


Job in Camapanelli's Future?
Lou Campanelli, the ousted University of California basketball coach, may soon have a job interview.
The athletic director at University of Nevada, Chris Ault, said today he is considering Campanelli for the head coaching vacancy there, although he admitted accusations that Campanelli verbally abused his players at California "puts a dim light on Lou's resume."
"Put it this way: I'm sure there'll be interest on our side," Ault said in a telephone interview from his Reno campus.
"Certainly, Lou's name has come up. We're interested. But I'm not saying enthusiastically. We have no leading candidates yet."


Essay; The Tax-And-Cut Movement
"The supply-siders said you could reduce the deficit by cutting taxes," says a veteran Republican observer, "and they were wrong. The Clinton people say you can reduce the deficit without cutting spending, and they are wrong."
Implicit in this both-house-plaguing is a blinding insight that would surely win the Nobel Prize in economics for any iconoclastic genius who dares to put it forward: The crowd-pleasing way to reduce the deficit is
to cut spending and raise taxes at the same time
.


METRO DIGEST
AT THE WORLD TRADE CENTER: INQUIRY, LOSS, PRECAUTIONS
Three major companies that had planned to move into the World Trade Center before the explosion last Friday are reconsidering the move.
The companies had been negotiating for the equivalent of 10 to 15 floors of office space.
A1.
TEAM OF BOMB SPECIALISTS HUNT FOR CLUES
Within hours of the explosion, Federal officials began assembling a team of the nation's most experienced bomb specialists, technicians who probed the wreckage after the terrorist attacks on the United States Marine Corps barracks in Beirut and Pan American Flight 103.
B4.


Rape-Incest Case in Ireland Provokes Furor
A nationwide wave of revulsion and anger has risen in Ireland over a case of incest in which a father raped and assaulted his daughter for 16 years, sired a child by her, and may serve only four years in prison for his acts.
The case came to light Monday, when the Central Criminal Court in Dublin sentenced the man to seven years after he pleaded guilty to charges of rape, incest and assault.
The judge said he would consider the case one of incest, for which the maximum sentence is seven years, with release possible after four.


Review/Music; 'Sacre du Printemps,' at 80, Thunders With Youth
"Le Sacre du Printemps" will be 80 years old this spring, yet its shock waves rattle the ear with undiminished force.
Stravinsky's ballet music, known now as a concert piece, is no less an amalgam of musical terrorism and natural cataclysm than it was at its first performances in Paris.
Indeed, listening to the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra under James Levine play it at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon was to be stunned all over again.
Music has not been the same since "Le Sacre." Its legitimization of violent expression and its violations of regular metric movement opened avenues for younger composers, but Stravinsky's piece created no school of followers: nothing, for instance, that approached Schoenberg's influence on a generation of Serialists or Chopin's on the piano writing that came after him.
"Le Sacre" stands by itself.
At first impact, it betrays no past and no future.
Stravinsky himself was in awe, saying that he was merely the vessel through which this music passed.


Pop and Jazz in Review
The Sundays  The Academy


Running Late?


Accounts
*
WINS-AM, New York, to Frierson Mee &amp; Herman Inc., New York, to handle creative advertising for the news radio station, previously handled in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.
The media buying portion of the account will continue to be handled by Media Buying Service, New York.


Pension Fund Sues S.E.C.
The New York City public employees' pension fund sued the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday seeking to invalidate a policy that allows companies to bar shareholders from voting on hiring discrimination and other employment-related proposals at annual meetings.
The suit by the New York City Employees' Retirement System arose over an S.E.C. ruling last fall that the Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Inc., a restaurant and gift-shop chain that operates mainly in the South, did not have to include an anti-discrimination resolution in its proxy material sent to shareholders.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
SUSPENDED, or dropped, ceilings -- consisting of lightweight fibrous panels supported by a grid of metal strips -- are an easy, economical and attractive way to cover old ceilings and hide overhead pipes, ducts, wiring and framing in unfinished areas.
Home centers and building-supply stores sell suspended-ceiling kits in a variety of panel designs, colors and textures.
Installing a suspended ceiling is not too difficult for two people working together, but planning a layout beforehand is crucial.


BOSNIAN MUSLIMS FLEEING VILLAGES UNDER SHELLFIRE
After overrunning much of a Muslim enclave in eastern Bosnia, Serbian forces rained artillery shells today on thousands of Muslims trapped in the snow-covered region, United Nations officials here said.
[ The reports led the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata, to send a message to the United Nations saying that, even based on the most conservative reports, the Bosnian Serbs were committing a "massacre." She said most of the Muslim victims were found with their throats cut. ] Attack Follows Airdrop
The shelling came a day after the United States Air Force tried for a second time in three nights to parachute aid into the enclave, around Cerska, about 20 miles from here.
The enclave was once home to both Serbs and Muslims.
Last spring the Serbs forced the Muslims from villages in the area, only to be pushed out themselves by a Muslim counteroffensive in December.


Los Angeles Beating Condemned by Police Expert
Laying groundwork for the prosecution's contention that four police officers intentionally beat Rodney G. King in violation of his civil rights, an expert on police procedures testified today that the beating was a "clear violation" of Los Angeles Police Department policy.
The expert, Sgt.
Mark J. Conta of the department, hammered away at the officers' conduct in the beating, which was captured on amateur videotape two years ago today.
He condemned what he described as a savage attack on a defenseless, beaten man.


It's Hamstring, Not Bo's Hip
Bo Jackson may be able to scale to the tops of baseball fences and overcome little inconveniences like 90 m.p.h. fastballs and hip-replacement surgery.
One thing he cannot do is overcome the elements.
Such was the case today.
Jackson, serving as designated hitter in a Chicago White Sox intrasquad game -- his first-game action of the spring -- was limited to two at-bats.
"It's soft out there," Jackson said.
"Everybody was complaining about the dirt. Everybody was slipping coming out of the box. That happened to me the first and second time. That dirt can't cause you to do nothing but pull a hamstring or a quad."


WOOLWORTH CORP. (N)
An ambitious program of modernizing its aging chain of stores continued to cost the Woolworth Corporation, owner of F.W.
Woolworth &amp; Company, which reported a rise in earnings yesterday that fell far below analysts' projections.
For the fourth quarter, the retail company reported profits of $165 million, or $1.26 a share, compared with a loss of $128 million in the fourth quarter of 1991, when it took a charge of $250 million to close or remodel 900 stores.


Tennis; Rosset Shows Agassi a 3-Set Early Exit
First came the wonder years, then the half-bald Mohawk years, then the image years, and now, according to 22-year-old Andre Agassi, he has finally entered his professional years.
Focus is everything.
Not content merely to punch in at the tournament hotel with the rest of the players, he flies to his daily missions like a comic book superhero, swooping in and out of the sky with the help of his new Lockheed jet and a pair of personal pilots.


Bridge
The title of most-traveled expert undoubtedly belongs to Zia Mahmood of Pakistan and Manhattan, with Martin Hoffman of England in the runner-up position.
Among female players, Sabine Zenkel of Chicago seems to have the strongest claim.
She represents her native country, Germany, regularly in international competition and was in Europe in January for other tournaments.
In The Hague, playing with her German partner, Daniela Von Arnim, she finished fourth in a top-class field, ahead of Zia and the famous partnership of Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell.
Later she played in the annual tournament in St.
Moritz, Switzerland.
Four days ago she was back in Chicago winning a Regional Swiss Team Championship, with help from the diagramed deal in the final, decisive match.


Time to Stare
To The Home Section:
As I shuddered my way through "Try Time Stuffing: GetaLotMoreDone"  [ Feb. 25 ] , my mind was blessedly accompanied by the first and last two lines of "Leisure," a poem by William Henry Davies:
What is this life if, full of care,  We have no time to stand and stare?
A poor life this if, full of care,  We have no time to stand and stare.
ISLAY BENSON  Wanaque, N.J.


Geronimo! Slopes Are Deceptive at Any Gradient
Standing at the top of very steep slopes, skiers may feel as if they are looking down sheer precipices that drop off to nothing.
But the way ski slopes look from above is deceptive, and the way ski resorts present slope gradients often leads to misunderstandings.
"People mix up degrees and percentages," said Tim Beck, president of Sno-engineering, a ski resort consulting firm in Littleton, N.H.
"An average stair with a 7-inch riser and an 11-inch tread is about 32.5 degrees or 63.5 percent; this would be an advanced ski slope. Low-intermediate skiers can ski short pitches up to 35 percent, and slopes with rolls and pitches of 35 to 55 percent are usually the most popular at ski resorts."


Cuomo Proposes Increasing the Salaries of Judges
With new money available and a new Chief Judge, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo sought to end a long budget feud with the court system today, saying that the state's 1,147 judges should be given their first pay increase in six years.
Under the plan, the judge's salaries would be raised incrementally from the start of the fiscal year beginning April 1 until October 1994, so that the state, which already spends $96 million a year on judge's salaries, would spend an additional $24 million more over a year and a half.


New York Trial Postponed For Clifford in B.C.C.I. Case
Clark M. Clifford, who is expected to undergo heart surgery this month, has won an indefinite postponement of his trial in New York in the Bank of Credit and Commerce International scandal.
Mr.
Clifford, who is 86 years old and suffers from a variety of ailments, was scheduled to stand trial on March 15 in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, along with his former law partner, Robert A. Altman.
But Acting Justice John A. K. Bradley on Tuesday separated the defendants' cases and granted Mr.
Clifford a postponement.


President Will Also Make a Pitch
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON, a Chicago Cubs fan, won't be the only Clinton throwing out a baseball on opening day.
President CLINTON will do the honors for the Baltimore Orioles.
While Hillary Clinton is tossing out the first ball in Chicago on April 5, the President will be doing likewise in Baltimore, aides said yesterday.
Hillary Clinton, a native of Park Ridge, Ill., is a lifelong Cubs fan.
Her husband, who throws left-handed, is also a Cubs fan. (AP)


No Instant Green Cards
To The Home Section:
Americans are often criticized for their shortsightedness.
After reading John H. Cushman Jr.'s article  [ "Illegal Workers: a Long Road to Legality," Feb. 4 ] , I have to agree that we deserve this criticism.


U.N. Chief Sees Somalia Force Shifting in May
The Secretary General of the United Nations, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, proposed today that a new United Nations-led force of 28,000 troops replace the American-led coalition now in Somalia on May 1.
Mr.
Boutros-Ghali's report, which now goes to the Security Council for consideration, recommends a larger international force than American officials had expected, though the number of United States troops in that force will be the same as original plans, Administration officials said today.


S.E.C. Adds Post to Lawsuit Against Hoffenberg
The Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday added The New York Post as a defendant in its civil fraud suit against Steven Hoffenberg, for the first time tying the newspaper to Mr.
Hoffenberg's legal and financial troubles.
By bringing The Post into the suit, the commission is trying to retrieve the millions of dollars Mr.
Hoffenberg has already paid to keep the paper alive.
If the strategy succeeds, it could further imperil The Post.


CHRONICLE
DOROTHY HAMILL, the figure-skating champion, has agreed to buy the Ice Capades, the skating company with which she has performed for nearly a decade, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
The touring company, which is owned by the International Broadcasting Corporation, of Minneapolis, filed for bankruptcy in September 1991.
It is scheduled to emerge from bankruptcy in June, according to a statement issued by Ms.
Hamill in Los Angeles.


Highway Chase Ends in Shootout


Jaruzelski Is Now Sorry He Ordered Martial Law
Gen.
Wojciech Jaruzelski, now 69 and retired, sat stiffly in his chair with a slightly pained expression, as if he were nursing an old wound.
But he did not hesitate a second before answering the question: if he had it to do all over again, would he impose martial law on Poland?
"I'd rather shoot myself in the head," he declared solemnly.


Bronx Board Is Removed in Rape Case
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday temporarily removed a Bronx board that has refused to punish a principal accused of obstructing an investigation of a rape case in her school.
Mr.
Fernandez sent in a slate of trustees to take disciplinary action in the principal's case.
But the nine members of the District 12 board, which includes parts of the East Tremont and Morrisania sections, will retain their other powers.


'Flintstones' and Programs Like It Aren't Educational, F.C.C. Says
Federal regulators are putting television stations on notice: contrary to the past practice of many broadcasters, cartoons like "The Jetsons" and "The Flintstones" can no longer count as "educational and informational" programming.
The announcement, issued on Tuesday by the Federal Communications Commission, may not come as news to parents, whose households are inundated with cartoon turtles, rabbits and robots.


Rev. Peter Rinaldi, 82, Shroud of Turin Expert
The Rev.
Peter M. Rinaldi, who fostered interest in the Shroud of Turin and encouraged scientific investigation of its authenticity, died Sunday at a hospital in Turin, Italy.
He was 82 and lived in Turin and Port Chester, N.Y.
He died of heart failure, church associates said.


Health Bill May Have to Wait
The House Ways and Means chairman said Congress would probably be unable to enact bills to overhaul health care this year.
Page A22.


Out of Sight, Out of Mind; Suburbs' Hidden Homeless
The owner of AP Auto Sales has reduced the number of Long Island's unsheltered homeless by one.
Tony Puglisi gives Eugene Nagy a place to sleep on an old sofa in a blue van parked in the used-car lot and the chance to wash up and cook in an office there.
In return, Mr.
Nagy volunteers to do the occasional chore around the lot, washing cars or cleaning the yard.
But Mr.
Puglisi says Mr.
Nagy's presence on his property has cost him his village business license and put him at odds with town officials.
"I'm here 25 years and now the town officials came and said we couldn't get a license because I've got him in a little van," he said.
"I have to hide him."  The Official Position
Amityville officials say the issue is building codes and zoning, not social policy.
"We've got to have some control," said the Village Administrator, Bruce MacGill.
"If somebody brought a homeless person into their home that would be O.K., but this is a main thoroughfare in a business district."


Review/Film; 8-Hour Nomadic Trip in Mongolia
In the opening moments of "Taiga," a mesmerizing eight-hour journey into the nomadic tribal culture of northern Mongolia, the camera makes a slow 360-degree panning shot across the magnificent desolation of the Darkhad Valley, a remote steppe ringed by snowcapped mountains.
The only sounds to be heard are wind, running water, bird calls and the moans of grazing herds of yak, sheep and goats.
After majestically surveying the landscape, the film zeroes in on the region's human inhabitants, a tribe of nomadic herders who live in large tents known as yurts.
Slowly and methodically, the film insinuates itself into their culture.
An early scene shows a midnight seance in which a wizened old woman, a shaman, dons a sacred robe weighted with pieces of iron to commune with protective spirits who tell her when the tribe should leave its summer encampment.


Blast Victim Is Buried in Rockland County


These Lights Just String You Along
Sue Scott, the owner of Primal Lite in Emeryville, Calif., designs night lights and lights on strings that look like cartoon images: plump, curvy automobiles, cowboys on bucking broncos, and cups of coffee with toast.
"Who wants to do anything serious and traditional?" she said.
"It's about adding a little lightness and a little twist to life."


Calendar: Blooms, Photos And Tours
Focus on Vegetables
Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, off Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.


Market Place; In a long shot, an indictment actually benefits a gaming stock.
THINGS have been a bit grim in recent months at the Gtech Holdings Corporation, a maker of computerized lottery systems.
In December, Federal prosecutors were reported to be investigating a contract to the company from Maryland.
Last month, Gtech stock sank when New Jersey officials postponed approval of keno, one of the company's most profitable lottery systems.
Days later, the stock slid another 12 percent when California decided to review its bidding process before renewing a Gtech contract.


Peter Rogers To Close Agency
Peter Rogers, president and creative director at Peter Rogers Associates in New York, said yesterday that after 20 years he would close his agency, which specializes in fashion and cosmetic accounts.


Macchiarola To Lead Panel On Chancellor
The New York City Board of Education reached a consensus in a private session yesterday that a former city schools chancellor, Frank J. Macchiarola, would lead the search for a successor to Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, board members said.
In choosing Mr.
Macchiarola, the board rejected the selection process that led to Mr.
Fernandez's appointment, saying that it had been controlled too much by a Manhattan elite and had not been responsive enough to the concerns of parents of the city's schoolchildren.


If You're Shopping for a Crib, Take Along a Few Lullabies
ON the surface, buying a crib for a newborn baby is a sublime experience.
But parents, particularly first-time parents, say that trying to reconcile their emotional, financial and practical investments is an experience that sets their nerves on edge.
The sheer array of cribs can be dizzying: wood cribs, wicker cribs, plastic cribs and cribs made of iron and brass.
Sleigh cribs.
Cribs between two giant plastic clam shells.
Some cribs turn into junior beds, others into daybeds.
Prices can range from $200 to $3,000.


An epistemological approach to that elusive marketing phenomenon known as dry beer.
PLEASE evaluate the following questions for relevancy and interest:
Why is the dry beer category floundering?


We Shouldn't Exclude Immigrants With H.I.V.; Reasonable Risks
To the Editor:
"Immigrants Infected With AIDS" (editorial, Feb. 20) not only supports the Senate in upholding the ban on immigrants who test positive for H.I.V., but it also suggests that "immigrants with any costly condition ought to be excluded." This is a misguided and inhumane position, contrary to the intent of this country's immigration law.


Guild Charged by N.L.R.B.
The New York Newspaper Guild has been accused of falsely telling several members that they could not resign from the union during a strike against The Daily News in 1990.
The guild, representing news, advertising and circulation employees, fined several members for crossing guild picket lines and reporting for work after guild officials told them they could not resign from the union.
A complaint by the National Labor Relations Board's regional office accused the guild of unfair labor practices and of coercing several members from exercising their right to resign.
The board wants the fines returned to four former members.
Barry F. Lipton, president of Local 3 of the guild, said the charges "are unfounded."


Review/Jazz; Marcus Roberts's Piano: Dissection and Renewal
Everything the pianist Marcus Roberts plays is icy and transparent, as if the air between his notes is somehow clearer than usual.
Sometimes Mr.
Roberts will reharmonize a melody, using spare triads at first and fat and lush chords the next.
Or he'll arpeggiate through a piece, following the harmonies; standard practice, but with his ability to convey clarity, the most obvious movements become profound, their significance underscored.
He lets his hands mark out contrasting rhythms that threaten to tear a piece apart, and he freely varies a tune's tempo.
Mr.
Roberts has dedicated himself to learning not only the jazz tradition but also the lilting music of the 19th century, and he brings an astonishing richness to his playing.
Above all, he is gaining a rare intellectual rigor; everything he plays seems to have been examined for the meaning it imparts.
Roberts has pared the harmonies, adding momentary dissonances like flashes or letting hammered notes resonate quietly.
He's an eccentric, without any of the primitivism that eccentricity so often implies.


Review/Ballet; Bavarian Troupe Tilting At Spanish Windmills
The dancers looked beautifully trained and scrupulously rehearsed when the Bavarian National Ballet of the Munich State Opera offered "Don Quixote" on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater.
Konstanze Vernon, the troupe's director, certainly knows how to develop a harmonious ensemble.
Allegro steps were clear as well as fast.
Poses were firmly held without any wobbles.
Christina McDermott and Oliver Matz, who were cast in the leading roles of Kitri and Basilio, bounded effortlessly throughout the two-act production.
Their pas de deux in the final scene was especially notable for Mr.
Matz's spectacular leaps and Miss McDermott's series of sharp whipping turns.


If New Yorkers Could Only Pay Their Taxes by Credit Card
To the Editor:
The New York State Legislature should allow municipalities to add a surcharge on payments by credit card.
Localities as a result would be more inclined to give residents the option of paying taxes and other bills by the credit card method.
New York State banking regulations do not permit the addition of a nominal surcharge on the ground that such a charge would constitute discrimination against credit card users, compared with payers of cash.
Because of this regulation, town governments (such as Greenburgh) do not accept payments of taxes by credit cards because we do not want to lose money.


High Court Limits Conduct Of Advisers to RICO Claims
The Supreme Court ruled today that accountants, lawyers and other outside advisers to corrupt companies cannot be sued under the Federal racketeering law unless they actually participated in the operation or management of the organization.
The 7-to-2 ruling in a case closely watched by accountants is likely to shield outside professionals facing charges of securities violations or other financial misconduct from additional liability for triple damages under the statute, the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law, widely known as RICO.


Sports of The Times; The Meaning Of 'the Boss Is Back'
EVER so quietly, George Steinbrenner returned to baseball the other day.
Maybe you hadn't noticed.
Some may have mistaken it for a big brass band.
And the carnival.
And fireworks on the Fourth of July.
And the terror and shock of alarms that the Martians had landed.


In Philadelphia, A Scottish Spring
IT'S probably a good thing that most people can't see into the future.
Take the Great Garden at Pitmedden, for instance.
What if Sir Alexander Seton, when he built his lavish formal garden on the blustery east coast of Scotland in 1676, could have seen it burning to the ground in 1818?
Or if he could have seen the National Trust for Scotland rebuilding it in the 1950's?
And what if Jane Guest, at 22, could have seen
her
future when she left Edinburgh for Boston on a lark in 1967 (her cousin offered her a free plane ticket in exchange for baby-sitting)?
Falling in love with G. Willing Pepper, a direct descendant of Benjamin Franklin.
Thirty-seven years her senior, he was then a vice president of the Scott Paper Company, a man who would not only encourage his wife's education and career but also be inclined to do little romantic things, like building her a greenhouse when Mrs.
Wharton Sinkler gave her an orchid.


Quit Sniping at Clinton's Fresh, Honest Plan
To the Editor:
Jack Kemp is not wrong to point out in "Taxes vs. Growth" (Op-Ed, Feb. 19) that government absorbs too large a percentage of gross national product.
But he was a full and willing participant in the Republican-led tax cuts and military buildup that led to our mind-numbing deficit figures, and his protests -- people aren't taxed too little, government spends too much -- sound hypocritical.


Conservative Foe Challenges Giuliani
A municipal bond expert who has never before run for office is aggressively seeking the Conservative Party nomination for Mayor, and party leaders say he has a good chance of denying Rudolph W. Giuliani, the likely Republican nominee, the Conservative line on the ballot this fall.
A strong Conservative Party candidate could siphon off some of Mr.
Giuliani's support in the general election in November, helping the Democratic nominee in a tight race, political strategists said.


Despite Hurricane Andrew, Prudential Reports '92 Gain
The Prudential, parent of the largest insurance company in North America and one of the country's largest financial institutions, reported yesterday that its capital rose by $79 million in 1992, to $9.822 billion from $9.743 billion in 1991, despite a $900 million net loss in insurance operations largely because of Hurricane Andrew.
Robert C. Winters, chairman and chief executive, said at the company's annual news conference in New York that the company had "vigorous performances" at its Prudential Securities, home mortgage, group insurance and asset management businesses, as well as gains in bond investments.
Results Short of Goal
Still, the overall results fell short of the company's goal of $10 billion in capital because of the costs of claims from the hurricane and other natural disasters in 1992, Mr.
Winters said.
The company would not reduce its dividends to policyholders, he added.
Prudential, which is based in Newark, paid more than $2.1 billion in dividends in 1992 and expects to pay out about the same amount this year.


New Barbarians
Put yourself in the mind's eye of the bomber.
Whoever he is, it's likely he first viewed the city from the air, looked out and saw the twin towers mirroring each other's dizzying rise.
Or maybe he stood at the window of a safe house in Queens or New Jersey and looked at them thrusting so immodestly over a thousand feet in the air; no doubt he thought they mocked his passionate intensity.
The World Trade Center towers don't have much poetry in them.
It might be harder, psychologically, to bomb one of the old cathedrals of commerce like the Empire State or the Chrysler Building.
These seem to to aspire beyond mammon.
Belonging to a bygone era, they no longer challenge the world.
The Michelin Guide to New York describes them in virtually archeological terms.


Albert Sabin Dies


San Salvador Journal; As Workplace Buddies, Wartime Foes Forge Peace
When Hector Antonio Barrientos Lopez bums a cigarette from one of his fellow apprentices, the two often marvel that the simple, amicable exchange can occur between two men who fought on opposite sides in the civil war that ended a year ago.
"One of us will always say, 'Who's going to believe this?' " Mr.
Barrientos, a former guerrilla, said as he paused in his task of hand-painting letters and designs on wall plaques in a workshop in the heart of San Salvador.


Smith Helps Riley Get Off Hook
The entire season has been an experiment for Charles Smith, an experiment that has not been resolved.
Primarily a power forward during his four seasons with the Los Angeles Clippers, Smith has endured an erratic season as the Knicks' starting small forward.
During the first week of training camp, Coach Pat Riley looked at Smith's size (6 feet 10 inches), strength, agility, shooting touch, and ability to play all three frontcourt positions, and declared that Smith had Karl Malone-like potential.


Where Fire Raged, Architecture Blooms
RECENTLY, Thaddeus Kusmierski was designing an up-from-the-ashes house for a survivor of the great Oakland and Berkeley fire.
Mr.
Kusmierski sang the praises of built-in bookshelves as a way to impart coziness and a sense of much-needed stability.
His client agreed, then suddenly remembered.
"But I have no books anymore," she said sadly.
There was an awkward moment between architect and client.


For Kite, Success Is Finally Knocking
For the first 20 years of his career, Tom Kite meticulously carved a niche for himself about three-quarters up golf's totem pole.
His dossier read: minor talent but labor intensive; low charisma but high profit; a consistent grinder who went entire seasons without missing a cut and through sheer doggedness won most of the tournaments on the PGA Tour's B list.


An Uneasy Broadway Battles a Case of the Spring Yawns
As the season's most awaited -- and most talked about -- musical, Neil Simon's "Goodbye Girl," opens tonight at the Marquis Theater, the rest of Broadway is struggling to shake off a severe case of the winter box-office doldrums.
Nine months after celebrating the most exciting season in recent memory, Broadway now finds itself with a hangover, with a generally underwhelming lineup of new productions, only a few of which have spurred more than modest advance ticket sales.
"The Goodbye Girl," which has an advance sale of $10 million, and "The Sisters Rosensweig," which has a $3.3 million advance, stand in contrast to almost everything else coming this spring.
Of last season's 37 shows, meanwhile, only 6 are still around, and several of those are showing signs of weakness.
Audiences at "Crazy for You" and "Jelly's Last Jam" have fallen off during the new year.
And there have even been occasional same-day tickets available for "Guys and Dolls," 1992's blockbuster, and discount coupons available for such hits as "Les Miserables" and "Miss Saigon." In the last week in February, only two shows were complete sellouts: "The Phantom of the Opera" and "Anna Christie" in the 499-seat Criterion Center, a limited-engagement play that has now closed.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Strangler Fig
Q.
On a recent trip to Florida, I heard about a "strangler fig." I can't imagine such a violent name for a plant.
Kindly explain. -- Cornelius Pitts, Albany


Creative Shuffle At Lowe &amp; Partners
After nearly five months as vice chairman and chief creative officer at Lowe &amp; Partners in New York, Lee Garfinkel is reorganizing the creative department and hiring five more senior staff members.
All five previously worked with Mr.
Garfinkel at either BBDO New York or the defunct firm Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver in New York.
Robert Nelson, 42, former senior vice president and director of broadcast production at TBWA Advertising in New York, joins Lowe as senior vice president of broadcast production, succeeding Cynthia Woodward, who left.
Amy Borkowsky, 32, former senior vice president and associate creative director at Calet, Hirsch &amp; Ferrell in New York and Peter Cohen, 37, former senior vice president and creative director at Lintas New York, were named to the new positions of senior vice presidents and group creative heads.


Choice of Commissioner Moves to Back Burner
Six months to the day after they asked Fay Vincent to resign as commissioner, major league club owners gathered today amid a growing movement among them to delay the selection of a new commissioner until they have negotiated new labor and television contracts.
The owners did appear to be making progress on at least one front.
At a joint session of all 28 owners Thursday, they were scheduled to discuss a proposal by Richard Ravitch, their chief labor executive, to share all of their financial information with one another.


Dr. Judah Zizmor, 83, a Pioneer In Head and Neck Radiology, Dies
Dr.
Judah Zizmor, a physician who helped lay the foundations for high-technology radiology of the head and neck, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 83.
His death came after a lengthy illness, said Dr.
Arnold M. Noyek, a former associate who is professor of otolaryngology and radiology at the University of Toronto.


Fordham Senior Takes Matters Into Own Hands
For Jay Fazande, Fordham's senior point guard, one more loss means handing the team manager his uniform for the last time and giving up the warm-up suit and free sneakers.
No more college basketball in the Bronx or anywhere else.
Those thoughts and some prodding from Coach Nick Macarchuk made Fazande realize last night that the Rams needed a boost after a lethargic first half in which they barely led Lafayette, 32-31, in the opening round of the Patriot League tournament.


Home Video
A Shift to Buying
Video dealers say people are buying more movie tapes these days, not just renting them.
And figures available would seem to support the contention.
So far this year sales of all kinds of tapes are 15 to 20 percent higher than a year ago, industry figures show.
Of 19.6 million cassettes sold through Feb. 21, about 11 million are movies, a survey in Variety reported.


The Forverts Lives
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 17 Book Notes item on Philip Roth and The Forward refers to the Yiddish-language Forverts in the past tense: "the Yiddish newspaper that was published in New York for almost 100 years."


An Officer's Guilt Casts Shadow on Trials
The first evidence-tampering scandal in state police history has cast a shadow over criminal trials in central New York State, making prosecutors' jobs more difficult, lawyers and law-enforcement officials say.
The scandal broke last fall, when a state police investigator with Troop C, David L. Harding, admitted fabricating fingerprint evidence in four cases, including the murder of a family of four.
Another officer, Robert M. Lishansky, has also been charged with tampering with evidence.


We Shouldn't Exclude Immigrants With H.I.V.; A Necessary Distinction
To the Editor:
The debate, and your editorial of Feb. 20, about admitting people to the United States who have AIDS or who are H.I.V. positive fails to distinguish between immigrants and visitors.


Florida Approves Measure on Right to Breast-Feed in Public
In an action that is being hailed by women's and health groups as an important symbolic victory, the Florida Legislature has enacted what is apparently the first state measure guaranteeing women the right to breast-feed their children in public.
By a unanimous vote, the Florida Senate on Tuesday passed a bill that amends the state's statutes on indecent exposure, lewd and lascivious behavior and obscenity to exempt and protect nursing mothers from arrest or harassment by law-enforcement or private security officials.


New Negative For Johnson: Drug Test Is Positive
Ben Johnson, the sprinter who cannot seem to outrun scandal, is in another drug-related bind.
As Johnson faced a hearing tomorrow for a positive drug test, Canadian officials worked behind the scenes to persuade their wayward runner to retire before the world comes to Toronto next week for the indoor track and field championships.
The International Amateur Athletic Federation announced yesterday that it would convene a special session of its doping commission on Friday in Paris, to consider test results of Johnson.
The Toronto Star reported yesterday that Johnson's tests showed a high level of testosterone.
Johnson was tested three times over a six-day period in January, after track meets in Hamilton, Ontario; Montreal and Toronto.


Economic Scene; A B.T.U. tax would do the job, but there are still some problems.
IT is no secret why President Clinton opted for a B.T.U. tax over alternative energy levies: The idea is to raise maximum revenue gain with minimum political pain.
But his proposal to tax the heat content of fuels is generating a lot of grousing among environmentalists and economists.
While none of their complaints sound like deal-breakers, they will certainly figure in the push and shove of the Congressional lawmaking.


ON THE SET WITH -- Arnold Schwarzenegger; Big Guy. Big Star. Big Deal, Baby.
It was just a few days before Arnold Schwarzenegger flew to New York to start filming in the real Times Square.
On a chilly morning here, he flung open a door overlooking a glittering replica of the New York scene.
Mock rain tumbled out of cylinders overhead.
The actor stood, cool, facing a Bad Guy gripping a scythe.
John McTiernan, the director of the movie being filmed, "Last Action Hero," yelled, "Cut!" The rain stopped.
Mr.
Schwarzenegger, arguably the town's biggest star in more ways than one, shruged and walked from the cameras.


The Lobbyists' Gravy Train
House Republicans have been having a hard time staking out an opposition stance on the budget this year.
But they have taken a firm stand against following the Democrats' decision to bar lobbyists from annual legislative retreats.
The G.O.P. stood foursquare for the rights of lobbyists to join them at their annual conference last weekend in Princeton, N.J.
One can almost see the happy travelers filing into Union Station while the conductor shouted, "All aboard the gravy train."


Money Fund Yields Mixed As Assets Shrink for Week
Yields offered by money market funds were mixed in the latest week, and assets fell as investors chose to make larger commitments to the stock and bond markets.
The average yield on tax-exempt funds fell. Taxable funds were up very slightly.


KMART CORP. (N)
The Kmart Corporation reported on Tuesday that fourth-quarter operating earnings at domestic stores were up 12.7 percent on a sales gain of 2.3 percent for record four-quarter and full-year sales, net income and earnings per share.
Kmart, the nation's second-largest retailer after Wal-Mart, attributed the companywide 11.7 percent rise in fourth-quarter net earnings to its attempt to sell more attractive merchandise and improve its domestic stores -- a program that reached half its stores by the end of the fiscal year.


A Little Primer of Lords and Commons
To the Editor:
It is, to say the least, misleading for Fay Vincent to state in "Debt, Taxes and a Politician's Downfall" (Op-Ed, Feb. 22): "In 1909, Lord Asquith was the Liberal Prime Minister" of Britain.
If that had been so, he would have had to run the Government from the House of Lords, something no British prime minister has been allowed to do since Lord Salisbury in 1895. (Thirty years ago, Lord Home renounced his title to become Prime Minister.)


Clinton, Who Opposed 'Soft Money,' Got Plenty
As Presidential candidate, Bill Clinton, who pledged to tame "big money interests" by putting an end to unlimited, unregulated campaign donations, was biting a hand that generously fed him, a new analysis of campaign spending concludes.
The analysis, by the lobbying group Common Cause, says the Democratic National Committee amassed $20.1 million in unregulated "soft" money donations in the last four months of 1992.


Bond Rates Fall Again To Lows
Long-term interest rates dropped once more to record lows yesterday, leading some analysts to say that the credit market is not being driven by daily developments but by a shift to a long-term view that sees only modest economic growth and low inflation.
The 30-year Treasury bond continued its two-week rally, which has seen long-term yields fall a third of a percentage point and crash through the 7 percent barrier.
Yesterday, the yield dropped to 6.78 percent, from 6.83 percent on Tuesday, as prices surged.
Yields on other Treasury issues also declined again.


A Wordsmith With a Touch of Barnum
He's perhaps the best athlete in the Mets' clubhouse, stronger than Bobby Bonilla, faster than Howard Johnson, more graceful than Vince Coleman.
And he is flat-out the best pure talker in the organization, perhaps in the major leagues.
Say hello to Ryan Thompson, center fielder and verbal leaper.


Review/Pop; A Man Belonging To His Fans
Barry Manilow belongs to his loving audience.
He admitted during his Tuesday evening opening of a five-day Radio City Music Hall run that critics detest him and that his music business advisers thought he wouldn't last.
"They didn't count on you," Mr.
Manilow cooed, pointing a theatrical finger at the worshipful capacity crowd.
That gesture, both intimate and completely nonspecific, encapsulated Mr.
Manilow's carefully designed appeal.
He's all there for his fans, offering them the show-biz spectacle they've come to expect.
Yet Mr.
Manilow is gregarious without being expressive, building romantic visions based on craft and a love for music, not on the usual confessions of the singer and songwriter.
He is a very careful performer; even the personal asides that peppered his performance, about his lonely Brooklyn childhood and his teen-age dreams of being one of the Supremes, were meticulously rehearsed.
His singing and the band's playing always remained within the confines of careful orchestrations.


Pop and Jazz in Review
'A Grand Night for Singing!'
Rodgers and Hammerstein songs  Rainbow and Stars  30 Rockefeller Plaza


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Long-term interest rates dropped to record lows again as traders appeared to accept the probability of modest economic growth with low inflation.
The 30-year Treasury bond continued its two-week rally, dropping in yield to 6.78 percent.  [ Page D1. ]
Stocks rose as equities became more attractive to investors than bonds, which have fallen to record-low yields.
The Dow gained 3.51 points, to 3,404.04, and other indexes gained.  [ D8. ]


Airbus's Latest Flies Into the Storm
With President Clinton's attack on Europe for subsidizing its aircraft builders still echoing here, the European Airbus consortium today introduced the A321, which it touted as a new airplane made without government support.
But much turned on definitions, as has always been the case in the long-simmering dispute between the United States and Europe about whether unfair European government subsidies are costing jobs and profits in American aerospace.
The 186-seat A321 is not, by most measures, a new aircraft at all.
It can also be argued that the plane is subsidized nearly as much as Airbus's five other models.


Jobless Dick Williams Talks to Steinbrenner
Is Dick Williams, a name from George Steinbrenner's past, in the Yankees' future?
Williams, who managed six major league teams but not the Yankees in a 21-year career, was waiting in the lobby of the Ritz-Carlton Hotel when Steinbrenner arrived for the owners' meeting today.
As soon as Williams spotted Steinbrenner, he went outside to greet him, then walked with him to the registration desk in the lobby, waited while Steinbrenner registered, then went up to his room with him.


Review/Dance; Feld Opens Season With Show of Stamina
Whatever they're eating for breakfast, the dancers in Feld Ballets/NY are something fierce nowadays.
Overflowing with stamina and energy, they took to Eliot Feld's ballets on Tuesday night with grand flair and flourish.
A few of these works, including "Hadji," the new solo on this opening program at the Joyce Theater, can end up as nothing short of endurance tests, for both performer and audience.
Such pieces, including "Contra Pose" and "The Jig Is Up" on this bill, show Mr.
Feld in his repetitive mode, inventive but never terse.
The other Eliot Feld is more romantic, and certainly more dramatic, as proved again in "Evoe," one of last year's notable successes.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Ross Perot's appearance before a Congressional committee misstated a measure of Government deficit spending in some editions.
What totals $4 trillion is the accumulated Federal debt; the Federal budget deficit is the difference between receipts and outlays in one year.


Corrections
A news analysis article on Monday about a judge's ruling on the St.
Patrick's Day Parade permit for the Ancient Order of Hibernians referred incorrectly to the position of Rudolph W. Giuliani, who is seeking the Republican nomination for mayor.
He was not silent; he had said previously that the Hibernians should get the permit, despite their refusal to let gay groups march, because a turndown would violate the Hibernians' First Amendment rights.


Korean Populist Withdraws Charges
The extraordinary yearlong political odyssey of Chung Ju Yung, an industrialist whose run for the South Korean presidency shook the ruling party but ended in failure and charges of election-law violations, concluded with a strange whimper here today.
In an interview, the imperious billionaire not only promised to quit politics for good, but denied that he had really believed the bitter accusations of corruption that he had leveled against the ruling party and its candidate, Kim Young Sam.
He added that, contrary to months of declarations that he wanted to save South Korea from its dishonest politicians, he had actually sought the presidency as a way of fighting a huge tax bill handed to his conglomerate, the Hyundai group.


U.S. Upset With Japan On Chip Pact
Clinton Administration officials say they are dissatisfied with Japanese compliance with a 1991 trade agreement on computer chips, but the Administration -- and the domestic semiconductor industry -- is leaning against imposing any immediate sanctions.
Because of their importance to the automobile, consumer electronics and computer industries, computer chips have long ranked among the most contentious trans-Pacific trade issues.


New York Can Take a Bow
The World Trade Center disaster was one of those events that humanized New York for the rest of the country.
Poor, beleaguered New Yorkers, residents of the city everybody loves to hate, have done themselves proud in the aftermath of last week's bombing.
As so many have noted, the greatest tribute goes to the thousands of men and women who work in the twin towers.
Robbed of light, fresh air and immediate help, they drew on their survival instinct and got down smoky stairways to safety.


Leading Bomb Specialists Sift Explosion Aftermath
Within hours of the explosion that ripped through the World Trade Center last week, Federal officials began assembling a team of the nation's most experienced bomb specialists.
They are highly skilled technicians who have probed the wreckage after the terrorist attacks on the United States Marine Corps barracks in Beirut and Pan American Flight 103, assaults on abortion clinics and an endless string of tit-for-tat bombings by rival gangs.
The experts' job: to find out as swiftly as possible what kind of bomb was used in the trade center's underground garage, how the bomb was detonated and anything that might help track down who planted it.


Saved From Extinction, Agency Faces New Peril
It was considered a miraculous political revival in Washington a decade ago when an obscure Federal law-enforcement agency with an ungainly name and few political friends not only survived, but actually grew, after President Reagan and the National Rifle Association tried to eliminate it.
The agency is the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, and its director for the last 10 years, Stephen E. Higgins, is credited with helping it gain respect in Congress, partly because it continued to demonstrate its expertise on bombings and arson in several widely noted cases.
Because of that reputation the agency was one of the first called last week to help investigate the explosion at the World Trade Center.


CHRONICLE
It's not a hotel, not a ballroom, not the usual venue for a black-tie tribute, but what could be a better place for the New York City Police Foundation to hold its 16th annual winter benefit gala than the Police Department headquarters at One Police Plaza?
LOUIS V. GERSTNER JR., chairman and chief executive of RJR Nabisco Inc. and a former president of American Express, will be honored tonight by the 22-year-old foundation, whose mission is to help the department run programs that cannot be financed with city money and to strengthen relationships between the police and the community.


Tough Job Done, NBC Is Looking Ahead
In the aftermath of the most turbulent period in the history of NBC News, attention among staff members turned yesterday to the question of who will succeed Michael G. Gartner, who announced his resignation as president on Monday under pressure.
One widely held view was that Mr.
Gartner will be an easy act to follow -- partly because his personal style alienated his staff, but also in part because he was obligated to carry out an unpopular mission of severe cost-cutting demanded by his corporate bosses, and that mission is now largely accomplished.


U.N. Report Sees 'Massacre' by Serbs
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees reported today that if only 10 percent of the information she had was accurate, Serbian forces were carrying out a "massacre" of Muslims in eastern Bosnia.
The report led the United States to convene an emergency meeting of the Security Council this afternoon.
The Council demanded an immediate end to "killings and atrocities," which it blamed squarely on "Serbian paramilitary forces." It also told the leaders of the three Bosnian factions, who are conducting peace talks in New York, to stay here until they reach a settlement.
But it was not immediately clear whether they would do so.


Lemieux Turns His Attention to Penguins
MARIO LEMIEUX, finally able to focus on hockey rather than his health, said yesterday that he rarely thought about his cancer even during his daily radiation treatments.
Talking at length for the first time about his two-month fight with Hodgkin's disease, Lemieux said he was confident that the disease is in remission and that he can turn his attention toward winning another Stanley Cup.
"It feels great I can get back to doing what I love best: playing hockey," Lemieux said.
Hours after completing his 22d and final radiation treatment Tuesday, Lemieux chartered a plane to Philadelphia for the Pittsburgh Penguins' 5-4 loss to the Flyers.
He had a goal and an assist despite the fatigue resulting from the radiation.


Hunt On for Government Waste
Determined to continue casting himself as an enemy of big government, President Clinton announced today that his Administration would conduct a six-month investigation of ways to eliminate waste and abuse in government.
Mr.
Clinton said Vice President Al Gore would oversee the project, which echoes government diets prescribed in past administrations, relying on suggestions from members of Congress as well as from Federal employees.


Policy's Limits in Bosnia
Although the Clinton Administration has presented the airdrop of relief supplies into Bosnia and Herzegovina as a demonstration of resolve to protect the beleaguered Bosnian Muslims, the mission has instead come to symbolize the limitations of American policy.
In four days of airlifts, American C-130's have dropped almost 77 tons of food and medicine, aiming at spots near three Bosnian towns.
A considerable amount appears to have been delivered where it was intended.


Dow Gains 3.51 Points, To 3,404.04
Stock prices moved higher yesterday as interest rates continued their declines, making stocks a more attractive investment than bonds.
The Dow Jones industrial average of blue-chip stocks gained 3.51 points to close at 3,404.04.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 277.4 million shares, slightly higher than Tuesday's volume of 275.9 million.
Advances led decliners by a ratio of 2 to 1.
S.&amp; P. Up 1.36 Points
The broader market also rose, with the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index up 1.36 points, to 449.26, just shy of the record close of 449.56 set on Feb. 4.
"The market actually did better than the Dow depicted," said Hugh A. Johnson, chief investment strategist for the First Albany Corporation.
"There was meaningful strength in the over-the-counter issues as the Nasdaq composite index rose 6.20 points, to 683.92."
Mr.
Johnson also said he had been impressed by the strong trade volume.
"It has a tendency to dry up before the release of the monthly employment data, which will be released on Friday," he said.
"It appears as though investors are becoming somewhat less cautious."
Helping to underpin some of the strength yesterday were gains in bond prices, which helped the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond fall to 6.78 percent.
Aside from making bond yields less competitive compared with those of stocks, Mr.
Johnson said, lower long-term interest rates "implies that corporations can continue to refinance existing debt, which over time will help earnings." Selloff in Timber Partnerships
The biggest net loser on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday was Rayonier Timberlands L.P., which lost more than 14 percent of its value, dropping $5.625, to $34.125.
The fall followed an article in The New York Times yesterday saying investors buying units of the logging company for their yield would likely lose money in the long term because of the terms of the partnership agreement governing the securities.
The selloff spread to IP Timberlands Ltd., another limited partnership in the timber industry, which lost $2.375 to close at $22.625.
Genetic Therapy rose $2.125, to $12.625, after the company said that the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health had approved two of its human gene trials to treat cystic fibrosis.
The Genzyme Corporation rose $1.625, to $35.125.
The biotech company reported fourth-quarter earnings of 33 cents a share against 30 cents a year earlier.
Chemtrak Inc. rose $2.75, to $15, after the Food and Drug Administration gave the medical supplies company clearance to sell its single-use cholesterol test products in the United States.


Radiothon to Benefit the Philharmonic
The 16th annual New York Philharmonic/WQXR Radiothon, an on-air auction to raise funds for the orchestra, will take place this weekend on WQXR-FM (96.3).
Musicians from the orchestra and artists who have been guest soloists will be heard in live and recorded performances and interviews, and listeners will be able to bid for a wide selection of gifts.
These include a Jamaican holiday, a tennis match with musicians, private musical performances, dinners with musicians, and recordings.
The Radiothon will start tomorrow at 2 P.M. with a four-hour broadcast from the WQXR studios and will continue from the Panevino restaurant in the lobby of Avery Fisher Hall, where volunteer operators will accept gift orders and contributions.
There will be a pledge desk in the lobby as well.


Prosecution Is Complete In Sex Case
The prosecutor in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial ended six days of closing argument today by condemning the four defendants and appealing for compassion for the mentally retarded young woman he said they "maliciously used."
Time and again, the prosecutor, Glenn D. Goldberg, described the 21-year-old woman as an 8-year-old child.
Her life, he said, was a desperate search for acceptance, affection and approval, and she wound up on March 1, 1989, being exploited by the athletes she most admired.
He said they exposed her to a "freak show" with a baseball bat, a broom handle and a stick.


INSIDE
No Deadlines in Waco
Federal officials said they would wait as long as necessary for a peaceful end to the standoff involving a heavily armed religious sect.
Page A16.
Senate Extends Jobless Aid
The Senate defeated a Republican bid to alter the unemployment benefits bill, which then won passage as proposed by the President.
Page A22.
Replacing Schools Chief
The New York City school board will have a former Chancellor lead the search for a new one.
Page B1.
Neither Lewd Nor Lascivious
Florida enacted a law guaranteeing women a right to breast-feed their children in public.
Page A18.


Reggie White's Tour Plans Stop on Jets' Pad
Reggie White's agent calls it "Reggie's frequent fliers tour," and the most acclaimed free agent in the National Football League plans to bring it to the Jets.
That is merely one of at least half a dozen stops that White, the Eagles' pass-rushing whiz, has in mind over the next few weeks, his agent said yesterday.
The only club he has a date with is Cleveland, which he will visit this weekend.


Grand Central Terminal Invites Gazing, Not Waiting


Celebrating an 'Unavoidable Art'
FRANK GEHRY's Chiat/Day building in Los Angeles looks like a set of binoculars.
Oscar Niemeyer's Pantheon in Brasilia, above, resembles winged sculptures about to take flight.
Mr.
Gehry and Mr.
Niemeyer are among the 15 architects who have won the $100,000 Pritzker Architecture Prize, the profession's highest honor, which has been given annually since 1979.
"The Art of Architecture: The Pritzker Architecture Prize," an exhibition of 150 photographs and 12 models by the winners, opens Friday at the National Building Museum in Washington, to run through April.
"The show is to make the public aware of the profession as one of the most important and unavoidable art forms that the public will encounter," said Bill Lacy, an architect who is the secretary of the prize jury.


Entrepreneur Pleads Guilty In Mail Fraud
A direct-mail entrepreneur pleaded guilty today in a $14 million scheme in which he defrauded thousands of people who paid to be listed in Who's Who in American Executives and other so-called vanity books.
The entrepreneur, Steven S. Watstein, used the name Steven West.
He ran a company based in Great Neck that lured prospects, many of them mid-level executives or owners of small businesses, by falsely informing them they had been confidentially chosen for inclusion in one of the books by a selection committee that included famous names.
The scheme took place from July 1988 to July 1991.


Not Just Scratching Veneer's Surface
GIVE 37 industrial design students wood veneer that looks like bird's-eye maple, oak or walnut, and let them cut, boil and steam it.
The result?
"Explorations in Veneer: Ideas Toward Objects," an exhibition of 17 designs by students at Pratt Institute in Brooklyn.
The show runs through March 13 at Gallery 91 in SoHo.
J.
Maruszewski won first prize for scoring a single sheet of veneer and folding it into two translucent lamps that can be squashed flat, or stretched out.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE phrase "Do as I say, not as I do" may ring especially hollow for many of today's parents, who came of age during times of sexual and drug experimentation in the 1960's and 70's.
The concerns and risks are very different now from what they were a generation ago.
Convincing today's young people of that, however, can be a difficult problem, particularly for parents who don't wish their children to follow in the footsteps they made during their own teen-age years.
"My son asked me directly about whether I'd used drugs," said Dr.
Alan Marlatt, the director of the Addictive Behaviors Research Center at the University of Washington in Seattle.
He and other child development experts advise parents to tell their children the truth about their youthful experimentations, but to temper that truth with discretion and perspective.


Rangers, Missing Messier, Also Miss a Victory
Adam Graves tried his best.
Last night at Madison Square Garden, he stepped into a hole left by Mark Messier -- the team captain, the chief playmaker, the Rangers' top superstar.
He played center rather than his usual wing.
He took a team-high seven shots.
He hit.
He passed.
He tried not to think about the man he was supposed to replace.
Graves gave what he could, but even that wasn't enough.


2 Managers Could Learn From Fighters
Talk about unlikely sights.
At a news conference yesterday that breathed one last day of hype into the James (Buddy) McGirt-Pernell Whitaker title fight on Saturday, the combatants quietly sat side by side at the head table.
It was the managers who had to be kept apart.
This doesn't usually happen in boxing.
Fighters snarl and sneer and point fingers.
They say threatening things intended to create a fever pitch.
Managers simply stand back, fold their arms and enjoy the buildup.


Pina Carmirelli, 79, A Violinist, Is Dead
Pina Carmirelli, a violinist who appeared as a soloist and in chamber-music ensembles, died on Saturday at her home in Rome.
She was 79.
She died after a long illness, said Frank Salomon, a co-administrator of the Marlboro Music School and Festival in Vermont, where Miss Carmirelli was a participant for many years.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Mike Oldfield  Carnegie Hall


Authorities Plan To Wait for End Of Cult Standoff
Federal officials said today that they were prepared to wait as long as it took for a peaceful ending to the standoff near here between members of a heavily armed religious cult and hundreds of law-enforcement officers.
"The goal is to resolve this situation, ultimately in Federal court, without further bloodshed," Jeffrey Jamar, a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent, said today at a news conference here.
"It does no good to set deadlines."


Photos Show Bomb's Heat And Force
The bomb blast that knocked out Manhattan's World Trade Center towers unleashed a scorching fireball and shock wave that incinerated parked cars closest to the explosion and flung others around like marshmallows, the first released pictures of the underground devastation show.
Police and Federal officials who displayed slides of the wreckage at the regular news briefing yesterday declined to draw conclusions about the nature and position of the bomb.
But the pictures graphically illustrated what the police bomb squad commander called "the tremendous release of energy" that killed five people and injured more than 1,000 and explained why experts have been unable to descend into a seven-story crater to hunt for clues.


Foreign Affairs; Assad's Surprise
Israeli diplomats told the new and untested U.S.
Secretary of State to expect some kind of pleasant surprise in Damascus two weeks ago.
President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, ever the seducer and strategist, did not disappoint.
He gave Warren Christopher a secret diplomatic gift that could lead to a redrawing of Middle Eastern battle lines and has already caused the U.S., Syria and Israel to revamp negotiating priorities.
The Syrian strongman told the chief U.S. diplomat that he was ready for a major deal with Israel.
He repeated public statements about trading "total peace" with Israel for "total withdrawal" by Israel from Syria's Golan Heights.


Waiting in Gorazde: Hope Rises but Rations Fall, to One Slice of Bread a Day
As this besieged city waited Wednesday for its first American airdrop, Dzemila Dzambegovic made her way through a crowd of hungry people waiting outside 13 Marshal Tito Street for the daily food handout.
Her share, for four people, was two slices of bread.
When the 60-year-old woman passed back through the crowd with the two slices in a plastic bag, a stranger asked her how much she had been given.
She paused, pushed her scarf away from her face as if preparing to speak, then burst into tears.
Without a word, she shuffled down the street in her running shoes, head bowed.
How Long?
How Much?
In all the debate here over President Clinton's decision to order food and medical supplies dropped by parachute, no one in Gorazde seems to question the value of the operation.
In this city, 11 months under siege by Serbian nationalist troops, the only issue has been when the airdrops would begin, and how much food they would bring.


Germans Sentence Anti-Foreign Rioter to 2 1/2 Years
A German court sentenced an unemployed 22-year-old man today to two and a half years in prison for throwing a firebomb at the police in riots against foreigners in Rostock last summer.
It was the first major prosecution for crimes connected to the Rostock riots, though there have been 24 convictions on lesser charges.


The Mohair Toilet Seat
Washington's subsidy for ranchers who produce wool and mohair exceeds $100 million a year.
In a budget of $1.5 trillion, that's peanuts.
But like the Pentagon's overpriced toilet seats, it is inexcusable.
President Clinton wants to cap subsidy payments at $50,000 per person per year.
That's not good enough.
Having dared to take on the ranchers' friends in Congress, he might as well go all the way.
It's time to kill this program.


No Headline
"I still believe I couldn't have acted any other way. But I deeply regret it. It was a nightmare. It is a great burden for me, and it will be until the end of my days." -- GEN.
WOJCIECH JARUZELSKI, on recalling martial law in Poland in 1981.  [ A1:3. ]


U.N. Boycott Has Belgrade Angry at U.S.
With consumer prices tripling each month because of economic sanctions against Serbia, Panaskeva Babic's pension of 155,000 dinars a month is not enough to live on.
On Tuesday she stood in front of a bank offering to spare someone the misery of standing in line all night to pick up a monthly interest payment, a service for which she was asking 10 German marks, or about $6.50, the value of her monthly pension.


We Shouldn't Exclude Immigrants With H.I.V.; Overruling the Experts
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 20 editorial supporting the ban on immigrants with H.I.V. reflects assumptions spread by one side of this debate -- assumptions unrelated to the real people involved.


In a Victory for Clinton, the Senate Votes to Extend Jobless Benefits
Democrats defeated the first Republican challenge to President Clinton's economic program in the Senate today.
They held ranks against a proposal that would have offset the cost of extending unemployment benefits with spending cuts.
The 57-to-43 vote along party lines came after the Senate Democratic leadership held its conservative members in line by presenting the issue as a test of their loyalty to the new President and his economic policies.


Can Tartabull Carry Weight of a Smile?
Danny Tartabull has one of those smiles that got Bobby Bonilla in trouble last season.
Bonilla signed a $29 million contract with the Mets and then proclaimed that New York would not remove the smile from his face.
What a mistake.
Tartabull smiled all season because he had a $25.5 million contract and experienced a much smoother ride in his first year in New York.
Despite missing 39 games with assorted injuries, Tartabull led the Yankees with 25 homers, drove in 85 runs, never telephoned the press box and never wore ear plugs.
He was smiling today.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.19
3.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.96
3.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.01
3.04
4.14
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.48
5.54
7.19
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.78
6.83
7.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.70
7.79
8.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.76
5.79
6.76
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Blues; Longtime Pianists With a Firm Grip on the Past
The two blues pianists who performed on Friday night in Brooklyn Heights, in a concert presented by the Arts at St.
Ann's, came from a generation before mass media and easy travel blurred regional and individual styles.
Booker T. Laury, from Memphis, and Henry Townsend, from St.
Louis, have been professionals since the 1930's; they are individualists who have stayed that way.
Playing solo, they haven't smoothed out individual rhythmic quirks to fit in with bands.
And since they have largely been ignored by recording companies -- Mr.
Townsend made "Mule" for Nighthawk Records in 1980, which has been rereleased as a CD -- they haven't been pressured to update their music.
Both bluesmen sound increasingly wayward, startling and irreplaceable.
The 83-year-old Mr.
Townsend sang epic-length blues, many stretching far beyond 10 verses, that presented a landscape of unending desolation and betrayal.
He sings in a weary, plaintive tenor, with quavers and slides that make remembered pain sound immediate.
His gentle vocal lines, and a silently tapping left foot, hold together music that always seems on the verge of shattering.


Reviews/Music; From Two American Composers
Last week offered two opportunities to look in on American composers.
On Wednesday, the New York Chamber Symphony, Lawrence Foster and Yo-Yo Ma played Stephen Albert's Cello Concerto at the 92d Street Y. On Friday morning at Avery Fisher Hall, the New York Philharmonic presented one of its 150th anniversary commissions: Ellen Taaffe Zwilich's new Third Symphony.
Mr.
Albert, who was killed in an automobile accident on Dec. 27, wrote his 30-minute piece for Mr.
Ma and the Baltimore Symphony some three years ago.
This was its first trip to New York.
It finds the composer in the role of observer.
The introductory solo, broad and melancholy, has a touch of the gypsy.
Soon, mournfulness melts into shrill anxiety.
Explosions of percussion appear like unexpected fireworks and act as dividing lines between the two.


We Shouldn't Exclude Immigrants With H.I.V.
To the Editor:
"Immigrants Infected With AIDS" (editorial, Feb. 20) supports the Senate vote to exclude immigrants infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS.
You base your opinion on public health and financial cost grounds, but never mention human rights.
The burdens on human rights far outweigh the negligible benefits to public health or cost savings.


Pemex: Mexico's Hesitant Oil Giant
After decades of isolation from foreign influence, Petroleos Mexicanos is reaching out for all sorts of help from foreigners as it tries to make itself into a modern oil giant in the image of an Exxon or a Shell.
But the transformation has run into an unusual self-imposed barrier that is sidelining the company as a major source of new export revenue for a nation that badly needs to earn more dollars.
Pemex, as the state-owned company is known, is offering petrochemical plants for sale to foreigners, hiring American companies to drill wells, shedding tens of thousands of workers and selling off many secondary operations like those making valves, pumps and ships.
And it has even come close to doing the unthinkable under Mexican law: pledging oil as collateral for foreign loans -- a practice outlawed after Mexico nationalized the industry in 1938.
No Export Expansion
In Mexico's grand vision, the most important goal is to increase exports of manufactured goods greatly to pay for a huge influx of American products.
Until that happens, Pemex remains the nation's biggest export earner, bringing in 30 percent of all the dollars that Mexico received in 1992 from its sales abroad.


Reworking Products, Ingeniously
PRODUCT designers want to reinvent the mouse trap, the soap dish, or the napkin, over and over again.
At Accent on Design, the competitive component of last week's New York International Gift Fair at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, two companies won awards for their designs: Vero San Francisco, of Oakland, Calif., for Holey Soap, a round glycerine soap with a square hole that perches on a wooden cone, and Archipelago, of Manhattan, for bed and table linens decorated with self-covered buttons, whip stitching, or French wired ribbon.
Anne Vigneri, who owns Vero with her husband, Frank, said the idea for Holey Soap came to her in a dream.
Two years ago, the Vigneris designed a soap sewn inside a silk pouch.
When the soap was used, the lather came through the silk, and when the soap was finished, "You had this beat-up looking piece of fabric," she said.


Vehicle Sales Rise 9% But Annual Rate Dips
Sales of North American-built vehicles rose 9 percent in late February from the levels of a year earlier, auto makers reported today.
Still, accounting for seasonal adjustments, the annual rate of car sales slipped to 5.5 million in the period, from 6.5 million in mid-February and 5.9 million a year ago.
Analysts were divided as to whether lagging car sales reflected consumer worries about President Clinton's economic proposals, especially those for higher taxes, which the President disclosed in a speech to the nation on Feb. 17.


And You Hate Doing the Wash?
IN "Voices of American Homemakers," an oral history project of the National Extension Homemakers Council published last week by Indiana University Press, more than 200 women tell of being children, wives, and particularly homemakers in rural America from 1890 to 1940.
Before washing machines, women scrubbed thick woolen clothes on washboards, sometimes taking all day.
Lora Torsey of New Hampshire said her mother "scrubbed till her fingers would bleed."


Events: Talks on Design and Style Architecture and Urbanism    National Institute for Architectural Education, 30 West 22d Street; (212) 924-7000.      A series of talks by the authors of books on architecture continues Tuesday when Beverly Russell speaks about women in design. On March 22, Cynthia Davidson discusses architecture at the end of the millennium, and Mario Gandelsonas will speak about Chicago's urban grid on April 6. Programs start at 6:30 P.M. Fee is $3; members, no charge. Reservations are required.  Voices of Architecture    Architectural League of New York,      Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 753-1722.


TIFFANY &amp; CO. (N)
A plunge in revenues from Japan and rising expansion costs caused a 38 percent drop in net income at Tiffany &amp; Company in the fiscal year that ended Jan. 31, the company said yesterday.
The disappointing results at the jewelry and specialty retailer came amid a slight decline in net sales, to $486.4 million, from $491.9 million theprevious year.


Connecticut Cable Company Is Refusing to Pay TV Stations
The cable-television company serving southwestern Connecticut stood firm against state officials today, saying it would drop Connecticut's broadcast stations unless the stations agreed to waive fees for their signals.
The company, Cablevision, said the Connecticut stations, broadcasting from Hartford and New Haven, are not part of the home market of its franchises, and so are not entitled to fees that a 1992 Federal law allows local broadcast stations to negotiate with cable operators.


Review/Pop; First Things First in 90's Style Protests
"This isn't politics," said Consolidated's drummer, Philip Steir, during the requisite question-and-answer period after the band's performance at the Grand on Friday night.
"Politics happens out there. We're a pop group. This is entertainment."
Although Mr.
Steir probably just wanted to remind people that much more than a rock concert is needed to change the world, his assertion wrongly belittled Consolidated's particular gift.
By combining industrial and hip-hop beats with explicitly political lyrics in music that makes no bones about its intent to instruct, this San Francisco trio has devised a way to bring the protest song tradition into the post-rock era.


No Headline
N.H.L Canadiens Are Stunned by Lightning The Tampa Bay Lightning made their 20th victory a memorable one with a 3-1 triumph at home over the National Hockey League's top team, the Montreal Canadiens.
Wendell Young's 32 saves and two goals by rookie Rob Zamuner helped expansion Tampa Bay surprise Montreal.
Before a sellout crowd of 10,425, Tampa Bay snapped a five-game winless streak.
Montreal had a six-game winning streak snapped. (AP) Maple Leafs 3, North Stars 1: Doug Gilmour became the second Maple Leaf to score 100 or more points in a season and Toronto extended its unbeaten streak to 10 games.
Gilmour set up Dave Andreychuk in the second period to reach the century mark.
The only other Leaf to get as many as 100 points in a season was Darryl Sittler, in 1975-76 and 1977-78. (AP) BOBSLEDDING  American Wins Four-Man Title  Brian Shimer of the United States became the World Cup four-man bobsled champion yesterday in Lillehammer, Norway, after his sled finished third in the final of the six-event series to give him 168 points.
Other members of the USA 1 sled on the course built for the 1994 Winter Olympics were Bryan Leturgez, Karlos Kirby and Randy Jones.
Shimer also took gold in the World Cup two-man and four-man combined series with 308 points. (AP) TENNIS Garrison Gains in Florida  On a day when the wind was gusting up to 30 miles an hour, Zina Garrison-Jackson led seven seeded players into the third round yesterday in the Virginia Slims of Florida tournament in Delray Beach.
The seventh-seeded Garrison-Jackson scored a 6-4, 3-6, 7-6 (7-3) victory over Stephanie Rottier of the Netherlands, who hit the ball into the net three times in the third-set tie breaker. (AP) HARNESS RACING  Driver Wins 8 Races in a Night  Dave Palone drove eight winners in a single program Tuesday night at the Meadows in Meadow Lands, Pa., to tie a world record.
Seven of Palone's winners were consecutive, also tying a world mark. (AP)


A Brief Break in the Action of Winter


Review/Television; Dear Camcorder Diary: Memoirs From All Over
"Self-Portraits" is evidence that the age of the video diary or video garage sale is upon us.
In February 1991, the producers gave cameras to 100 people in 25 countries -- exactly how they were chosen is not clear -- with an invitation to create "video letters" about themselves.
The result, edited down to an hour, is a grab bag of mini-autobiographies, imaginings and reflections that begins with a birth and ends with a funeral.
Like most scrapbooks, the parts are better than the whole.
At any rate, the best of them avoid the pretentiousness of the categories into which they have been lumped: "Awakening," "Coming of Age," "Self-Expression," "Suffering," "Wisdom."


Spring Training Report
Texas Rangers
As the major leagues' top home run hitter (43) last season, outfielder Juan Gonzalez, who also drove in 109 runs, thought he was worth more than the $280,000 he made last year, and so did the Rangers.
They just couldn't agree on how much more.
And since as a two-year player, Gonzalez wasn't eligible for arbitration until after this season, it was the Rangers who had the ultimate leverage.
Yesterday they used it.
After failing to win agreement on a multiyear contract or even an interim one-year deal, the team unilaterally renewed Gonzalez's contract for one year at what team officials described as "a very substantial raise," presumably closer to the $500,000 the club had offered than the $850,000 Gonzalez had sought.
Two other players not eligible for arbitration -- catcher Ivan Rodriguez, the American League Gold Glove winner, and third baseman Dean Palmer -- also rejected multiyear pacts but came to terms on new one-year agreements.
Kansas City Royals
In 10 years in the big leagues he had never had surgery, but yesterday Mike Boddicker underwent arthroscopic surgery on his left knee and was expected to miss two to four weeks.
A minor cartilage tear was repaired and cartilage under the knee cap was shaved, the Royals' team physician, Steve Joyce, said.
Doctors had not expected to have to shave the cartilage, and Boddicker will be out longer than had been thought.
The 35-year-old right-hander, 1-4 with a 4.98 earned run average and three saves in 1992, will be paid $3 million this season, the final year of a three-year contract.
Chicago White Sox
A disgruntled Carlton Fisk reported to camp, still stuck with a minor league contract, albeit one fashioned in an unprecedented way.
The 45-year-old catcher, the White Sox's career leader in home runs, signed a contract yesterday that had to be drawn up by management's Player Relations Committee in order to include language that Fisk, a 21-year major leaguer, had insisted upon, including a guarantee barring an assignment to Class AAA Nashville.
Fisk will be guaranteed $650,000.
If the catcher is cut, he will be paid $800,000.
If he should play 50 games, his salary would reach $900,000; 90 games would guarantee $1.1 million.
Montreal Expos
Outfielder Moises Alou, who staged a two-hour protest by holding out at the start of spring training, had his 1993 contract renewed yesterday by the Expos, ending an exhausting round of negotiations.
Alou, runner-up in National League rookie of the year voting last season, refused to sign for the club's last offer of $210,000, so he was renewed at what he and his agent predicted would be a smaller figure, possibly $200,000.
An impasse centered on the club's belief that Alou receive a split contract, meaning he would be paid a smaller salary if he were sent to the minors.
But the club relented and gave him a one-way deal.
Alou followed through on a threat to boycott the start of spring training Feb. 27, holding out for two hours.
He then joined workouts after being coaxed by his father, Expos Manager Felipe Alou.


Hatch Act Overhaul Advances
The House of Representatives voted today to overhaul the Hatch Act to allow Federal employees to engage in partisan politics outside the office on their own time.
Democrats and moderate Republicans supporting the changes in the act, which was adopted in 1939, contended that 3.2 million Federal workers were being denied their constitutional rights.
The opponents, largely conservatives, argued that Congress must protect the nonpartisan image of the civil service.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  SERBS OVERRUN MUSLIM ENCLAVE  Bosnian Serb forces overran several villages in eastern Bosnia's Cerska enclave and rained artillery shells on thousands of Muslims trapped in a mountain valley trying to flee the Serbs, United Nations officials said.
A1  NEW MUSLIM 'MASSACRE' FEARED  The United Nations official overseeing relief efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina reported that if only 10 percent of the information received was accurate, Serbian forces are carrying out a "massacre" of Muslims.
A8


Luis Kutner, Lawyer Who Fought For Human Rights, Is Dead at 84
Luis Kutner, a human rights lawyer who practiced in Chicago for more than six decades, died Monday at St.
Joseph Hospital in Chicago.
A lifelong resident of the city, he was 84 years old.
The cause was heart failure, his office said.
Mr.
Kutner was co-founder with Peter Benenson of Amnesty International in London.
He campaigned for a worldwide habeas corpus code so that any arrested person would be properly charged and, at the court's discretion, released on bail.


Scientists Find Long-Sought Gene That Causes Lou Gehrig's Disease
In a lustrous finale to one of the most fervid hunts in biology, scientists have discovered the gene behind Lou Gehrig's disease, a neurodegenerative disorder that results in muscle wasting, paralysis and death.
And while identifying the gene for an illness is usually just the first step in learning how it works and what happens when it goes awry, in this case the long-sought quarry turns out to be one of the most familiar genes in biomedicine.
This familiarity means that potential therapies for the disease may be much closer at hand than had been expected.


William Bohus, 57, Witness for Warmus And Glove Executive
William P. Bohus, an import company executive, died on Tuesday at New York University Medical Center at the age of 57.
He lived in Manhattan.
He had prostate cancer, his family said.


Review/Music; The Chilingirian Quartet
Like Brahms, Bartok had to learn concision.
And he learned it well, so much so that it is easy to see why the maturing composer gradually lost interest in his early Piano Quintet (1904).
He performed it and even revised it for a time, but never bothered to have it published.
The music, in fact, sounds more like Brahms than like Bartok at times, not altogether surprisingly, since Brahms wrote a seminal work in the form.
The Chilingirian String Quartet closed its concert at Weill Recital Hall on Friday evening with a big, blustery performance of the Bartok quintet, with Panayis Lyras at the piano.
Sensibly enough in this broadly Romantic effusion, the players made the most of the work's youthful abandon, not concerning themselves overmuch with slips in pitch or rhythm.


Passage of Health-Care Bill Seen as Unlikely This Year
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, said today that Congress was unlikely to pass a comprehensive health-care bill this year, despite strong urging by President Clinton and the Senate majority leader.
Mr.
Rostenkowski, an Illinois Democrat whose panel has written a large portion of the nation's tax and health laws, said Mr.
Clinton's health legislation would probably be too big and too complex to combine with the President's economic package.
But he and other lawmakers expressed confidence that Congress would pass a health-care bill to the President's liking next year.


Iran Reported to Arrest 47,000 Drug Addicts
An estimated 60 tons of illegal drugs have been confiscated and 47,000 addicts arrested since last March in Iran's long-running battle against drug use and trafficking, a Teheran daily reported today.
Maj.
Gen.
Riza Seifollahi, commander of Iran's Disciplinary Forces, known by the acronym NAJA, put the value of the narcotics seized, mostly opium and heroin, at $25 million, the newspaper Salam reported.


North Stars on Brink of Moving South
The Minnesota North Stars seem ready to become the Dallas Lone Stars.
NORM GREEN, owner of the North Stars, said yesterday that barring an unforeseen falling out with Dallas city officials, his team will relocate to Texas.
Green continued informal meetings with Dallas leaders and is now expected to engage in more intense negotiations with City Council members.
"Until this deal is done, nothing is done," Green said.
"But it looks like this deal will be done." He said negotiations went smoothly with DONALD CARTER, owner of the Dallas Mavericks, over lease terms to share Reunion Arena.


Old Drug Allies Terrorizing Escobar
Pablo Escobar Gaviria, a veteran practitioner of terrorism, is suddenly squirming as a target of terrorism.
In a modern gang war complete with faxed communiques and clandestine news conferences, a powerful faction of the Medellin cocaine cartel has turned on its godfather and vowed his destruction.


O'Rourke Proposed For U.S. Judgeship
Andrew P. O'Rourke, the Westchester County Executive, has once again been recommended for a Federal judgeship, clouding the November race for who will manage the county.
Mr.
O'Rourke said today that he was honored by a judgeship recommendation made by both Senators from New York, Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Alfonse M. D'Amato, but that he would need several days to decide whether he would accept the recommendation or seek re-election to the job of county executive.


COMPANY BRIEFS
NORTHWEST AIRLINES INC., Eagan, Minn., extended a spring price sale on tickets purchased in advance.
Passengers now have until Monday to save up to 40 percent off the regular 14-day advance fare, the airline said.
The original sale ended Wednesday.
REVCO D.S.
INC., Twinsburg, Ohio, signed a sales agreement to buy and operate as Revco stores 12 Begley drugstores in Tennessee and Virginia.
Terms were not disclosed.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about people who returned to work after the explosion at the World Trade Center referred incorrectly to the company that manages 90 West Street, an office building in lower Manhattan, and to an agent for the company.
The company is Galbreath Riverbank; the agent is Karla Kudatzky.


A Top Post Is Filled at Drug Maker
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company said yesterday that it had promoted Kenneth E. Weg to president of its pharmaceutical group, which represented more than half of the company's $11.2 billion in revenues last year.
Mr.
Weg, whose appointment is effective immediately, had previously served as president of pharmaceutical operations at the New York-based company.
He succeeds Wayne A. Davidson, 61, who previously announced his intention to retire June 1, ending a 35-year career with Bristol-Myers Squibb.


Albert Sabin, Polio Researcher, 86, Dies
Dr.
Albert B. Sabin, the pioneering researcher on viruses and viral diseases who developed the vaccine that is the main defense against polio in the United States and much of the rest of the world, died yesterday at Georgetown University Medical Center in Washington.
He was 86 years old and lived in Washington.
The cause of death was congestive heart failure, the hospital said.


Same Haiti Policy, Still Illegal
Presidents and Supreme Courts have had their odd dealings over the years, but this may be the first time the Court has been called upon to uphold a campaign flipflop.
As a candidate, Bill Clinton condemned as immoral the Bush Administration's policy of forcing boatloads of refugees back to Haiti, and he praised a court that found that approach illegal.
But just before his inauguration Mr.
Clinton, fearing a huge influx of refugees, adopted the Bush policy.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Montgomery Blair High School in Silver Spring, Md., misstated the number of students from Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan who qualified this year among the 40 finalists for Westinghouse science scholarships.
It is two, not one.


CHRONICLE
It's a baby girl -- no name announced yet -- for the singers WHITNEY HOUSTON and BOBBY BROWN.
The 6-pound-12-ounce infant was born yesterday, The Associated Press reported.
Lisa Hintelmann, spokeswoman for Ms.
Houston, would not disclose where the baby was born.


M. E. Christiansen, 76; Popularized 'Duracell'
Mogens Erik Christiansen, a chemical engineer who made "Duracell" an international household word in the 1970's, died on Tuesday at Jupiter (Fla.) Hospital.
A longtime resident of Old Greenwich, Conn., he kept a winter home in Jupiter.
He was 76.
He suffered a stroke, his family reported.
Mr.
Christiansen retired in 1979 as head of the battery group of the old P. R. Mallory &amp; Company.
During his tenure, Mallory's battery division changed from doing business mostly with the Government to enter the consumer market.
He introduced the "Duracell" trademark name and the distinctive design of its alkaline batteries, sold here and worldwide.
The battery group of Mallory has since become Duracell Inc. of Bethel, Conn.


On Stage, and Off
Get Ready for Six Hours of History
It may be a tad optimistic to start calling this a "they said it couldn't be done" story, but the signs are that "The Kentucky Cycle," Robert Schenkkan's nine-act epic encompassing 200 years of American history, is at last pointed toward Broadway.
A New York producer, David G. Richenthal, announced this week that he had acquired the rights to the play, which won the Pulitzer Prize last year, from the Center Theater Group in Los Angeles.
He said he had entered into a partnership with the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington to stage the six-hour production at the Kennedy's Eisenhower Theater for an eight-week subscription run in the fall, to be followed immediately by a move to Broadway.
Gerald Schoenfeld, chairman of the Shubert Organization, confirmed he'd spoken with Mr.
Richenthal about housing the play in a Shubert theater in New York.
"He said he has every expectation of bringing it here," Mr.
Schoenfeld said.
"I told him we would be pleased to book it."


COMPANY BRIEFS
GENERAL MOTORS CORP., Detroit, will suspend production at its Willow Run car assembly plant in Ypsilanti, Mich. for a second week starting Monday because of slow sales.
ROHR INC., is trying to sell its aircraft parts plant in Hagerstown, Md., but the 400-worker factory could be closed if a buyer is not found, company officials said yesterday.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.29
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.92
4.01
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.98
3.01
4.17
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.44
5.48
7.28
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.73
6.78
8.03
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.65
7.70
8.99
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.71
5.76
6.78
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Martha Dalrymple, 89; Wrote of Landmarks
Martha Dalrymple, a co-author of an exhaustive study of New York City landmarks, died on Monday in Portland, Ore., where she had moved 17 years ago.
She was 89.
The cause of death was chronic lung disease and heart failure, said her half-sister, Joanna Stuart of Portland.


Review/Film; Crime, Comedy and, of Course, Love
"Mad Dog and Glory" is an almost unconscionably enjoyable movie that plays like something conceived by a contemporary, furiously hip Damon Runyon.
It's about the spiky relationship of Wayne (Robert De Niro), a mild-mannered Chicago police photographer, derisively nicknamed Mad Dog, and Frank (Bill Murray), a dangerous hoodlum who wants to be a stand-up comedian.
At the Comic Cazie, the club he owns, Frank is a smash with his routines on the Cosa Nostra.
Like all comics, he's best when dealing with the familiar in front of audiences that share his interests.
The film is also a love story about Wayne and Glory (Uma Thurman), the gorgeous if slightly battered bartender presented to Wayne by Frank after the policeman saves his life.
Frank airily describes Glory as "the gift that keeps on giving." In fact, she is supposed to be returned to the sender after one week, something that Wayne doesn't find easy to do.


People
*
Bernadette Mansur was named vice president of corporate communications, and Arthur Pincus was named vice president of public relations, both new positions at the National Hockey League, New York.
Ms.
Mansur was vice president of communications at Reebok International Ltd., Stoughton, Mass., and Mr.
Pincus was previously sports editor at The Washington Post.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The F.B.I.; Variations on a Theme of 'No Comment'
It was initially billed as a news conference in which the nation's two top law-enforcement officials would announce advances in prosecuting crime in the telemarketing business.
And that's just what reporters got, despite the fact that they crammed the F.B.I. auditorium for the latest word on an arrest in the World Trade Center bombing.
George Stephanopoulos, the White House spokesman, confirmed a report just after noon that there had been an arrest in the bombing case and referred all reporters to the news conference, saying that Stuart M. Gerson, the Acting Attorney General, would "be prepared to take questions on this."  Refused to Answer
But at the conference, which was called by Mr.
Gerson and Director William Sessions of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Mr.
Gerson took the crowd of reporters through a detailed description of the telemarketing fraud and arrests.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Sect; Suspect in Bombing Is Linked To Sect With a Violent Voice
Mohammed A. Salameh, the suspect arrested yesterday in the bombing of the World Trade Center, is said by law-enforcement officials to be a follower of a blind Muslim cleric who preaches a violent message of Islamic fundamentalism from a walk-up mosque in Jersey City.
The Muslim cleric, Sheik Omar Abdul Rahman, who stood trial in Egypt a decade ago in the assassination of President Anwar el-Sadat, has emerged as the spiritual leader of a movement that the Egyptian Government contends is behind dozens of violent attacks in Egypt, including a spate of shootings of foreign tourists.
Another Violent Link
The sheik has also been linked to El-Sayyid Nosair, an Egyptian currently serving 7 to 23 years for crimes related to the slaying of Rabbi Meir Kahane, the Israeli right-wing leader.


Judge Opens Trial of P.L.O. Official in 1973 Bomb Plot
Lawyers for an official of the Palestine Liberation Organization contended in a Brooklyn court yesterday that their client was arrested on attempted-bombing charges because the American Government "wanted to appease the Israeli Government" at the start of the Persian Gulf war.
But a Federal prosecutor told the jury that the P.L.O. official, Khaled Mohammed el-Jassem, was accused in 1991 on the basis of fingerprint evidence that showed the defendant to be the long-sought suspect who planted bombs that failed to detonate at three Israeli sites in New York City in 1973.
Time Bombs
"The targets were all symbols of the Government of Israel," the prosecutor, Charles E. Rose, said.


Sampras's Game Is Cooled by Volkov
Framed by a desert sunset far more spectacular than he was, Pete Sampras, sore of foot and spirit, did not play the kind of tennis that matched his career-high ranking of No. 2 in the world tonight at the Newsweek Champions Cup.
Stung by the semaphore ground stroking of Aleksandr Volkov, who is ranked 22d, Sampras went down barely swinging, 7-5, 6-4, and became the seventh of this event's top 10 seeded players to make a premature exit.


Some War-Weary Serbs Ask U.S. and Russia to Impose Peace
The airdrops of relief supplies into Bosnia and Herzegovina by the United States and the offer of similar help by Russia have been welcomed by many Serbs, who see such cooperation within the United Nations as the only hope of ending the Balkan war.
It is not clear how much influence these people have on the president of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic, whose nationalistic policy the United Nations has blamed for much of the violence.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-7  BOSNIAN EVACUATION IS PLANNED  Bosnian Serb military commanders agreed to allow for the evacuation of thousands of Muslim civilians from an area in eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina that has been overrun by Serbs, U.N. officials said.
A1  The U.N-sponsored talks on Bosnia appeared in danger of collapse.
A6


Where Stardust Dreams Are, Always
THE image of a Manhattan nightclub for many people will always be synonymous with the impossibly glamorous fantasies of New York nightlife imagined by Hollywood movies of the 1930's and 40's.
And when Mary Cleere Haran, a singer who cultivates a sophisticated but wholesome 1940's look, performed for the first time at Rainbow and Stars recently, she evoked that mythical ambiance with a wistful good humor.
"It's not exactly what I had envisioned it would be like when I saw those movies with nightclubs," she observed of Rainbow and Stars, which represents the top of the line in New York City cabarets.


Review/Film; Jazz in Nazi Germany: Youthful Resistance
"Swing heil!" is the battle cry of the Swing Kids, long-haired, big-band-loving teen-age rebels in Nazi Germany.
You may want to reread that sentence slowly, just to make sure it does not describe some missing chapter of "Wayne's World" or simply seem too nutty for words.
In fact, there is some historical background to the premise of this surprising musical, which is set in 1939 and revolves around the jubilant American dance music its characters adore.
And here's the oddest part of the whole project: the Swing Kids conceit turns out to be the film's best aspect.
This is not one of the great wrong-headed movie ideas after all.


Chaim Leib Pekeris; Mathematician, 84
Prof.
Chaim Leib Pekeris, a mathematician and founder of the mathematics department at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel, died on Feb. 25 at Kaplan Hospital there.
He was 84 and lived in Rehovot.
He had suffered a stroke, the institute said.


Senior Black Editor Resigns From Daily News
Ellis Cose, chairman of the editorial board of The Daily News, said yesterday that he would resign soon to become a contributing editor of Newsweek magazine.
Mr.
Cose, a black journalist and author who has written on race, politics and the press, said he was leaving The News to dedicate more time to writing.
His departure is likely to increase pressure on The News's publishers, Mortimer B. Zuckerman and Fred Drasner, to hire minority-group reporters and editors.
Critics of the publishers at the newspaper had said that Mr.
Cose's fate would be viewed as a measure of their commitment to increase racial and ethnic diversity at The News.


Soccer Tickets? Try Overseas
Foreign fans will soon have the ability to purchase strips of tickets to follow their favorite team through all of its 1994 World Cup matches in the United States.
That same privilege, however, may not be afforded Americans for some time.
World Cup USA yesterday announced the formation of World Cup Travel Services, a network of licensed travel agents who will be able to sell sets of tickets and hotel rooms to international fans.
The ticket plans include one in which customers can select a team, and follow that team as it plays at several different sites.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B14-15.


Hardaway Has Bruise
The knee injury to TIM HARDAWAY was not as serious as first feared, but the Golden State Warriors guard will be sidelined for at least one game.
Hardaway suffered the injury to his right knee when he came down awkwardly after being fouled during a game on Wednesday night.


The Rangers Are Happy To See Lemieux, for Once
It's hard to imagine the Rangers feeling happy about a visit from Mario Lemieux.
Lemieux is supposed to be New York enemy No. 1, the player from Pittsburgh chiefly responsible for the Rangers' recent Stanley Cup woes.
And when he arrives at Madison Square Garden tonight for the Penguins' game against the Rangers, Lemieux brings some of the league's best statistics and the Patrick Division's best team.
The Rangers' desire to see Lemieux play tonight, though, has nothing to do with hockey and everything to do with the battle the league's biggest superstar has been waging against Hodgkin's disease.
After missing nearly two months to undergo radiation treatments for this form of cancer, Lemieux returned to action Tuesday night in Philadelphia and will play his second straight game when he meets the Rangers tonight.





Suicide Doctor Betrays Relationship of Trust
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 22 front-page article on Dr.
Jack Kevorkian's recently accelerated crusade to assist the terminally ill in carrying out their plans for suicide highlights the medical profession's discomfort with euthanasia.
The right to die is a right not yet fully recognized by society and sure to be the subject of debate.


Women's History Month
Here is a sampling of events in the metropolitan region that celebrate March as Women's History Month.
A full schedule is available by writing to the New York City Commission on the Status of Women, 52 Chambers Street,
Room 317, New York 10007; or by calling (212) 788-2738.
Today
"WOMEN'S ART, WOMEN'S LIVES, WOMEN'S ISSUES," an exhibition of art by 100 women.
Tweed Gallery, 52 Chambers Street, lower Manhattan.
Through March 31.
Open weekdays, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 788-2738.
"STRONG WOMEN IN THE MOVIES," a film series.
National Organization for Women, New York City Chapter, 15 West 18th Street (ninth floor), Chelsea. 7 P.M.
Admission: $7; $5 for members.
Continues Wednesday, next Friday and March 19 and 24.
Information: (212) 989-7230.
Tomorrow
PANEL DISCUSSION on sexual harassment in the workplace, sponsored by the New York City Chapter of the Coalition of Labor Union Women.
New York Metro Area Postal Union, 460 West 34th Street (ninth floor), Manhattan; 10 A.M. to 2 P.M.
Admission: $10.
Information: (212) 242-0700.
Sunday
"A WOMAN'S PLACE," a two-hour walking tour of the Lower East Side, led by Joyce Mendelsohn.
Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street. 1 P.M.
Admission: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Also on March 21.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
Monday
"CONVERSATIONS ABOUT WOMEN," Joyce Avrach Berkman, the author of a book about the South African feminist novelist Olive Schreiner, discusses the writer's life and work.
Part of a series running Mondays through March 22. 8 P.M., New School for Social Research, 66 West 12th Street, Greenwich Village.
Admission: $10.
Registration: (212) 229-5690.
Tuesday
"I LIFT MY EYES TO THE HILL: THE LIFE OF MABEL HAMPTON AS TOLD BY A WHITE WOMAN," a lecture by Joan Nestle with music and slides.
Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center, 208 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village. 8 P.M.
Admission: $3.
Information: (212) 620-7310.
Wednesday
KATE CLINTON, comedian.
Pace Downtown Theater, One Pace Plaza, lower Manhattan. 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 346-1715.
Later in March
READINGS by women writers.
Included are Leslie Feinberg, on Wednesday ; Darien Taylor, March 24; Gerda Lerner, March 25, and Judith Katz, March 31.
Judith's Room, 681 Washington Street at Charles Street, West Village. 7 P.M.
Donations accepted.
Free.
Information: (212) 727-7330.
"NEW YORK WOMEN: WALKING TOURS," three sessions that visit homes, workplaces and neighborhoods associated with prominent New York women.
Sponsored by the New School for Social Research, 66 West 12th Street, Greenwich Village.
March 14, 21 and 28. at 10:30 A.M.
Course number: 1015.
Series admission: $50.
Registration: (212) 229-5690.
"CHAMBER MUSIC AND SONGS BY WOMEN COMPOSERS," performed by the Aviva Players.
Kosciuszko Foundation, 15 East 65th Street, Manhattan.
March 16 at 8 P.M.
Admission: $10; $8 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 362-2277.
"QUILTS BY AFRO-AMERICAN WOMEN," Caribbean Cultural Center, 408 West 58th Street, Manhattan.
March 23 through June 15.
Tuesday through Friday, 10:30 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Saturday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 307-7420.
"CARRYING ON: THE AGING OF WOMEN ACTIVISTS," a four-hour workshop.
The Crystal Quilt, a women's organization, 91 Franklin Street, TriBeCa.
March 20 at 1:30 P.M.
Admission: $20; $5 for those with low incomes.
Information: (212) 941-4994.


Israeli Expulsions Violate International Law; Kuwait Did the Same
To the Editor:
If you are going to belabor the ethics of Israel for deporting Arabs that it considers internal risks to Israeli security, then you should remind readers just as often that Kuwait deported 300,000 Palestinian Arabs -- some of whom had lived in Kuwait a long time -- for the same reason.
That the United Nations ignores this inequitable comparison is a matter for you to explore and not ignore.
SHIRLEY SANDS  Boca Raton, Fla., Feb. 19, 1993


Storm Knocks Out Electricity To Several Thousand Houses
The brief hint of spring that arrived this week was blown away yesterday as heavy rains and winds up to 65 miles an hour moved into the region.
Shore towns in New Jersey and on Long Island, still struggling to recover from the flooding of a vicious storm and high tides last December, began battening down for yet another assault from the sea.


Restaurants
In the final analysis, it could be argued that consistency, more than dazzle, is the touchstone of a good restaurant.
Many establishments open with a clear concept and noble intentions, and some even reach their goals.
But a restaurant's fiber is really tested a year or two down the line, when early exhilaration evolves into a demanding routine.
Andiamo, a jazzy Italian restaurant in a theatrical space near Lincoln Center, has been grappling with that problem for several years.
It got off to a high-kicking start in 1988 under a talented and versatile chef, Frank Crispo.
As is often the case, just as the restaurant had established an enthusiastic clientele, the chef moved on.
Two successors failed to rekindle the excitement, and Andiamo was reduced to a gastronomic understudy in this competitive neighborhood.


Market Place; Pension funds tell Paramount it's time to take some action.
WISCONSIN'S State pension board notified more than 150 of the largest holders of Paramount Communications Inc. stock yesterday that it would withhold its vote for four board members on the company's compensation committee.
The reason?
Top management's annual and long-term bonuses are not tied to the company's return to shareholders.
The Council of Institutional Investors, an association of the largest pension funds, says it will support the plan.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Suspect; Polite, Prayed a Lot, a Neighbor Says
Mohammed A. Salameh, the man arrested in the World Trade Center bombing, was described by a neighbor as a quiet person who prayed a great deal, received many guests and often helped her carry her groceries into her apartment.
A woman who lived in the building at 34 Kensington Avenue in Jersey City, where the police said Mr.
Salameh lived until his arrest yesterday, said that she was very surprised to learn that her neighbor, and perhaps some of the guests in his apartment, might have been responsible for the bombing.


Taylor Shows His Fastball, Not Nerves
There was a buzz at sunny Fort Lauderdale Stadium today, an electricity that had nothing to do with George Steinbrenner and everything to do with baseball.
It was Brien Taylor pitching against Jim Abbott, the Yankee future against the Yankee present.
So what if it was only an intrasquad game.
Although it would be foolish to dismiss Abbott's drawing power, most of the 3,500 spectators came to watch the 21-year-old Taylor oppose major league hitters for the first time.
Taylor pitched for the Class A affiliate in Fort Lauderdale last year, and the former No. 1 draft choice did not disappoint the locals who returned as he uncorked his still-developing fastball and displayed a cool demeanor.


The Animator's Art Deserves Respect
To the Editor:
While Peter Watson makes a valid point about the absurdity of nominating Aladdin as best actor for an Academy Award (Op-Ed, Feb. 13), his perspective on animation, acting and art is less than accurate.


U.S. Opposes Court Interference in Gay Troop Ban
Five weeks after President Clinton hailed a judge's ruling that the Pentagon's ban on homosexuals in the military is unconstitutional, the Justice Department is trying to keep that ruling from taking effect.
Administration officials say in interviews and court papers that allowing the decision in the case of Petty Officer Keith Meinhold to take effect could upset a fragile compromise reached in January by Mr.
Clinton and Congress to delay lifting the ban until July 15.


Cult Frees Another Child, Raising Hopes in Standoff
In what the authorities described as a positive sign in the standoff between hundreds of Federal agents and a religious cult near here, another child was released today.
But the recovery of a man's body still clutching a semi-automatic pistol was a grim reminder of the fierce gun battle that started it all.
A total of 20 children have been released since the standoff began on Sunday, first in small groups and, for the last 48 hours, one a day.
But as many as 18 more children are believed to remain inside the group's besieged compound, surrounded by hundreds of Federal agents, Texas Rangers, military helicopters and armored personnel carriers.


The Closing of Times Square


Trade's New Sheriff
Both Clintons were on view last week.
In full campaign mode, he bustled out to a Boeing plant to berate European governments for unfairly subsidizing Airbus, Boeing's main rival.
On Friday he sounded more conciliatory.
"We must compete, not retreat," he told a university audience.
"The truth of our age is this: Open and competitive commerce will enrich us as a nation."
Mr.
Clinton is hardly the first President to sing the good-cop, bad-cop tune: Free trade is fine as long as it's fair.
What's interesting about his rendition is its timing.
Only six weeks on the job and he's already announced that there's a new sheriff in town, one who's not afraid to swagger a bit on the international stage.


Chemists Find Way to Make An 'Impossible' Compound
By opening a chemical gate into a hollow carbon molecule, a team of chemists has discovered a simple way to make compounds that most scientists believed could not exist: compounds incorporating the elements helium and neon.
Aside from the scientific importance of the discovery, future compounds based on this research may be useful in treating certain forms of cancer and in tracking down the polluters responsible for oil spills.


George Brown, 70, Former Governor Of Bank of Jamaica
George Arthur Brown, the former Governor of the Bank of Jamaica and until he retired in 1990, an Associate Administrator of the United Nations Development Program, died on Tuesday at his home near Kingston, Jamaica.
He was 70.
He died of cancer, said Hilda Paqui, a spokeswoman for the United Nations aid agency.
At the time of his death, Mr.
Brown was chairman of the Council of the Mona Campus of the University of the West Indies.


Reporter Asserts Elysee Palace Tapped His Phone
The newspaper Liberation today printed documents appearing to demonstrate that the French presidential palace tapped the telephone of an investigative reporter for Le Monde in a two-month period in late 1985 and early 1986.
The journalist, Edwy Plenel, said in an interview that there was no question that the 16 summaries of his conversations between Dec. 30, 1985, and Feb. 26, 1986, were genuine.


Franco Hopes Patience Makes Perfect
On the morning of Sept. 29, 1992, John Franco, a man who had never so much as been on the disabled list, was on the operating table at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York.
Franco, having made a concession to physical vulnerability, hadn't surrendered all control.
"Don't put me under," Franco told the doctors.


U.S. Hints Plea Bargain Is Possible for Wachtler
A Federal official yesterday left open the possibility of a plea agreement with the former New York State Chief Judge, Sol Wachtler, but said that any such agreement would have to include at least a year in jail.
The official, who spoke only on condition of anonymity, would not say that a plea deal had been offered to Mr.
Wachtler, or that one had been proposed by his lawyers.
But he did he say that the prosecution was "open" to negotiations.


With Plenty of Food, Water and Bibles, Texas Cult Can Hold Out for a While
They bought hundreds of 40- and 50-pound sacks of grain, mostly rice and millet, at two food co-ops near Dallas.
A neighbor saw them in recent months spend nearly $6,000 on canned goods and juices at Sam's Club, a discount warehouse on the outskirts of Waco.
There is a water tower in the inner courtyard of their fortified compound, along with a dirty but usable well.
Although agents for the Federal Bureau of Investigation have yet to cut off electricity to the compound, there are at least two generators and a stockpile of batteries available if they do.


Foot Infections Puts Jordan in the Hospital
MICHAEL JORDAN was hospitalized yesterday in Chicago because of a foot infection.
He is expected to stay overnight at Northwestern Memorial Hospital but is listed as probable for the Chicago Bulls' game tonight against San Antonio, said a team spokeswoman, JOYCE SZYMANSKI.


Sports of The Times; Can Anyone Save the Big East?
WHAT if the rest of the country had its way?
What if March Madness ended at the Big East's borders?
What if this is what we read a week from Monday?
KANSAS CITY, March 14 -- In a shocking response to Syracuse University's victory in the Big East championship game, the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament committee omitted the league from its 64-team field.


Abroad at Home; On Bended Knee?
How far will Bill Clinton bend his knee to the murderous thugs who lead Serbian aggression in Bosnia?
How far can they push him without a response that preserves American honor?
Those questions have to be asked after the first disastrous application of the new Clinton policy toward the conflict in Bosnia.
Consider what the President did to defer to Serbian sensibilities -- and what he got back.


McGirt Jab Stings, but How About Left Hook?
All week, James (Buddy) McGirt has been throwing left jabs at sparring partners, left jabs at padded gloves, left jabs at the heavy bag, left jabs into the air.
But what about the left hook?
"He threw plenty of left hooks today," his manager, Al Certo, said after McGirt worked out briefly yesterday at the gym where he trains in Jersey City.
"You should've seen him."


ACCESS NOT EASED TO BOSNIAN TOWNS
Much of eastern Bosnia remains cut off from ground convoys of relief supplies despite the Clinton Administration's efforts to persuade Serbian forces to lift their sieges, American officials said today.
The Administration had hoped that the airdrops would demonstrate to the Serbs that it was futile to block ground convoys to the Muslim enclaves in eastern Bosnia and thus encourage them to allow trucks carrying the supplies to pass.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon:
Closing This Weekend
"THE LAST YANKEE," Manhattan Theater Club at City Center Stage II, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
A comedy-drama by Arthur Miller about two couples who meet at a state mental hospital where the wives are patients; directed by John Tillinger.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 7:30 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 581-1212.
"SAMUEL'S MAJOR PROBLEMS," St.
Mark's Church in the Bowery, Second Avenue and 10th Street, East Village.
A new play, whose action begins at the end of an all-night party.
Written and directed by Richard Foreman.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today through Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Information: (212) 533-4650.
BAVARIAN NATIONAL BALLET OF THE MUNICH STATE OPERA, New York State Theater, Lincoln Center.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today, 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M., and Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $48.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
"THE ROYAL CITY OF SUSA: ANCIENT NEAR EASTERN TREASURES IN THE LOUVRE," Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.
Sunday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
Admission: $6; $3 for children and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.
JULIAN SCHNABEL: WORKS ON PAPER, 1976-1992, Matthew Marks Gallery, 1018 Madison Avenue, at 78th Street.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 861-9455.
"PREVIEW: THE NARA CONVENTION HALL INTERNATIONAL DESIGN COMPETITION," Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
Architectural proposals by 10 architects for a cultural complex in Nara, Japan.
Through Sunday.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Because of construction that has closed several floors of the museum, admission is half price through March 31: $3.75; $2.25 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 708-9480.
Closing Next Weekend
"SAINT JOAN," National Actors Theater at the Lyceum, 149 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
George Bernard Shaw's drama, featuring Maryann Plunkett; directed by Michael Langham.
Through March 14.
Performances: Tuesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $45.
Information: (212) 239-620.
"THE INTENSITY OF AN ACTOR: AN AL PACINO RETROSPECTIVE," American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
Through March 14.
Museum admission: $5; $2.50 for children and students; $4 for the elderly.
Screenings are an additional $2.
Screening times and other information: (718) 784-0077.


U.S. Split on Gay Life
A New York Times/CBS News Poll found that Americans are sharply divided over whether gay men and lesbians choose their sexual orientation and that this view shapes attitudes on everything from whether homosexuals should serve in the military to gay life in general.
Article, page A14.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Overview; JERSEY CITY MAN IS CHARGED IN BOMBING OF TRADE CENTER AFTER RENTED VAN IS TRACED
A New Jersey man described by the authorities as an Islamic fundamentalist was arrested yesterday and charged with taking part in the car bombing that shook the World Trade Center a week ago.
With twisted but crucially identifiable fragments of a yellow van found in the rubble and a paper trail showing that the vehicle had been rented in New Jersey four days before the explosion, investigators said they traced the renter and achieved what they called a swift, lucky breakthrough in a case that had been expected to take months.


Sounds Around Town
Melody and Zoom
Pond, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Seattle is bound to lose its magnetic pull eventually, and people will once again consider it simply the home of airplanes and rain.
Then it will be Portland's moment to dazzle the masses.
Cheaper rents and less hype, but proximity to the alternative-rock boomtown, make the City of Roses an ideal cultivating ground for challenging, smart new rock.
One of Portland's best offerings so far is Pond.
The group, which has released a debut album on Nirvana's former label, Sub/Pop, has a sound all its own, based in melodic mutterings and angry psychedelic zoom.
Pond appears Saturday night in the middle of a bill warmed up by Coffee and headlined by Buffalo Tom.
The late show is sold out, so get your tickets now for the 7:30 P.M. performance.
Tickets are $8, available at See Hear in Manhattan, (212) 505-9781; Pier Platters in Hoboken, (201) 795-9015, or through Ticketmaster.
Female Power
Kristin Hersh, She Never Blinks and Cindy Lee Berryhill, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
The power of woman is unleashed in two separate shows on Saturday at this favorite downtown spot.
Kristin Hersh, leader of the trailblazing avant-rock group Throwing Muses, sings and plays her harrowing, gorgeous music in a solo performance; She Never Blinks opens.
That show begins at 9 P.M.
Taking the stage at 11 is Cindy Lee Berryhill, reclaiming her title as the Dorothy Parker of folk with a set of her dry-as-ice, bittersweet compositions.
Each show is $10 and tickets are available at the Knitting Factory or through Ticketmaster.
Sweet, Sharp and Blue
Son Seals, Tramp's, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
Son Seals plays blues that can be as bitter as the Chicago wind, but when they're sweet they're like creme brulee, dark and sharp on the surface, but with an inside that's rich with sugar.
Mr.
Seals remains among the best guitarists to carry the torch from such players as Muddy Waters, paying attention to rock without abandoning the basic 12-bar tradition.
His music communicates the harsh realities of black urban life in terms that make as much sense today as they did when the blues were young.
This show's a real bargain, especially since Lucky Peterson is opening on Friday and the Bennett Brothers share the bill on Saturday.
Sets begin at 8:30 and 11:30 each night, and tickets are available at Tramp's or through Ticketmaster.


Ketchum Sets Up Media Buying Unit
Ketchum Advertising in Philadelphia said yesterday that it had formed a separate unit, the Ketchum Media Group, to specialize in media buying and related media services.


COMPANY NEWS: Undemanding Watchdog; A (Very) Modest Auditing Proposal
The Public Oversight Board has a tough-sounding name, but it's the type of self-regulatory group that many professions would love to have looking over their shoulder.
To hear the board tell it, one of its biggest accomplishments has been an elaborate peer-review mechanism it introduced 16 years ago to improve audit quality -- even though no major firm has ever earned a failing grade.


Starks Becomes Show-Stopping Phantom of the Garden
A masked man sparked the Knicks to a 28-point lead last night, then a sometimes forgotten man protected it.
John Starks (22 points), wearing a face mask to protect a broken nose suffered in the first quarter, shot 7 for 8 in the first half, including 3 for 3 from 3-point range.
Then Tony Campbell, who disappeared from Pat Riley's playing rotation in December, scored a season-high 28 points, helping the Knicks to a highly entertaining 125-111 victory over the Utah Jazz at Madison Square Garden.


CHRONICLE
The actress KATHARINE HEPBURN was hospitalized yesterday for exhaustion, a family member said.
The 85-year-old actress will spend a few days in Hartford Hospital, Miss Hepburn's brother-in-law, ELLSWORTH GRANT, told The Associated Press.


Review/Theater; How Far Two Good Sports Will Go
EVEN if you don't share my conviction that Bernadette Peters and Martin Short are among the most winning of performers, you still might admire how they play the losing hand they've been dealt in "The Goodbye Girl."
In their heroic and tireless effort to put over the dull musical at the Marquis, these stars would serve the audience dinner and fill out its 1040 forms if given the chance.
Ms.
Peters goes so far as to dress up as a plate of french fries with ketchup on top - don't ask why because no explanation is forthcoming - and Mr.
Short hobbles about in golden Mary Pickford curls and matching lame tights for an Act I finale that requires him to play Richard III in drag.
Both stars cheerfully contend with agressive child actors and garish band arrangements that could drown out Ethel Merman, not to mention a nausea-inducing turntable that is the centerpiece of the most hideously designed big-budget musical in years.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Upstart Beats Sabatini  Lindsay Davenport, a 6-foot-2-inch high school junior who turned pro just last week, upset third-seeded Gabriela Sabatini, 7-6 (7-5), 6-1, in yesterday's third round at the Virginia Slims in Delray Beach, Fla.
The Hoosiers' 6-foot-7-inch senior forward passed three players -- former record holder Glen Rice of Michigan, Hoosier Steve Alford and Mike McGee of Michigan -- and now has 2,468 points for his career. (AP) Florida State 83, Georgia Tech 82: Eleventh-ranked Florida State lost a 15-point lead, then rallied in the final 10 minutes and edged Georgia Tech in Atlanta behind Bob Sura's 22-point performance. (AP) Massachusetts 61, St.
Joseph's 43: Louis Roe scored 12 points and No. 23 Massachusetts ran off 21 straight points in the second half to defeat St.
Joseph's in Amherst, Mass. (AP) New Mexico 69, Utah 59: Ike Williams scored 26 points and New Mexico's 3-point barrage finally wore down No. 9 Utah at Albuquerque, N.M. (AP)
B.Y.U. 84, Texas-El Paso 63: Gary Trost and Nick Sanderson led a fast-breaking Brigham Young attack and as the No. 21-ranked Cougars beat Texas-El Paso on the road to move into a first place tie with Utah in the Western Athletic Conference. (AP) Oklahoma St. 114, Oral Roberts 85: Bryant Reeves, Brooks Thompson and Fred Burley all had career nights as No. 19 Oklahoma State finally shook off Oral Roberts, at Stillwater, Okla. (AP) N.B.A.
Cavaliers Beat Wolves  Terrell Brandon, playing for injured Mark Price, scored 17 of his career-high 21 points in the second half as Cleveland rallied from a 15-point deficit to beat Minnesota, 103-95, last night in Minneapolis.


Accounts
*
Start Inc., Herndon, Va., to Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, New York, to handle the account of the company that offers frequent-saver programs to consumers.
The account was previously at Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG, New York.
Billings were estimated to be more than $10 million.


Salomon Says It Lost $250 Million in Trading
Salomon Inc., which is widely regarded as the biggest, boldest trader in the bond market, yesterday reported a $250 million loss in the first two months of the year.
The loss was a reminder that some firms that earn big profits from speculative trading must inevitably suffer occasional losses.


Antitrust Exemption Is Targeted In Senate
In a long anticipated move, Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum today introduced legislation that would eliminate major league baseball's 71-year-old exemption from Federal antitrust laws.
The Democrat from Ohio said the 1922 Supreme Court ruling, which exempted the major leagues from antitrust laws on the ground that the game could not be considered interstate commerce, no longer applies.


LEDERLE REDUCES PRICE OF NICOTINE PATCHES
Lederle Laboratories, a maker of nicotine patches designed to help people quit smoking, said yesterday that it planned to reduce its prices by 33 percent temporarily and to give away more patches to state and local clinics.
The company, which is lagging behind the market leaders Marion Merrell Dow and Ciba-Geigy, said last month that it would donate two million of its Prostep nicotine patches to smoking-cessation programs for state and local governments.
Lederle, a Wayne, N.J., subsidiary of the pharmaceutical giant American Cyanamid Company, said yesterday it would add one million patches to the program.
Three million patches would supply 75,000 smokers through a six-week program.
For smokers who purchase the patches, Lederele is cutting the cost from $4 to $2.50 a day through June 30.


DDB Needham Quits Sears Review
DDB Needham Worldwide withdrew yesterday from the review for the apparel portion of the Sears Merchandise Group's account, with estimated billings of $20 million to $25 million.
DDB Needham's withdrawal was unexpected, especially after Adweek had speculated the review might end up in a creative shoot-out between DDB Needham and Ogilvy &amp; Mather, the incumbent.
But Keith Reinhard, DDB Neeham Worldwide's chairman and chief executive, said the "substantial resources" required for the review "are best deployed against the needs of existing clients at this time."


CHRONICLE
It was a stellar crowd that assembled on Tuesday in the Carlton Hotel in Washington to honor STROBE TALBOTT and MICHAEL R. BESCHLOSS, authors of "At the Highest Levels: The Inside Story of the End of the Cold War," published by Little, Brown.
Among the guests: BEN BRADLEE, former executive editor of The Washington Post, and his wife, the writer SALLY QUINN; KATHARINE GRAHAM, chairwoman of the Washington Post Company; ROBERT S. STRAUSS, former Ambassador to Russia and former Democratic national chairman; Senators PATRICK J. LEAHY of Vermont and JOHN F. KERRY of Massachusetts; SHARON PERCY ROCKEFELLER, president and chief executive of WETA, the public television station in Washington, and EVANGELINE BRUCE.


Rev. Peter Rinaldi, 82, Shroud of Turin Expert
The Rev.
Peter M. Rinaldi, who fostered interest in the Shroud of Turin and encouraged scientific investigation of its authenticity, died on Sunday at a hospital in Turin, Italy.
He was 82 and lived in Turin and Port Chester, N.Y.
He died of heart failure, church associates said.


Spreading A.A. Message, One Broadcast at a Time
The first time Tom attended an Alcoholics Anonymous meeting at the Whalley Avenue jail here, he went for two reasons: the coffee and the cigarettes.
He hadn't counted on meeting George, a member who handed him "the Big Book," A.A.'s basic text, and said, "Read this; it will help." Tom did and it did.
He's been a member and sober for 15 years.


Overhaul Set for Domestic-Help Rules
Shaken by the trouble over Zoe Baird, Congress began steps today to make it easier for well-off people to pay Social Security and unemployment insurance taxes for their domestic help.
Two subcommittees of the House Ways and Means Committee held a joint hearing on legislation that would raise the amount of wages that must be paid before taxes are due and permit employers of household help to file the required forms just once a year.


Stocks Gain Allure as Bonds Lose Their Luster
A continued plunge in interest rates to the lowest level in decades is causing many money managers to make fundamental shifts in their investment strategies, flocking to stocks in search of the high returns that bonds had previously provided.
Their enthusiasm has propelled some market averages to within inches of new highs this week, with stocks regaining all the ground they lost two weeks ago as President Clinton presented his proposed budget.
The consequences go far beyond the investment community.
The stock market's vigor, if sustained, can help companies sell stock to pay down debt, expand and, often, add employees.


Haitian Leader Calls on Clinton To Set a Deadline for His Return
Signaling a growing impatience with the pace of diplomacy, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the ousted Haitian President, called on President Clinton today to set a firm deadline for his return to power.
"We believe it's possible to restore democracy to Haiti," Father Aristide said at a forum on Haiti on Capitol Hill.
"That's why the first thing we ask for today is to set a date certain for my return to Haiti."


Designer Who Was Shot in TriBeCa Dies
A graphics designer who was shot in the neck almost two weeks ago by robbers as she loaded packages into the trunk of her car has died, the police said yesterday.
The designer, Bonnie Bear, 42, died at 9 P.M. on Wednesday at Bellevue Hospital Center, said Detective Joseph McConville, a New York City Police Department spokesman.
She had been breathing only with the aid of a respirator since the shooting on Feb. 23.


On My Mind; Hindus Against Hindus
The chances are that not one of the people at the dinner party in Bombay will ever be elected to anything in India -- or even run for office.
But the future of this country will depend on them and people like them.
About 25 of Bombay's influential were in the apartment -- businessmen, a member of a great industrial empire, advertising executives, pollsters, a think-tanker, an architect, journalists, a movie producer.
It was a New York or Los Angeles sort of group, but with less of the sharp edge.


San Francisco Journal; Soap Opera by the Bay: Tales of Sex and Politics
Bill, a local politician, helped Tony win the job of police chief.
Tony then hired Bill's girlfriend, Joanne, as his spokeswoman.
Joanne wasn't doing a very good job, and she heard she was about to get the ax.
Bill yelled at Tony.
Tony yelled back.
Then Joanne said Tony had harassed her by kissing her and giving her earrings.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Complaint; Starting With Debris
Following are excerpts from the complaint against Mohammed A. Salameh filed yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
. . .
On Feb. 26, 1993, an explosion occurred in the garage area beneath the Vista Hotel, located at the World Trade Center complex in New York, N.Y. (hereinafter "explosion site"), causing massive destruction and the death of at least five individuals.
. . .


It's Not Only the Mail That Must Go Through


F.D.A. TO TOUGHEN TESTING OF DEVICES
Safety tests and applications for approval of some medical devices, including heart defibrillators and a home test for ovulation, were so poorly carried out that they were "not up to the level of fifth-grade science," Dr.
Bruce Burlington, the Food and Drug Administration's chief of the Center for Medical Devices, said today.
An internal investigation at the agency found that safety studies had too few patients to detect side effects and often had no control patients for making comparisons.
It also found that the studies had often failed to specify what they were looking for and to report direct results.


Art in Review
Flor Garduno  The Americas Society  680 Park Avenue, at 68th Street  Through Sunday
An air of mystery hangs over the pictures of peasants in South and Central America made by Flor Garduno, a young Mexican photographer.
Ms.
Garduno worked as an assistant to Manuel Alvarez Bravo, and her work shares his fascination with the rituals of peasant culture, as well as his moody, Surrealist-derived style.


Attention: The Boss Is Yesteryear's News
The Boss Watch begins from afar; if George Steinbrenner wants to be interviewed by me he can submit written answers and I may respond with questions.
In person, Steinbrenner can be amusing for short stretches, but he seems to have said the same thing for 20 years: Hear Me!
Hug Me!
Change Me, I'm Wet!
The relationship between Steinbrenner and New York, which began in 1973 with the Original Lie ("We plan absentee ownership") and was interrupted in 1990 by the Big Caper ("Howie, I want you should find out if Dave. . . . "), resumed this week in a brief squall of publicity that was contained by some real terrorism back home.
Steinbrenner's routine shamelessness was diminished and he merely materialized at spring training rather than stage an elaborate entrance with choppers, limos and celebrity look-alikes.


Review/Dance; From Tensely Tethered To Gloriously Free
Eliot Feld is one of the most articulate and visionary people in dance today.
But he insists on tethering his dancers, and on tying them, particularly the women, up in knots.
His fondness for tethering could be seen almost subliminally in "Harbinger," created in 1967 and brought back as a major revival this season.
It was presented by the Feld Ballets/NY on Wednesday night at the Joyce Theater.
Tethering was, in a sense, the raison d'etre of Mr.
Feld's new "Frets and Women." The ballet, set to music by Lou Harrison that tended to be repetitive and self-limiting, is a ritualistic dance for a group of nine women, with solos for three of them.
The women are dressed in gray sheaths that cover their body from shoulders to toe, but leave one leg bare.
The piece makes much, toward its end, of the fact that one of the women is dressed in a white stretch sheath that covers all but her face, summoning inevitable recollections of early Martha Graham costumes.


METRO DIGEST
THE TWIN TOWERS: A TUMULTUOUS DAY AND AN ARREST IN THE BOMBING
A 26-year-old New Jersey man described by the authorities as an Islamic fundamentalist was arrested and charged with planting the car bomb that shook the World Trade Center a week ago in one of the nation's worst acts of terrorist violence.
A1.
CAREFUL TRAP AT TRUCK RENTAL DEALER
The suspect was arrested after he returned for the third time to a Ryder truck rental dealer in Jersey City for a refund of the $400 cash deposit on the van that he said had been stolen the night before the explosion.
A1.


Review/Art; Some Japanese Rarities Of Buddhist Culture
The Japan Society has presented some wonderful shows over the years. (Who could forget "The Great Age of Japanese Buddhist Sculpture" in 1982?) But its recent track record has been somewhat spotty.
It reached a low point a few years ago with an exhibition of Ansel Adams photographs from a Japanese private collection, an unfathomable choice for a New York audience with exceedingly long exposure to this photographer's work.
By contrast, "Visions of the Dharma: Japanese Buddhist Paintings and Prints in the Honolulu Academy of Arts" brings the society back up to speed.
The work is extremely beautiful and is unfamiliar locally; much of it is being published for the first time in the good-looking catalogue written by the Honolulu Academy's curator of Asian art, Stephen Little, that accompanies the show.
The catalogue's contention that the academy has one of the "finest groupings of Japanese Buddhist paintings and prints in the United States" may be a bit inflated; with collections in Boston, Cleveland, San Francisco and Washington on the list, the competition is fairly stiff.
But there is much of interest to be seen here.


Israeli Expulsions Violate International Law; Double Standard
To the Editor:
The proposal for the immediate return of only 100 of the 400 Palestinian deportees illustrates a United States double standard on the Middle East, which your editorials reflect.


Prudential Reported to Seek A Settlement With S.E.C.
Prudential Securities Inc. is trying to negotiate a settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission of potential charges relating to the firm's practices in selling limited partnership investments during the 1980's, people who have been briefed on the talks said yesterday.
The negotiations for a settlement, which are said to involve a large fine, are part of a broad push by the firm to resolve the troubles caused by its sale of the partnerships.
If successful, the effort would close a chapter for the firm of a 1980's investment disaster that caused clients to lose hundreds of millions of dollars.


Review/Film; Role Models for the Ghetto
Ruby L. Oliver's "Love Your Mama" is the work of an earnest but unmistakably amateur film maker who wants to create believable role models for all those living in the kind of black ghetto from which she emerged, her faith intact.
"Love Your Mama" has the bluntly functional manner and look of a training film.
It's about a mother whose strong Christian faith helps her to rehabilitate her drunken husband and her teen-age son, a car thief, and to encourage her pregnant teen-age daughter to finish her education in order to open a day-care center.
The performances, especially by Carol E. Hall, as the daughter, and Audrey Morgan, as Mama, have a sweet plainness to them that is sometimes as effective as more sophisticated attempts at acting.


In Defense of Court Street Lawyers
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 17 "About New York" column describes Tony Falese, cabbie advocate, as a man with a silver bracelet, a beeper and "the air of a lawyer, the Court Street kind." Your message is that Mr.
Falese evokes a certain street sleaze image.
The phrase "Court Street lawyer" is an old elitist insult that reveals a socially toxic view of New York City as divided into two sectors -- Manhattan and "the outer boroughs." Burial of this phrase is long overdue.


Hispanic Voters and the Politics of Sludge
It is rare that a neighborhood, once singled out by city planners, can avoid accepting certain unloved byproducts of urban life -- the prisoners, the homeless, the sewage.
But last month Sunset Park, Brooklyn, forced the Dinkins administration to back down on plans to build a sludge composting plant there.
The move testifies, among other things, to the growing power of Hispanic voters in city politics.


In Israeli's Unusually Brutal Death, Usual Lessons
Even in this land where stabbings, shootings and stone-throwings have long stopped causing surprise, Yehoshua Weisbrod's death this week knocked the wind out of many people.
It was brutal.


Times Goes to Court, Charging Slowdown
The New York Times has filed court papers accusing the pressmen's union of violating a labor agreement at its new printing plant in Edison, N.J.
Judge Sonia Sotomayor of United States District Court in Manhattan has scheduled a hearing on March 12 to review the complaint.
The newspaper asserts that work slowdowns by pressmen in January and February violated a memorandum of agreement signed in November by The Times and New York Newspaper Printing Pressmen's Union No. 2.


Candidates for Congress Spent Record $678 Million, a 52% Jump
Candidates for the House and Senate spent more than two-thirds of a billion dollars on their 1992 election campaigns, 52 percent more than was spent on the 1990 legislative races, the Federal Election Commission said today.
The phenomenal rise in political spending, to $678 million, broke a six-year trend in which the total cost of running for Congress remained stable, at about $450 million for each two-year period before an election.


Mr. Lizzard, Following His Dream
WHAT man has not wanted to live the imagined life?
To fly like Chuck Yeager or Michael Jordan.
To dance like Fred Astaire in a ballroom clinch with the girl of his dreams.
To own a saloon and buy drinks for all his friends.
To step off the treadmill, slip the bonds of 9-to-5 capitalism and give the soul some breathing room.
A show of hands, please?


U.S. Aid Worker in Uganda Is Ambushed With Colleague
Gunmen shot and wounded an American aid worker and his Ugandan colleague in an ambush in northern Uganda, the relief agency CARE said today.
CARE said that the American, Stanley Dunn, was hit three times and that his Ugandan colleague, whose name was not immediately known, was hit 13 times when the gunmen opened fire on their vehicle on Wednesday.


The Law Being Invoked
The criminal complaint filed against Mohammed A. Salameh charges him with violating Title 18, United States Code, Section 844 (2) and (1).
The law forbids anyone from carrying "an explosive unlawfully during the commission of any felony which may be prosecuted in a court of the United States."


Lending Binge
The current record-low interest rates and the rush of consumers to refinance mortgages have helped interest-sensitive stocks like mortgage lenders.
Shares of Margaretten Financial, which was spun off by Primerica in January 1992, have risen 30.8 percent since the beginning of the year.
Yesterday, the stock closed at $19.50.


Editorial Notebook; General Jaruzelski Regrets
Gen.
Wojciech Jaruzelski is twice guaranteed a large place in Polish history.
In December 1981 he was the tough-minded Communist boss who imposed martial law to crush Solidarity, the grass-roots labor movement.
His military and secret police forces hunted down thousands of activists and herded them off to detention camps.
He came to symbolize, personally, the reimposition at gunpoint of a hated, Soviet-sponsored dictatorship on a resentful Polish nation.
Yet less than eight years later, in early 1989, it was the same General Jaruzelski who authorized Solidarity's return to legal status, and eventually its accession to government power.
Poland soon became the first non-Communist state in Eastern Europe since World War II, and General Jaruzelski felt comfortable enough with the new regime to stay on as President for another year and more.


Study Links Heart Disease to Margarine
Women who eat four or more teaspoons of margarine a day have a 50 percent greater risk of developing heart disease than women who eat margarine only once a month, according to a study published today in the British medical journal Lancet.
And women who eat large amounts of other forms of solid and semisolid vegetable fat, the equivalent of six or more teaspoons of margarine a day, increase their risk of heart disease by 70 percent.
These types of vegetable fats are found in cookies, cakes and fried fast foods.


TVWeekend; A Series That Just Might Be for Real
Tonight at 9:30, network television comes up with still another comedy series featuring still another group of very talented black American performers.
Apparently, the black experience in America is fine for prime time if it can be milked for a few laughs.
Occasionally, though, there is substance lurking in the comedy.
That was true of NBC's "Cosby Show." And it just might turn out to be true of ABC's new "Where I Live."
A couple of years ago, the producer Michael Jacobs ("Dinosaurs") was devising a version of Thornton Wilder's "Our Town" that would be set in a black community.
Meanwhile, Ehrich Van Lowe (a producer of "The Cosby Show") was developing a series based on his experiences growing up in the Bronx.
The two eventually got together with Disney's Touchstone Television to develop "Where I Live." It is set in Harlem, though it is filmed on an elaborate street set in Burbank, Calif.


Owners Favor Realignment, More Playoffs
By the 1995 season, major league baseball should have a new appearance.
Each league should have three divisions instead of two and each should have four teams instead of two in the post-season playoffs.
Club owners, by what was said to be an overwhelming majority, gave preliminary approval to the changes today.
In a straw vote, they also said they wanted each team to play between 10 and 20 interleague games each season.


2 Executives Indicted In Trade-Secret Theft
A trade-secret dispute between two well-known Silicon Valley companies led to a rare criminal indictment today.
Gordon Eubanks, the chief executive and co-founder of the Symantec Corporation, and Eugene Wang, a former Borland International executive, were indicted by a grand jury and accused of stealing trade secrets from a rival, the District Attorney for Santa Cruz County, Calif., announced today.
Mr.
Eubanks, 46, was charged with 11 counts of receipt of stolen property and conspiracy; Mr.
Wang, 35, was charged with 21 counts of trade-secret law violations and conspiracy.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Scene; Surprises in a Crowded Courtroom
At 7:45 P.M. yesterday, Mohammed A. Salameh, gaunt in a light grey sweat suit and white running shoes, entered a courtroom at the United States Court House in Manhattan to stand accused of participating in what the Federal prosecutor, Gilmore Childers, called, "the single most destructive act of terror ever committed on American soil."
The din of 200 reporters, lawyers and clerks quieted to an instant hush as Mr.
Salameh rubbed his wrists when his handcuffs were removed.
He glanced quickly behind him, searching the packed courtroom, then shrugged.


G.A.O. Says Big Farmers Profiteer Off Peanut Quotas
A report by the General Accounting Office says that a strange system of Federal production quotas has artificially restricted the nation's peanut supply, enriching big farmers at an annual cost to consumers as high as $513 million.
The report, scheduled for release on Friday, says that permits for peanut production within quota limits, distributed without charge to longtime farmers by the Government, have become so valuable that two-thirds of those holding the permits now lease them to other farmers who actually produce the peanuts.


AT THE WHITNEY, A BIENNIAL WITH A SOCIAL CONSCIENCE
THE 1993 Biennial Exhibition at the Whitney Museum of American Art begins on Madison Avenue in front of the building, where an enormous sculpture of a fire engine by the California artist Charles Ray is parked at the curb.
Sleekly red, it is also hugely cute, because its skewed proportions and simplified details are those of a child's toy that has been blown up to adult real-life scale.
Enjoy it.
There's not a lot of eyes-on pleasure to be had inside, where the latest Biennial turns its back on the razzle-dazzle of the 1980's and faces the harsher realities of the 90's.
The first Biennial to be completely organized during the tenure of David A. Ross, the museum's director, the '93 version is a pious, often arid show that frequently substitutes didactic moralizing for genuine visual communication.
It could easily be subtitled "The Importance of Being Earnest." It could also be called the Reading While Standing Up Biennial: the art is often heavy with text, even without the simplistic artists' statements featured on many labels and the reading room, where one can peruse the latest books of cultural and sociopolitical theory.


Review/Film; Sending Up Both Blacks and Whites
"Amos and Andrew," the first film to be directed as well as written by E. Max Frye, is less breathless than emphysemic, a handicapped satirical farce whose roots are not in life but in other, better movies and sitcoms.
The central situation is this: The white chief of police on a small resort island, not unlike Nantucket, mistakes a celebrated black playwright for a housebreaker, though the man is really the house's new owner in the process of moving in.
The chief, believing the man to have taken hostages, sets up an elaborate siege of the house.
When he realizes his mistake, the chief initiates a phony hostage situation that makes everything even worse, by which time all of America is watching the debacle through the facilities of national television.


Former Salomon Executive Is Hired by Mexican Firm
Lee H. Kimmel, who resigned as head of merchant banking at Salomon Brothers in June 1989, yesterday was named chief executive of Interacciones Global Inc., a new American subsidiary of Interacciones Casa de Bolsa, Mexico's largest independent securities firm.
Mr.
Kimmell, who spent 15 years at Salomon, has been running his own small investment banking firm, Kimmell &amp; Company, for the last two years.


1,000 Competitive Cats
Cats, their fanciers and all things cat-related will be abundant this weekend at the International Cat Show at Madison Square Garden.
About 1,000 cats, representing 40 breeds, will compete for cash prizes as well as for the opportunity to appear in cat-product commercials and a trip to the National Cat Show in London in May.
The final awards ceremony will be held 4:30 to 6 P.M.  on Sunday.
For cat owners, there will be workshops in cat care, photo contests and other events.
Hours are 3 to 9 P.M. today and 9 A.M. to 6 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday.
Admission is $10 today ($6 for children and the elderly); $15 tomorrow ($8), and $16 on Sunday ($10).
There is also a $25 ticket, good for admission tomorrow and Sunday.
Information: (718) 855-1928.


Star-Studded Opener at the Doral
The first serious golf shots are traditionally struck in Florida, so it was fitting that some of the biggest names in the game took starring roles today in the first round of the Doral Ryder Open.
Playing the lead was Greg Norman, who carved out a seven-under-par 65.
But what made the production a real success was the supporting cast.


Ballet School Celebrates 15th Anniversary


Battered Shore Areas Batten Down for Another Storm


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about the effect of the explosion at the World Trade Center on prospective tenants described negotiations between the Fiduciary Trust Company and the Port Authority incorrectly.
Fiduciary Trust, which occupies four floors at the Center, has been negotiating a renewal of that space and expansion to a fifth floor.
Its chairman, Lawrence Huntington, said yesterday that although Fiduciary has retained an engineering firm to assess damage to the premises, he still expected to sign a long-term lease and stay at the Center.


Pop/Jazz; Some Postcards From Planet Duplex
When he was a boy, the Conceptual artist David Greenberger started filling a notebook with rescued comments, small things people said that nobody else would have remembered.
"I was interested in the way overheard things took on a particular poignancy and power," he said.
Back then, word-scavenging was just one aspect of Mr.
Greenberger's creative vision.
Little did he know that after art school the preservation of the quotidian would become a central activity in his life.
But then, he hadn't expected to meet the folks at the Duplex.


Former Coaches Return
MIKE KEENAN and ROGER NEILSON are back in business.
On Wednesday, Keenan was introduced in Toronto as the coach and general manager of Canada's entry in the world championships, which will begin in late April in Munich, Germany.
Neilson, who was dismissed as the Rangers' coach in December, is the club's assistant general manager and assistant coach.
The Canadians, who last won the world championships in 1961, were fourth in their pool last year and lost to Finland in the quarterfinals.
Sweden is the defending champion.
Keenan, who left the Chicago Blackhawks over a contract dispute at the start of the season, will depend on National Hockey League players whose teams aren't in the playoffs.
Neilson said he expected plenty of quality players to be available, including Philadelphia's rookie star, ERIC LINDROS. (AP)


A Collision in Kissimmee
The Yankees, who have trained in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., since 1961, are talking with the commissioners of Osceola County about moving their spring site to Kissimmee, Fla., which is where the Houston Astros have trained for nine years.
But the Astros' new owner, Drayton McLane Jr., says neither the Yankees nor the county commissioners have talked to him.
"We have publicly said if they vote to allow the Yankees in there, we would leave," McLane said before the owners' meeting today.
"We feel we put Kissimmee on the map in baseball. All of a sudden, the Yankees want to come to town. You don't need two teams in a town of 35,000."


No Headline
"We've lost all faith in negotiations, agreements and promises. The situation continues as before with nonstop shelling from all directions." -- SENAID BABIC, a radio operator in eastern Bosnia.  [ A8:4. ]


Diner's Journal
Taking the Children Along
The children of many baby boomers are now old enough to sit in a restaurant without losing consciousness or using salt shakers as short-range projectiles, and more restaurants are offering enticements for children.
In New York City, this has prompted more restaurants to offer services for young diners: elevated seats, special menus, whimsical drinks and even decor that kids find engaging.


Israeli Expulsions Violate International Law; Be More Evenhanded
To the Editor:
"Bosnian Muslims to Settle in Israel" (news item, Feb. 11), a tiny paragraph buried on an inside page, reports that the Israeli Government has approved the request of two Arab villages to accept 100 Bosnian Muslims.
No Arab country has offered asylum to even one Bosnian Muslim.


The Art Market
Who Sold What?
It looks as though it will take a trial to determine the power of a handshake between an artist and a gallery.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with a review of two blues pianists misidentified the pianist shown.
He is Booker T. Laury, not Henry Townsend.


Growing Sorority in Congress Edges Into the Ol' Boys' Club
The young black woman with the gold sneakers, slacks, braided hair and Mickey Mouse watch stepped into the elevator in the Capitol.
"This elevator is for members only," the elevator operator said frostily.


Paying Tribute to Hanya Holm, Modern-Dance Choreographer
Hanya Holm, the modern-dance pioneer who died on Nov. 3 at the age of 99, was honored on Wednesday night on what would have been her 100th birthday.
"Hanya loved a party," the choreographer Don Redlich said at St.
Mark's Church, where everyone received a piece of an enormous birthday cake.
Miss Holm, a German-born choreographer and teacher, settled in New York in 1931 and became a major force in American dance and the Broadway theater.
Her achievements ranged from "Trend," the monumentally scaled depiction of social unrest she created in 1937, to the choreography for such musicals as "Kiss Me, Kate" (1948), "My Fair Lady" (1956) and "Camelot" (1960).


Harry Braus, 78, Dies; Government Scientist
Harry Braus, a scientist who developed a method to identify and measure organic pollutants in air and water but was forced from Government service at the height of McCarthyism, died on Monday at a hospital in Cincinnati, where he lived.
He was 78.
The cause of death was pneumonia, his family said.


Pepsi Plans $750 Million For Mexican Expansion
The global expansion of American cola companies continued yesterday as Pepsi-Cola International said it would invest $750 million over the next five years for its operations in Mexico.
The announcement came eight days after the Coca-Cola Company, the world leader in carbonated beverages, said it would spend $150 million over the same period for new or existing facilities in the interior of China.


More Reports of Suffering
Unconfirmed accounts of violence, hunger, lack of shelter and the complete absence of medicines and bandages in the Cerska enclave continued to emerge through reports from radio operators broadcasting from the besieged area.
"We've lost all faith in negotiations, agreements and promises," said Senaid Babic, the main radio operator.
"The situation continues as before with nonstop shelling from all directions."


Stocks Fall on Signs of Weaker Economy
Stock prices retreated a bit yesterday despite another surge in bond prices as new reports of economic weakness put pressure on the market.
Health-care and technology issues were among the notable losers.


Carlos Montoya, 89, Flamenco Guitarist, Is Dead
Carlos Montoya, a guitarist and composer who played an important role in transforming flamenco from a localized Spanish folk form into a style with an international following, died on Wednesday.
He was 89 and lived in Wainscott, L.I.
The cause of death was heart failure, said his son Allan Montoya of Wainscott.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Investigation; Insistence on Refund for a Truck Results in an Arrest in Explosion
He wanted his money back.
Since last Friday's bombing at the World Trade Center, officials said yesterday, Mohammed A. Salameh returned three times to a Ryder truck-rental dealer in Jersey City for a refund of the $400 cash deposit he had put down on the yellow Ford Econoline van that he said had been stolen the night before the explosion.


Business-news station does battle for hearts and ears of New York.
ALL-NEWS radio stations in New York are hardly known for understatement.
"You give us 22 minutes, we'll give you the world," boasts the long-running theme line of WINS-AM.
This tradition of hyperbole continues with a new marketing battle under way for the ears of New York news junkies, led by the upstart Bloomberg News Radio 1130 AM, just as WINS-AM and WCBS-AM gear up their campaigns for the spring ratings sweep.
The Bloomberg station, WBBR-AM, replaced the former big band music station, WNEW-AM, which was bought last fall for roughly $13.5 million by Michael Bloomberg, whose main business is providing financial data to traders and market watchers.


If the Past Is Prologue, Hong Kong Take Heed
As Hong Kong puzzles over its prospects after it is swallowed by China in 1997, there is no better reminder of the risks that lie ahead than the drab, bicycle-filled streets of this wind-swept town on the eastern Chinese coast.
Weihai, a sleepy backwater, does not look anything like bustling, sophisticated Hong Kong.
And that is the point.


Two European Giants Fail to Stop Their Slides
Two huge European companies Philips N.V. and Groupe Bull S.A. -- today announced substantial losses for 1992 as well as plans for new layoffs, underscoring the difficulties Europe has had pulling itself out of recession.
Philips, Europe's largest consumer electronics company, posted a $489 million loss.
The company, based in Eindhoven, the Netherlands, said it would lay off as many as 15,000 workers this year from a work force of 250,000.


BORLAND SLASHES PRICE ON SOFTWARE FOR WINDOWS
Firing a new salvo in the personal computer software price wars, Borland International Inc. has introduced Superpack, a promotional package priced at $199.95 that combines its Quattro Pro for Windows spreadsheet program and its Paradox for Windows data-base management program.
Paradox shipped in January at an introductory price of $139.95 but is scheduled to shift to a suggested retail price of $795 on April 30.
Quattro Pro has a suggested retail price of $495 but is now being offered for $99.
The Microsoft Corporation began shipping its first data-base product for Windows, called Access, in November at $99.


Boeing Sees Plane Orders Increasing
The Boeing Company said yesterday that it expected world air travel and demand for new airplanes to recover from the current slump, resulting in substantial growth by the end of the decade.
The Boeing 1993 Current Market Outlook, released yesterday, predicted that worldwide passenger travel would grow at an average annual rate of 5.4 percent from now through 2010.
As a result, at least 12,000 commercial airliners, from all manufacturers, will be needed during those 18 years to accommodate growth and to replace older airplanes, according to the report.
Boeing estimated the value of the 12,000 aircraft at about $815 billion in 1993 dollars, averaging $45 billion a year in industrywide sales until 2010, compared with $21 billion annually for the last 20 years.
The estimate did not represent a significant change from Boeing's projections of a year ago, and Boeing shares closed yesterday unchanged at $34.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Art in Review
Carroll Dunham  Sonnabend Gallery  420 West Broadway  SoHo  Through March 20
Carroll Dunham's painting in the 1980's was a post-Pop version of organic abstraction, with comic-strip balloons as biomorphic shapes.
The painter's touch was light and clean, an unusual blend of well-schooled painterly finesse and graffiti-art slickness.
But though the results had plenty of charm, they also felt small-scaled, a little precious, and one wondered if the work had anywhere to go.


Israeli Expulsions Violate International Law; Bosnian Palestinians
To the Editor:
Israel has received about 100 Bosnian refugees as a gesture of human rights accommodation (news item, Feb. 11).
This act closes a historical cycle: more than 100 years ago the Ottoman Empire settled Bosnian refugees in Palestine who are the ancestors to many of today's Palestinians.


For Children
Children's Museum of the Arts  72 Spring Street, near Broadway  SoHo  (212) 941-9198  Recommended ages: 18 months to 8 years
After closing for eight months, and moving three times, the Children's Museum of the Arts says it believes it has a permanent home.
It reopened two weeks ago in a loftlike SoHo space with delicately painted murals and an old wood floor, where on a recent Saturday sunlight poured through the large street windows and skylights.


Jury Gets Case Against 4 Men In Glen Ridge
After a trial of 21 weeks, the jurors began deliberating today in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial after the judge told them to base their verdict on the facts and evidence, not on favoritism or sympathy.
"This is a criminal trial," Judge R. Benjamin Cohen said.
"This is not a morality play." The jurors deliberated about 90 minutes before being dismissed for the day.


Review/Music; A Pianist Reads Between The Notes
In one of his Norton Lectures, Leonard Bernstein referred to "the 12 notes Nature gave us in the first place." The only problem is that Nature never gave us 12 notes at all; Nature provided a continuum of pitch that each culture has divided into segments, much the way languages select from the universe of vocal sounds to make meaning.
We have been spoiled by the great success of our 12 notes and we tend to take them for granted.
On the piano keyboard the artifice is still greater.
We have sliced up the octave into 12 equal parts, leaving every note just a little out of tune.
One of the tasks taken on by the pianist Phillip Bush in Merkin Concert Hall on Wednesday night was to remind us that the piano's tuning is only a recent development, that other systems of tuning are available to make other expressions possible.
He had three Yamaha grands, a Steinway grand and a Yamaha SY77 Synthesizer with a computer on stage with him, each offering a slightly different historical model of what our scale might sound like.
The influence of the composer Harry Partch, who had an interest in microtones and tuning, could be heard throughout the newer works.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A fundamental shift in investment strategy is being caused by the plunge in interest rates to the lowest level in decades.
Many money managers are flocking from bonds to stocks in search of higher returns, propelling some market averages and helping companies raise money to pay down debt and expand.  [ Page D1. ]
New orders for manufactured goods dropped sharply in January while the number of people applying for unemployment benefits jumped in late February.  [ D2. ]


Man Warned About Cable Dies on Rails
A man who had been warned only last week about the risk of stealing cable from the Metro-North commuter rail line was found dead today on the train tracks here, apparently the victim of electrocution, officials said.
The victim, George Scriber, 38 years old, had been arrested three times in the past for trying to steal cable, said Inspector John Lynch, acting chief of the Metro-North police.
Inspector Lynch said the Metro-North captain in charge of that area said he had told Mr.
Scriber last week, "Stay away, you're going to get yourself killed."


A Little Gulfstream Race Is Now Big
Nobody planned it that way, but a modest six-and-a-half furlong allowance race Saturday at Gulfstream Park turned into a blockbuster today when Fly So Free and Alydeed, a pair of superstars looking for a workout for their 1993 debuts, were among the seven horses entered.
Not only that, but the two horses are embarking on new careers as sprinters after establishing reputations as stars at classic distances of a mile or more.
Fly So Free won the Breeder's Cup Juvenile and the Eclipse Award as the best 2-year-old colt in North America in 1990, won the Florida Derby and four other races in 1991 and has earned more than $2 million.
Alydeed ran a strong second to Pine Bluff in the Preakness last year and was ranked as Canada's most promising colt until he lost three in a row and went back to the farm last September.


How Do You Fight the Mob? Get a Lawyer


Reeves Makes the Call: Simms at Quarterback
The Giants have picked their quarterback.
Phil Simms will be back for the next two years and Jeff Hostetler will play somewhere else.
Simms's agent, David Fishof, said yesterday that Simms had agreed to a two-year contract with the Giants worth $5,050,000.
He will earn salaries of $2.3 million this year and next, making him the highest-paid Giant ever, and will collect a bonus of $450,000 this year.


Art in Review
'The Artist as Subject'  'Paul Cadmus'  Midtown Payson Gallery  745 Fifth Avenue, near 57th Street  Through Saturday
This show is built around the figure of the 88-year-old Paul Cadmus, a striking-looking man though an artist of only intermittent interest.
Several painted self-portraits and portraits by friends are included.
But much of the work is photographic, ranging from family baby pictures to recent color close-ups of the silver-haired, pony-tailed artist by Chuck Close.
Jack Shear's black-and-white portrait is the best of these.
It manages to temper Mr.
Cadmus's penchant for mugging and shows him in a moment of statesmanly repose.


The Principal Question in District 12
New York City's Schools Chancellor, Joseph Fernandez, did well to intervene in the case of a local Bronx school board that failed to punish a principal accused of obstructing the investigation of a rape case in her elementary school.
After watching the case fester for several months, he appointed a three-member panel to determine the facts and recommend further disciplinary proceedings.
His action underscores a proper determination to learn the truth and hold school officials accountable.
The case involves an 8-year-old girl allegedly raped by a custodial worker in a school auditorium, according to the Board of Education's own special investigator, Edward Stancik.
Afterward the girl wandered around a neighboring school and, when discovered by an aide, made up a story to explain her presence.


Poll Finds an Even Split on Homosexuality's Cause
Americans are sharply divided over whether gay men and lesbians choose their sexual orientation, a split that shapes attitudes on everything from homosexuals in the military to gay life in general, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
Americans who say individuals cannot change their homosexuality -- 43 percent of those surveyed -- are more sympathetic to the gay view on these issues than the 44 percent who see it as a choice.
The country is split evenly, 43 to 43, on whether homosexuals should be allowed to serve in the military.
But support is higher, just over half, among those who think sexual identity cannot be changed; it is much lower, less than a third, among those who think being gay or lesbian is a choice.


In the Age of AIDS, Sex Clubs Proliferate Again; Unable to Eliminate High-Risk Activities, New York City Considers Closer Monitoring
Several years after New York City health officials cracked down on commercial sex establishments in an effort to fight AIDS, new sex businesses are proliferating once again, forcing officials to seek new ways to regulate sex as the epidemic continues to spread.
This time around city officials appear to be taking a more conciliatory approach.
They are reaching out more to the businesses, known as sex clubs, and seeking their cooperation in monitoring themselves rather than forcing further closings.
They say the clubs, which offer patrons anonymous sex with multiple partners, can actually help reduce the spread of the virus if their patrons can be steered to practice safer sex.
Emphasis on Monitoring
The resurgence of commercial sex establishments, catering to both homosexuals and heterosexuals, in New York and other cities is at odds with signs that many people are growing more conservative in their sexual practices because they fear AIDS.
Public health officials in New York City say several factors may be at play -- denial of the H.I.V. risk, a sense of immortality among younger generations, sexual preferences that are difficult to modify, and even a sense of fatalism.


Beating Case Prosecutors: 2 Styles Focus as One
In a prosecution that is proving remarkably difficult despite a seemingly damning videotape, two hard-nosed Federal lawyers are drawing praise for trying to mount a well-focused case against four police officers accused in the beating of Rodney G. King.
The two prosecutors, Barry Kowalski and Steven D. Clymer, have won some points and lost some points in the first week of testimony in the high-profile civil rights trial.
But they have made it clear that they think they have a persuasive story to tell, and that they intend to be masters of the case.


Radio Free Europe Just Isn't Needed Anymore
To the Editor:
I can only applaud President Clinton's suggestion to save more than $600 million by fading out Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty (news article, Feb. 21).


At the Bar; Some prisoners see the Sol Wachtler case as a ray of hope for their petitions.
Some view the Sol Wachtler case as a tragedy, others as a scandal.
But to a third group, composed largely of assorted prisoners and their lawyers, it represents something else altogether: an opportunity.
These are inmates who brought their pleas before Judge Wachtler in the months before his arrest on extortion charges last Nov. 7.
Although his former colleagues insisted that Mr.
Wachtler appeared to be functioning normally before the arrest as the Chief Judge of New York's highest court, it was on these inmates' cases that he had functioned.


Group Warns of Transit Fare Increase
With a warning and a coffin, a riders' group began an advertising campaign yesterday to protest a proposed subway and bus fare increase and a potential $1 billion cut in the capital program to improve New York City transit lines.
Over the next few days, the group will post stark advertisements in nearly all the city's 6,000 subway cars reminding riders of two fatal subway accidents and suggesting that they are being taken "for a ride." The group announced the campaign at a news conference yesterday.


Rome Journal; Scandal Produces a Hero (Or Is It an Inquisitor?)
A news magazine depicted him on its cover as Superman.
Another published a booklet of his thoughts, rather like that of Mao.
In one year, the most public of the investigators inquiring into the huge bribery scandal in Italy, Antonio di Pietro, has become a hero in a land that seems short on heroes and long on rogues.
Each morning the newspapers carry his image along with news of the latest arrest.
Each evening television newscasts record the latest success of Mr. di Pietro, a 42-year-old knight in Armani armor tilting against the princes of politics and big business.
Vendors of instant-slogan T-shirts do a brisk trade in those that proclaim, "Thank you di Pietro."


Long Bond's Yield Down to 6.73%
The bond market rally that doesn't want to stop kept moving ahead yesterday, as the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond dropped to 6.73 percent, from 6.78 percent on Wednesday.
And for a time yesterday, shorter-term interest rates also declined sharply, giving an indication that some investors and traders expect the economy to slow enough to force the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates again.


Marines Begin Somali Shooting Inquiry
The courtroom had been hastily slapped together, the desks were beaten and dented and the visitors' chairs were a couple of inverted desk drawers.
C-130 transport planes drowned out the testimony as they revved up on the runway just outside the door.
But there was nothing casual about the proceedings.
Gunnery Sgt.
Harry Conde of the Marines, 33 years old, sat on his chair, shifting nervously, the first American serviceman in Somalia to face a military hearing on charges of using excessive force, in this case the shooting and wounding of two Somali teen-agers in early February.


Muslims Reported Ready to Approve Bosnia Map
A new breakthrough in the peace talks to end the Balkan war appeared near tonight when mediators said that President Alija Izetbegovic, head of the Bosnian Muslim Government, might agree tomorrow to the division of the country into ten mostly autonomous provinces.
If he accepts a map defining these provinces that has been prepared by the mediators, Cyrus R. Vance for the United Nations and Lord Owen for the European Community, he will isolate the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, leaving him as the only negotiator still opposed to the division.


Gap Inc. (N)
The Gap Inc., the sportswear retailer, reported yesterday that fourth-quarter earnings dropped 21.7 percent, although its revenue in the fourth quarter ended Jan. 30 was up 15.8 percent.
The Gap has been expanding rapidly in recent years and has been adding stores in major cities, which tend to have high rents.
Competition from other sportswear outlets has also increased pressure on the Gap to cut prices.


WHITE HOUSE SHUNS BIGGER A.M.A. VOICE IN HEALTH CHANGES
The White House rejected a request from the American Medical Association today for a bigger voice in remodeling the nation's health-care system.
Besides the doctors, some consumer groups are complaining that they have been excluded from the formulation of President Clinton's health policy.


A Model for a U.S. High-Tech Network? Try Iowa
President Clinton used his trip to Silicon Valley last week to spotlight his proposal to invest Federal funds in a high-tech computer, voice and video network that could do for communications what the interstate highway system did for driving.
But he might well have used Iowa, which has spent the last few years quietly building just such a communications network.
Iowa is already broadcasting college classes on portions of the state-owned network, which will consist of a 2,800-mile web of thin glass fibers that will connect all 99 counties when it is finished next fall.
Other uses planned for the network include voice, data and video communications among state agencies, distributing lottery tickets, updating voter registration lists and letting libraries exchange materials electronically.
Pondering Government's Role
Even as the Iowa network becomes a reality, its bumpy history -- from cost overruns to political battles -- offers clues to the challenges that are likely to face such a project nationwide.
The conflicts intensify when rapidly extending the services to all sectors of the society, not just those who can afford to pay for them, becomes a primary goal.


Bosnian Serb Leader Says His People Fight Out of Fear and in Self-Defense
With demonstrators on the street below, telephoned bomb threats, a lawsuit related to alleged war crimes, a stream of visitors to his Manhattan hotel and obligations to consult at the United Nations twice a day, Radovan Karadzic remains as calm as a soothing psychiatrist, which he was before he became chief of the 1.3 million Serbs of Bosnia.
He needs to be calm.
Of the three ethnic leaders from Bosnia and Herzegovina here for negotiations on a peace settlement, Dr.
Karadzic is the one singled out for the most antagonism.
"I live with it," he said, during one of a seemingly unending series of interviews.
Calm and Contradictions
Dr.
Karadzic patiently answers questions about accusations that he has fostered "ethnic cleansing" of large areas of Bosnia by his Serbian forces, who have sent streams of Muslims and Croats fleeing their homelands.
He denies that his forces are besieging Sarajevo or other towns.
He explains why he rejects key elements of the peace proposal from Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen.


As Expected, Retailers Post Slow February Sales
The nation's retail chains reported yesterday that sales sagged in February compared with the same month last year.
Analysts attributed the dip mostly to bad weather, which kept shoppers home, and to consumers' concerns over the economy.
Sales had been expected to drop after a very good Christmas season and a surprisingly strong January.
Retailers usually spend February stocking spring merchandise and eliminating winter goods, so the month is often a lackluster one.
Suggests a Slowing Recovery
Still, the latest figures disappointed some analysts and offered further evidence that the recovery has slowed since the start of the year.


New Executive At ABC Marketing
Peter Chrisanthopoulos, president and chief executive at the Network Television Association in New York since it was founded in April 1990, said yesterday that he would leave on March 16 to take the new position of executive vice president of research, marketing and promotion at ABC.


Executive Changes
CASCADE MEDICAL INC., Eden Prairie, Minn., appointed Dennis J. McFadden chief financial officer.
DIAGNOSTEK INC., Albuquerque, N.M., a pharmacy services supplier, named William A. Barron executive vice president and chief financial officer.


Gymnast's Tough Test: Helping Deliver Baby
The world's greatest gymnast, Vitaly Shcherbo, was shouting in English and Russian, excited and frustrated.
That's because in the early hours this morning, as he yelled long-distance instructions into a telephone, Shcherbo helped his wife deliver a baby.
"We're calling her Kristina," he said here proudly today of the daughter born in Pennsylvania.
"Six pounds." He couldn't talk any more.
"I have to rest now, maybe later."


The Nets Keep O'Neal at Bay
The blustery weather outside Byrne Meadowlands Arena notwithstanding, the winds of change weren't really blowing outside the Nets' locker room tonight, but Chuck Daly thought he might try a gag on Kenny Anderson for effect.
The Nets' coach was entertaining the news media after his team had smothered Shaquille O'Neal and the Orlando Magic in the second half, winning by 116-97, when the injured point guard walked past them a few feet down the hall.


Albert Smith, 78, Dies; Thwarter of Neo-Nazis
Albert J. Smith, who while mayor of Skokie, Ill., a heavily Jewish suburb of Chicago, led efforts to prevent neo-Nazis from parading on Hitler's birthday in 1977, died at his home there on Tuesday at 78.
He had cancer, a funeral home spokesman said.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Clues; Vital Evidence in Towers Bombing Found Early in the Investigation
It was late Sunday afternoon, Feb. 28, when the team of 10 investigators first moved cautiously into the blast area beneath the World Trade Center, looking for clues to what might have caused the deadly explosion two days earlier.
What they found there that day, only minutes after they entered, has proved to be crucial to the case.
The search team, one of two groups that went down that afternoon, was made up of the most senior investigators from the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and the New York City Police Department's bomb squad.
Two were bomb squad detectives; the eight others were from the bureau, including two explosives technicians, each with a military explosives background, two forensic chemists and four crime scene investigators.


Serbs Reported Willing to Allow Muslims to Leave Overrun Area
The United Nations said today that it had reached an agreement with Serbian nationalist leaders in Bosnia for a 24-hour cease-fire this weekend to allow "safe passage" for thousands of Muslims fleeing Serbian attacks in eastern Bosnia.
The United Nations military command in Zagreb, Croatia, said that it hoped to establish "safe corridors" out of the Muslim communities of Cerska, Srebrenica and Zepa if the Muslim-led Bosnian Government also agreed.


Corrections
The caption with a front-page picture by The Associated Press in some copies on Wednesday, showing a young man comforting two women at the funeral of a victim of the explosion at the World Trade Center, misidentified the man.
He was Michael Garofalo, not Ernest DiGiovanni.


INSIDE
Waco Sect Is Capable Of a Very Long Standoff
With thousands of dollars' worth of stored food, their own water tower and at least two backup generators, David Koresh and his followers might be able to hold out for months against Federal agents who have been surrounding their compound near Waco, Tex., since Sunday.
Page A16.
The Big Shift to Stocks
Plunging interest rates have prompted investors to shift from bonds to stocks, a move that could have wide effects on the economy.
Page D1.
A Judge and Jail Time
Plea deals are being considered in the extortion case of Sol Wachtler, New York's former Chief Judge.
Page B6.


Sounds Around Town
Trio Plus One
Daryl Scherman Quartet, Tavern on the Green, Central Park West at 67th Street, (212) 873-3200.
For several years the pianist and singer Daryl Scherman has been developing an enviable polish as a performer with a repertory of rarely heard songs, chosen perceptively from the pop output of the last 70 years.
She has done this in solo situations, in a duo with the bassist Boots Maleson and in a trio with the guitarist James Chirillo.
This weekend her group has become a quartet with the addition of the saxophonist Morris Goldberg, a white native of South Africa who came to the United States 30 years ago and has spent much of his career here playing with black South Africans like Hugh Masakela and Abdullah Ibrahim as well as with American musicians.
The result is an unusual mixture of sources and styles.
The group plays tonight and tomorrow night at 8:30, 10:30 and 12:30, and on Sunday at 8:30 and 10:30 P.M.
There is a music charge of $15 tonight and tomorrow, but no minimum at any show.
In Great Footsteps
Ruth Brown, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, near 17th Street, Manhattan, (212) 533-7900.
As great singers like Billie Holiday, Sarah Vaughan and Dinah Washington have passed from the music scene, one of the singers following most capably in their tradition is Ruth Brown.
She might have been just a rhythm-and-blues belter, which was the way she started out in the 1950's, but she added to this the jazz inspiration she received from Holiday, Vaughan and Washington.
In fact, her program at Fat Tuesday's includes many jazz standards, which she will record for an album when her engagement ends.
Backed by a group led by the guitarist Rodney Jones, she will sing tonight and tomorrow night at 9 and 11 and on Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M.
There is a $27.50 music charge and a $10 minimum.
Cabaret and Jazz
Wendy Caplan and Billy Porter, J's, 2581 Broadway, north of 97th Street, (212) 666-3600.
A year ago, when the Manhattan Association of Caberets and Clubs had firmly established March as Cabaret Month, J's brought another flavor to the celebration with friendly programs called "Cabaret Meets Jazz." The two elements are joining forces again on Sundays this year, starting this weekend when a pair of rising cabaret singers, Wendy Caplan and Billy Porter, share the evening and the backing of a jazz trio led by the pianist Billy Charlap with Sean Smith on bass and Tim Horner at the drums.
Miss Caplan came to attention Off Broadway in "Tony 'n' Tina's Wedding" and Mr.
Porter was the 1992 "Star Search" winner.
Miss Caplan goes on at 8:30 P.M. and Mr.
Porter at 10; at 11:30 Mr.
Charlap's trio has the stage to itself.
There is a $12 minimum at the tables and a $7 minimum at the bar.


Review/Film; Maturing In Canada's Far North
Set in the far Canadian north in the mid-1930's, "Shadow of the Wolf" is a mystical adventure about the beliefs, rituals, lives and loves of Eskimos, who hang onto their old ways by near-frozen fingertips as the white man encroaches.
The elaborate but not always coherent Canadian-French production might be of interest to children with exotic tastes, but it's pretty lugubrious stuff for impatient adults.


Israeli Expulsions Violate International Law
To the Editor:
Steven Eidman is simply wrong in "Israeli Expulsions Don't Break Geneva Accords" (letter, Feb. 24), disputing your Feb. 3 editorial's conclusion that Israel's deportation of some 400 Palestinians violates the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.


Review/Film; About a Life-After-Wife Experience
"Surely I'm knocked off my perch!" declares Albert Finney as he luxuriates in the role of Warren Odom, a puckish Southerner who has suddenly been left by his wife.
Surprised at first by this betrayal, Warren is soon doing a quite a remarkable job of taking things in stride.
From wandering about in his pajamas eating junk food and depending hopelessly on his 17-year-old daughter, Lucille (Kathryn Erbe), he blossoms charmingly into a free spirit, meanwhile delivering ripely colorful dialogue with supreme flair.
"I've only recently begun to think of you girls as people," he casually drawls to his two daughters.
What did he think they were previously?
"Well, pets, to tell you the truth. Your mother's pets."


Bowman Is Treated
CHRISTOPHER BOWMAN, the American national champion last year, was beaten at a hotel in a seedy Pittsburgh neighborhood, according to a police report.
But Bowman yesterday denied what the report said.
Bowman, in Pittsburgh for an ice show, was treated on Tuesday morning at Mercy Hospital for injuries to his ribs and head, according to the police.


Lessons for Minorities On Rising to the Bench
For a few moments last weekend, Sanders Moody, a 34-year-old prosecutor, thought about becoming a judge.
It would be a long journey, he knew, but in the end, he said, "I could do something positive for my community."
Mr.
Moody is black, and the occasion for his contemplation was a seminar aimed at encouraging minority lawyers to pursue careers on the bench.


Clinton's Greatest Challenge
Those who would disagree, as I do, with some of the specific proposals in President Clinton's economic program must give him credit for his boldness and political courage in advocating them and for his indefatigable efforts to sell them to the American people.
If he demonstrates the same leadership qualities in addressing the major foreign policy issue of our time, he can secure his place in history as a great President.
That issue is the survival and success of political and economic freedom in Russia.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Federal Communications Commission's policy on educational requirements for children's programming misstated the location of WDLI, one of seven television stations whose license renewals have been delayed over the issue.
It is in Canton, Ohio, not Cleveland.
In some copies, the station was also incorrectly identified as WDCI.


Dog-Day Morning as Iditarod Starts
A third of them will be rookies testing their mettle for the first time, and still others will be inveterate sightseers out for yet another leisurely, 1,161-mile romp to Nome.
But when 69 mushers and some 1,200 dogs scratch off from downtown Anchorage this morning there will be enough seasoned veterans to make the 21st annual Iditarod a competition.


Reporter's Notebook; The Siege, Waco Points Out, Isn't Exactly in Waco
Waco did not plan on this.
But as a doomsday religious cult and its self-proclaimed Messiah kept hundreds of Federal agents at bay for a sixth day today, this central Texas city of 100,000 people was gamely trying to cope with its worldwide fame as the place where the drama was unfolding.


Aircrew Hopes for Best On Its Mission of Mercy
A blast of cold, thin Balkan air chilled an American military transport plane as the cargo door was opened two miles above Bosnia and Herzegovina before dawn today.
Hunched over a computer in the cockpit, an Air Force navigator called out ground coordinates as the crew stood ready.
When the coordinates were precisely right, the copilot shouted "Green light!"


So, Who Owns Big East: New York or New Jersey?
Safe from the burden of high expectation that has been a problem for St.
John's teams of the past, the Redmen can now begin asking some bold questions: How high?
How far?
How about us?
Their final regular-season game, a meeting with Seton Hall at Byrne Meadowlands Arena this afternoon with first place in the Big East Conference at stake, will not define the St.
John's season.
But the game can provide one more piece of evidence for all the people the Redmen have proved wrong.


Delicate Back Surgery for Bird
The former Celtics star LARRY BIRD underwent five hours of back fusion surgery yesterday to relieve pain that forced him to cut short his playing career last August.
"He'll be in the hospital for several days," said JIM RATTRAY, a spokesman for New England Baptist Hospital in Boston, where the surgery was performed.
"Recovery time is six to eight months. After that, he should be able to return to golf and all the other recreational sports that he enjoys."


First Pitch of Spring Is Made by Saberhagen's Agent
The meeting was held at an undisclosed site in Orlando.
It lasted nearly three hours, was full of talk about fastballs and medicine and deferred money and ended with both sides pledging to limit their public comments.
There are, though, virtually no secrets regarding Bret Saberhagen's contract-extension negotiations with the Mets.
The right-hander, who has bought property on Long Island, wants to pitch for the Mets.
The Mets, in the wake of departures by Darryl Strawberry, Frank Viola and David Cone, can't afford to run the risk of losing yet another marquee performer.


Hillary Clinton's Health Role Disputed
A Federal district judge considered today the legality of Hillary Rodham Clinton's influential role in formulating health policy for the nation.
At times it seemed that old laws had not caught up with the new realities of the wife of the President serving as his top official adviser on the future of health care in America.


Cello-Piano Recital
The cellist Joel Krosnick and the pianist Gilbert Kalish are to present a two-part recital titled "The Spirit of Romanticism" at 3 and 7:30 P.M.  tomorrow at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights.
The program comprises works by Mendelssohn, Bacon, Liszt, Reger, Schumann, Chopin, Faure, Messiaen and Franck.
The violinist Joel Smirnoff is to join the duo for the world premiere of Ralph Shapey's "Trio." Tickets are $15 ($8 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 854-7799.


A Cure for Sticker Shock: Buying a Car at a Preset Price
After their daughter Kristine was born, Rich and Kathy Houghton of Media, Pa., decided they wanted to replace their two-door Delta 88 Oldsmobile with a larger vehicle to accommodate their growing family.
A service offered by the local branch of the American Automobile Assocation saved the Houghtons hundreds of dollars and hours of haggling with dealers.


Tax-Free Bond Funds Producing Lower Yields
WITH municipalities racing to refinance to capture the lowest interest rates in years, how are tax-free mutual bond funds, which own municipal debt, keeping up their yields?
The quick answer: they aren't.
The MFS High-Yield Municipal Bond Fund, to cite just one example, cut its monthly dividend to 6 cents in February from 6.4 cents last June, and "we anticipate that the dividend will continue to come down," said Robin S. Huntley, the fund's manager.


Haitian Refugees Find Welcome Wears Thin
When Jean Silien Talabert came to New York last year, his brother eagerly gave him a place to live.
But now his brother says he cannot support him any longer, and the 26-year-old Haitian refugee is staying with a woman he barely knows.
He must leave the house daily at 8 A.M and return at 6 P.M. when she does.
She does not allow him to bathe at her place, although he does at night when she is asleep.


Poles Get Lessons With Their Loans
When Robert G. Faris first went to Poland two years ago with $240 million from Congress to make loans to entrepreneurs, he had to develop a brochure for borrowers that explained what a loan was and the responsibility of paying it back.
He found that Polish builders possessed fantasies about capitalism so grandiose that they designed inappropriately luxurious houses.
And when he decided to open a mortgage bank to stimulate badly needed home construction, the Polish Parliament had to be lobbied for a law that allowed the eviction of defaulters.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Vigil; Family of a Worker Missing Since Explosion Waits for News
At first, Wilfredo Mercado's relatives felt only blunt shock when they heard that the husband and father was missing in the explosion at the World Trade Center.
Some heard about it through television reports, some through frantic phone calls from family members.
But by now, the initial terror has turned into an excruciating vigil in which foreboding alternates with persistent hope, as they wait for news.
"Every time the phone rings we wonder if it's a good call or a bad call," said his cousin, Anna Serra.
"It's horribly upsetting. His wife just cries and cries and calls out his name." On His Way to Lunch
Mr.
Mercado, 37 years old, a purchasing agent for the New York Vista Hotel and Windows on the World, has been missing since the explosion on Feb. 26.
He was on his way to lunch when the bomb blast ripped through the underground garage at the World Trade Center in lower Manhattan.


No Headline
If I were seeing my women and children being fired at, with bullets coming in, I would have either freaked out and hid under my bed or picked up my gun and fired on who was coming at us. -- PAUL G. FATTA, a resident of the religious compound near Waco, Tex., who happened to be away when it was raided last Sunday.  [ 1:5. ]


On Being Both a Catholic and a Good American; A Parade Sponsor
To the Editor:
A Feb. 23 article on a Federal District Court hearing on New York's St.
Patrick's Day Parade states that, after the withdrawal of one potential sponsor willing to allow openly gay marchers, no group other than the Loyal Order of Hibernians has come forward to sponsor the parade.
Our organization, Anbhuain, the Gaelic Conceptual Art Collective, has filed a notarized parade permit application with the New York City Police Department.
The application was dated Feb. 20 and was posted to Police Plaza the same day.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Overview; Agents Step Up Search for Bombing Suspect's Links
Investigators found hundreds of pounds of bomb-making chemicals yesterday in a locker at a drive-in self-storage warehouse in Jersey City, and Federal officials said that a rented yellow van used to carry the bomb into the World Trade Center had been seen by witnesses at the warehouse.
The discovery of the chemicals appeared to supply a crucial piece of the complex puzzle that law-enforcement officials were trying to assemble to explain the bombing and the involvement of Mohammed A. Salameh, the 25-year-old illegal immigrant who was arrested on Thursday and charged with taking part in the explosion.
Other bomb-making materials were found on Thursday in Mr.
Salameh's apartment in Jersey City.


Abuse Trial Testimony Reviewed
The first full day of jury deliberations in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial was dominated today by the judge's defining again the legal term "mentally defective," a critical issue in the case, and by a re-reading of some trial testimony.
Although the jury was in court for about 7 hours and 35 minutes, it spent only about 2 1/2 hours actually deliberating the fate of four former Glen Ridge High School football teammates accused of sexually assaulting a mildly retarded schoolmate in March 1989.


A Believer Says Cult in Texas Is Peaceful, Despite Shootout
If he had not happened to be selling guns at a flea market in Austin on Sunday, Paul G. Fatta, a member of the Branch Davidian sect, said he might well have been behind a window at the sect's compound, exchanging gunfire with Federal agents who stormed the compound that morning in a mission that went awry and left four agents and at least three sect members dead.
"If I were seeing my women and children being fired at, with bullets coming in, I would have either freaked out and hid under my bed or picked up my gun and fired on who was coming at us," Mr.
Fatta said today.


Trade Center Locator Service
Dun &amp; Bradstreet, the business information service, has set up a toll-free telephone service to help callers find businesses that have been forced into new locations by the blast at the World Trade Center.


Classical Music in Review
Die Zauberflote Metropolitan Opera


Transactions
Baseball  American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Rusty Meacham, Hipolito Pichardo and Rick Reed, pitchers; Brian McRae and Harvey Pulliam, outfielders, and David Howard, shortstop.
Renewed the contracts of Brent Mayne, catcher, and Chris Haney and Mike Magnante, pitchers.
National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Agreed to terms with Reggie Sanders, outfielder, on a four-year contract.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Signed Calvin Jones, pitcher.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Agreed to terms with Scott Chiamparino, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- signed Bill Maas, nose tackle.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Kameno Bell and Amir Rasul, running backs; Mitchell Benson, defensive end, and Orson Mobley, tight end.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Lance Olberding and Chris Perez, offensive linemen, and John Washington, defensive end.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Announced the retirement of Kevin Haverdink, offensive tackle.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Swift Burch, defensive end; Robert Dressel, center; Jay Hillman, fullback, and Joe Mott and Jono Tunney, linebackers.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Announced the retirement of Joe Gibbs, coach.
Named Richie Petitbon coach.


Disaster in the Sudan
To the Editor:
Lori Grinker ("Disaster in the Sudan," Op-Ed, Feb. 12) need not express wonder at the lack of interest shown by "world" opinion in the disaster in the Sudan.
Concern and outrage over Islamic oppression and genocide of black Christians and animist tribes violates the canon of political correctness.
That canon portrays Islam as a philosophy of authenticity, progress and redemption, while portraying competing Western ideals (including Christianity) as imperialistic assaults on authentic and freely determined native ideologies.


Review/Dance; The Feld Shows Off Its Young Pupils With a Gala
The New Ballet School, which offers tuition-free classical training to public school children and is associated with Feld Ballets/NY, started in 1978 with 132 beginners.
Today it has 1,000 pupils, and all of them seemed to be onstage on Thursday night to open the annual gala for the school and the company at the Joyce Theater.
One might be stretching it as far as numbers go, but the scores of tots and adolescents who marched in, knees raised high, to begin a technique demonstration could have filled an opera house with their enthusiasm.
Elizabeth Barrow, with Mary Ann Orbe and Daniel Levans, put together a lively and instructive program that looked toward professional achievement rather than remaining content with children's choreography.


Review/Theater; Looking Back on the Bronx and Dr. King From Prosperity
Anger and frustration fill the air in "The Day the Bronx Died," a highly charged new drama by Michael Henry Brown.
The playwright does not primarily blame society for urban ills but individuals who victimize themselves through fear of retaliation or self-induced blindness.
When people are faced with a threat, it is easy but also risky to turn one's back and walk away.
In this play on the main stage at the Long Wharf Theater, a prospering middle-class black man named Mickey is suddenly confronted with a senseless attack on his teen-age son.
That sends him on a mind trek to his own boyhood in the Bronx in 1968.
He believes that this was the year that the borough died.
It was also, of course, the year that the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated.
The events are closely connected.


Diverse Rivals Gather for Parley on South Africa
The broadest and surely the oddest assortment of South African political rivals ever assembled in the same room gathered today around an enormous doughnut-shaped table to resume the quest for a new democracy.
With the South African Government and the African National Congress now agreed on the route away from white rule, the conference today began the tedious process of pulling together a broader consensus.


Freelance Musicians Resolve Final Dispute
The freelance musicians who play in the American Composers Orchestra have ratified a new contract, spokesmen for the the orchestra's management and Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians said yesterday.
Jesse Rosen, the orchestra's managing director, said that the orchestra's March 21 performance at Carnegie Hall, which had been in doubt during the negotiations, would take place as scheduled.
The players in the orchestra, which was one of the nine ensembles that went on strike in January, voted on Feb. 8 to accept the general contract binding the freelance orchestras that were bargaining as a consortium, but they reserved the right to negotiate a supplementary contract.
The players sought a higher pay scale than the other orchestras because their programs, mostly of contemporary music, are often difficult to prepare.


Simms Signs On; Hostetler Signs Off
Life marches on for the Giants.
Phil Simms signed his new two-year, $5,050,000 contract today, Jeff Hostetler continued to sort bids from prospective teams and the front office began presenting offers to unrestricted free agents.
After Coach Dan Reeves chose Simms over Hostetler as his quarterback, Simms quickly reached agreement Thursday on a new contract.
He will be paid $2.3 million for the coming season and the same for 1994, with a $450,000 signing bonus.
In this new era of free agency, the salaries were the highest ever given by the Giants, well over the previous high of $1.6 million paid to Simms last season.


METRO DIGEST
THE TWIN TOWERS: BOMB CHEMICALS FOUND IN A WAREHOUSE
Authorities found hundreds of pounds of bomb-making chemicals in a locker at a drive-in self-storage warehouse in Jersey City, and Federal officials said that a rented yellow van used to carry the bomb into the World Trade Center had been seen by witnesses at the warehouse.
The discovery of the chemicals appeared to supply a crucial piece of the complex puzzle that law-enforcement officials were trying to assemble to explain the bombing and the involvement of the 25-year-old illegal immigrant who was arrested on Thursday and charged with taking part in the explosion.
Other bomb-making materials were found on Thursday in the man's apartment in Jersey City.
Page 1.
F.B.I. INQUIRY PRODUCED NO WARNING
For months, the Federal Bureau of Investigation had been investigating a radical Islamic cleric and people believed to be his followers in Brooklyn and Jersey City.
But despite an abundance of intelligence, the bureau picked up no warning that any of them, including a suspect arrested on Thursday, might be planning a violent attack on the World Trade Center.
Page 1.
CLUES FROM SHADOWS OF A SUSPECT'S LIFE
Mohammed A. Salameh, the 25-year-old arrested as the first suspect in the World Trade Center bombing, apparently lived in this country illegally, squeezed into a small disordered apartment in Jersey City with three others.
Neighbors say he kept to a shadowy life penetrated by few people outside of a tight network of Arabs who shared housing and fraternized with him.
Some of these friends seem to have vanished in the last few days.
Page 25.
Islamic terrorist groups have mushroomed throughout the Arab world during the last two decades, multiplying into scores of tightly knit organizations.
Page 24.
Between 1984 and 1991, the Port Authority carried out several anti-terrorism planning reviews, including the mock bombing of a building.
Page 25.
A week after the explosion, Wilfredo Mercado, a purchasing agent for Vista Hotel and Windows on the World, remains missing.
Page 25.
NEW YORK CITY
HAVENS EVAPORATE FOR HAITIAN REFUGEES
When Jean Silien Talabert came to New York last year, his brother eagerly gave him a place to live.
But now his brother says he cannot support him any longer, and the 26-year-old Haitian refugee is staying with a woman he barely knows.
Mr.
Talabert, like many of the 1,000 Haitian refugees who ended up in New York after fleeing their violence-torn homeland in 1991, is finding the welcome wearing thin.
Page 26.
REGION
HIGH TOLL FROM STORM
A nightlong storm battering the New York metropolitan region with snow, sleet, freezing rain and whipping winds, ripped roofs off buildings, tore down power lines and sent cars spinning like tops.
The storm caused two deaths and dozens of minor traffic accidents.
Thousands of commuters endured traffic jams and bus and train delays of up to eight hours.
Page 27.
The jury in the Glen Ridge, N.J., sex assault case asked to hear the definition of a critical legal term and listened to trial transcripts.
Page 27.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 26


Drug Companies Finance Much of Medical Research in the U.S.
To the Editor:
Re "Drug Companies' Profits Finance More Promotion Than Research" (front page, Feb. 21): As a clinician and scientist who worked with some dozen and a half pharmaceutical companies as board member, consultant, information source, clinical and basic researcher, I think readers are entitled to an alternate opinion from that presented by a professor of pharmacy administration, professors of pharmaceutical economics and the Food and Drug Administration commissioner.


Waste, Inefficiency and Deja Vu
On his 43d day in office President Clinton summoned seven Senators, six Representatives and the White House press corps to proclaim a "terribly important initiative." He's going to root out bureaucratic waste.
Sounds worthy -- and familiar.


Hong Kong, Citing Hope for Talks, Delays Plans Opposed by Beijing
Hong Kong's Governor announced today that he would once again delay submitting an election-law package to the legislature here because China, which has categorically opposed the package, appears close to opening talks on the issue.
In a short speech to a tense and attentive Legislative Council, Gov.
Christopher Patten maintained his support of the proposals, which would increase democratic representation in the legislature.
But he was was careful to stress Britain's willingness to open talks on the political changes with the Chinese, who are scheduled to take over the colony in 1997 when a British lease expires.


Scaffold Collapse Kills Man in Pennsylvania


Art Hodes, a Pianist Known for the Blues In the Old Style, 88
Art Hodes, a two-fisted traditionalist blues and jazz pianist, died on Thursday at Ingalls Memorial Hospital in Harvey, Ill.
He was 88 and lived in Park Forest, Ill.
His wife, Jan, said he had undergone vascular surgery on Monday.


Cyclical Stocks Lifted By Employment Report
Investors embraced cyclical stocks and shunned those most responsive to interest rates yesterday after learning that employment growth last month was much stronger than expected.
No single index adequately reflected the stock market's divergent nature.
But several analysts agreed that February's payroll expansion explained the market's action.
Such growth nourished retailers, metals, autos and truckers, leaving utilities and banks to languish.


Russian Congress Will Meet For Showdown With Yeltsin
The Russian Parliament voted today to summon an emergency session of the full Congress of People's Deputies next week, setting the legislative branch on course for a showdown with President Boris N. Yeltsin.
The Congress is the highest legal authority in Russia, and a session had been sought by both the standing Parliament and by Mr.
Yeltsin to resolve whether there should be a national referendum in April, or under what conditions it should be called off.


Richard Wathen, 67, Retired U.N. Official
Richard W. Wathen, a retired United Nations official, died on Monday at New York University Hospital at the age of 67.
He resided in Manhattan and East Hampton, L.I.
He died of cancer, a friend and former co-worker said.


Critic's Notebook; Silent Partner Emerging In Policy Councils: TV
The pictures of misery might be from Somalia, but they turn out to be from the Sudan.
"Why isn't a rescue under way here, too?" asks Stephen Frazier, the correspondent on "Our Planetary Police," a CNN documentary about United Nations peace-keeping efforts, which can be seen tomorrow at 9 P.M.
The answer, he suggests, has to do with the fact that last year America's evening news programs carried 6 stories on the Sudan and 468 stories on Somalia.
He asks, "Does news coverage determine where the United Nations intervenes?"
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the United Nations Secretary General, and Donald McHenry, a former United States Ambassador to the United Nations, answer with an unhesitating affirmative.
Public sympathy for dying children is needed to goad governments to act, says Mr.
Boutros-Ghali, and Mr.
McHenry adds that "governments are forced to act whether they wish to or not."


Unemployment at 11.3% As New York City Gains
New York City's unemployment rate fell sharply in February, to 11.3 percent, Labor Department figures showed yesterday.
That was a significant improvement from the January rate of 13.4 percent, which was the highest figure in 25 years.
While February's rate was still in line with the recessionary levels that have persisted since summer, it was a strong indication that January's rate was a seasonal spike caused by layoffs after the Christmas season in the retail and construction fields and the continued shrinkage of the financial and service industries, Federal labor officials said.


Jose F. Duval Is Dead; Actor and Singer, 72
Jose F. Duval, an actor and singer, died last Saturday at Brotman Memorial Hospital in Culver City, Calif.
He was 72 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause of death was heart failure, said his son, Rex, of New York City.


Westward, Oh! Nets Play One for the Road
With only one more home game left before they take off on a four-game swing out West, the Nets looked like something out of a M*A*S*H* unit today.
Forward Derrick Coleman, backup center Chris Dudley and reserve guard Tate George were all out of practice because of the flu.
Point guard Kenny Anderson is out after breaking his left wrist.


U.N. General Tries to Reach Trapped Muslims in Bosnia
The general commanding the United Nations military aid-escort operation in Bosnia today personally set out to reach and set up the evacuation of thousands of hard-pressed Muslim refugees reported to be under attack by Serbian militiamen in the eastern part of the country.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon of France, together with an official of the United Nations' main refugee-relief organization, traveled overland from here to Konjevic, a village in the steep mountain valley of the same name on the edge of a Muslim enclave known as Cerska, to negotiate safe passage for thousands of people reportedly trapped there after the area was overrun by Serbian forces on Tuesday.


Nokes's 3d-Inning Follies
The sequence of plays that unraveled quickly in the third inning of the first game of spring training today left Matt Nokes looking like the erratic catcher he insists he isn't and left the Yankees searching for answers behind the plate.
In his Yankee debut, Jimmy Key had pitched two tidy innings against the Los Angeles Dodgers when Nokes instilled the third inning with the kind of frolic that was hardly fun for the Yankees.
He made one error, was charged with a passed ball and botched a rundown play that is usually mastered by most high school players.
It was an ugly display that tainted Key's outing in a 5-4 Yankee victory at Holman Stadium.


Foot Infection Keeps Jordan in Hospital
MICHAEL JORDAN remained hospitalized in Chicago for a second day yesterday because of a foot infection, forcing him to miss the Bulls' home game against the San Antonio Spurs last night.
An infection between two toes of his left foot sent the N.B.A. scoring leader to Northwestern Memorial Hospital on Thursday.
His foot still hurt when he walked yesterday morning and doctors decided to continue antibiotic treatment, said a spokeswoman for the Bulls, JOYCE SZYMANSKI.


Knicks' Campbell Slips Time's Arrow
The only thing Tony Campbell has lost this season is playing time.
He has not lost his shooting touch.
He has not lost his scoring ability.
And he has not lost his confidence.
Thursday night's 125-111 victory over the Utah Jazz was the night Campbell had been waiting for all season.
The rim looked as big as a Hula Hoop.
He made crucial shots, shooting 12 for 13 and finishing with a season-high 28 points.
And most important, Pat Riley left Campbell in the game when it counted.


Clinton Defends Bosnia Airdrops and Vows Tighter Sanctions
President Clinton today defended American efforts to provide relief aid to eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina and promised to further tighten sanctions against the delivery of oil and other supplies to Yugoslavia.
"We are exploring and, indeed, are in the process of implementing ways to tighten the embargo, which we will announce very shortly," Mr.
Clinton said at the White House.
"And I think there are other things we can do."


After an Arrest, Questions Remain
Mohammed Salameh's arrest in connection with the bombing of the World Trade Center leaves open one big question: To what extent does the blast reflect an alarming extension of international terrorism?
Whatever the answer, the vulnerability of urban America grows all the more obvious.
New York City police and Federal agents investigating the explosion made quick and effective use of a small bit of good fortune.
Early in their search through the rubble, they came across a piece of metal bearing a vehicle identification number which they quickly traced to a van rented from an agency in New Jersey.


Mayor Offers Panel to Select A Chancellor
Mayor David N. Dinkins intervened yesterday for the first time in the selection of a new Schools Chancellor for New York City and submitted his own list of members for a screening panel being set up by the Board of Education.
While the Mayor said he wanted to broaden the representation on the panel to make sure it reflects diverse business and educational perspectives, his aides said he was also concerned that the selection process might become politicized by his political opponents in an election year.


Paul Zimmerman, 54, Book and Film Writer
Paul D. Zimmerman, a journalist and screenwriter, died on March 2 at the Medical Center at Princeton, N.J.
He was 54.
The cause was colon cancer, said his wife, Barbara.


British Sell Computer To U.S. Lab
In a controversial decision that raises national security and economic competitiveness issues, one of the nation's leading weapons laboratories is buying an unproven supercomputer from the American branch of a British company rather than from one of several American companies.
The decision by the Lawrence Livermore Laboratories, an Energy Department scientific research and weapons-design center east of here, to buy the $15 million computer from the British company, Meiko World Inc., sent shock waves through the highly competitive supercomputer industry.


Editorial Notebook; Escape From New York?
It started when Gov.
Mario Cuomo irresponsibly gave Staten Island the go-ahead to pursue secession.
Then came similar rumblings from Queens, followed by a borough-based rebellion that toppled the Schools Chancellor.
And now the Brooklyn Borough President is campaigning for more local control of government in what is either a power grab or a misguided attempt at reform.
There's a temptation to dismiss this latest wave of New York-bashing as a silly nuisance.
In all likelihood, after all, the union will stand.
But in what condition?
Elected officials are making malicious mischief by encouraging the balkanization of a city that, for all its faults, works.
Their threat to sound government distorts reality, ignores history and could do plenty of damage.


Review/Dance; 'Quixote' as Showcase for Bavarian Troupe
Virtually an unknown quantity two weeks ago, the Bavarian National Ballet of the Munich State Opera has introduced an increasingly popular group of fine dancers to New York.
Wednesday night was no exception when Kiki Lammersen, who won a gold medal at the 1986 International Ballet Competition in Jackson, Miss., made a local role debut as Kitri, the heroine of "Don Quixote."
Scheduled to close the company's season tomorrow night at the New York State Theater, this 1991 staging of the 19th-century Russian classic by Ray Barra and Ivo Klatev is disappointingly schematic in its approach.
Atmosphere is sacrificed to a swiftly paced series of set pieces.
But at its best, the ballet serves as a showcase for individual dancers; in this instance, they included Miss Lammersen and Oliver Matz as Basilio, Natalya Trokai in the overextended role of Dulcinea and two brilliant male soloists, Udo Kersten and Christopher Kettner.


Review/Pop; Celebrating Merengue And Dominicans' Pride
The 14th annual Carnaval de Merengue started with El Cieguito de Nagua and Joselito Mateo singing merengue tipico: folky, speedy merengues driven by accordion and saxophone; it continued with bachatas, relaxed but ardent ballads, from Luis Vargas and Anthony Santos.
That lineup, Saturday night at the Paramount, signaled a change borne out by the next three hours of music: that the merengue is reaching out by reclaiming its rural roots.
The annual event ratifies the national pride of Dominicans in New York; shouts of "Viva la Republica Dominicana" got a joyful response.
But the show's format grew wearing.
Instead of intermissions as bands set up, disk jockeys from WSKQ (FM 98) relentlessly promoted the station between sets, and sometimes during them, with booming announcements that came to overshadow the music.
Polito Vega, one of the disk jockeys, even sang a suave ballad with Victor Roque y La Gran Manzana.


Managua Journal; Post-War Refrain: 'Give the Lady Her House'
In terms of David and Goliath battles, none in Managua would seem to match that being fought by Sandra Leets de Montenegro against the Sandinista Army and its commander, Gen.
Humberto Ortega Saavedra.
All Mrs.
Montenegro wants is the return of her family home, which is occupied by the general's daughter and grandchild in a compound surrounded by a high wall with broken glass imbedded along the top and a military checkpoint at the only entrance.


Opium Article Unconnected to LaRouche
To the Editor:
"Is Hong Kong Attack Tied to LaRouche?" (letter, Jan. 30) by Chip Berlet, Dennis King and Kalev Pehme, casts suspicions on "Hong Kong Money War," my Jan. 9 Op-Ed article about the firm of Jardine Mattheson and opium.
They suggest I may, perhaps, be promoting "LaRouchism without LaRouche." Nothing could be further from the truth.


Devils Pick Up Intensity and 1 Point
Although the pattern for success is to win at home and tie on the road, the Devils had good reason to be content with a 1-1 tie against Chicago tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
That's because the Blackhawks have been playing so solidly on the road in recent games, having won their previous two away from Chicago.
The Devils matched Chicago's tight play on defense and in the neutral zone -- and pleased Herb Brooks in the process.
The coach of the Devils thrives on games that have all the makings of a playoff contest, and this one had a great deal of that.


Messier Decides Ice Is Best Remedy for Sore Ribs
Mark Messier wrapped his sore ribs in a flak jacket and decided to play hockey.
He wasn't supposed to, not last night, not only five days after sustaining an injury that was expected to sideline him for a minimum of a week to 10 days.
Messier didn't care.
He felt good, so he played.
He thought he was healthy enough to aid the Rangers in their battle against the Pittsburgh Penguins, a Patrick Division rival.
And he was right, scoring the Rangers' first goal in their stunning 3-1 victory over the division-leading Penguins at Madison Square Garden.


Washington Memo; The Clinton Stake in Rostenkowski's Fate
In public they talk about economic stimulus, energy taxes, Medicare cuts and the proper ratio of tax increases to spending reductions.
But in the privacy of White House offices and Capitol cloakrooms, President Clinton's top economic advisers and the senators and representatives responsible for pushing the Clinton economic plan through Congress express a bigger worry: Will Dan Rostenkowski be indicted?


American Express to Sell Bulk of First Data Stake
The American Express Company said yesterday that it planned to sell more than half its majority stake in the First Data Corporation, the data processing concern that handles transactions for the charge cards of Mastercard and Visa as well as those of American Express.
This would be the company's first major transaction under Harvey Golub since he replaced James D. Robinson 3d as chief executive in January.
It could raise more than $1 billion for American Express as the company tries to rebound from huge losses.
And it could help smooth the bumpy management transition that brought Mr.
Golub to power and sent Mr.
Robinson to retirement.


Cosmopolitan Players
Michael Morgan is to conduct the Cosmopolitan Symphony Orchestra in Prokofiev's Violin Concerto No. 2, Beethoven's Symphony No. 4 and David Rimelis's arrangement of James P. Johnson's "Charleston" at 2 P.M.  today at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan.
Eric Grossman is to be the soloist in the Prokofiev work.
Tickets are $5.
Information: (212) 840-2824.


On Being Both a Catholic and a Good American; Only to the Faithful
To the Editor:
I was pleased to read that Pope John Paul II believes it is wrong for Muslim leaders to try to impose Islamic law on those of other faiths (news article, Feb. 4).
He promised in Sudan that the leadership of the Roman Catholic Church will "remind leaders of Muslim countries that Islamic law can be applied only to the Muslim faithful." The Pope must believe that such actions by Muslims would be as wrong as the Catholic hierarchy's seeking to enact laws in Western countries that would force non-Catholics to obey church teachings on divorce, birth control and abortion.
BRUCE E. ALTSCHULER Oswego, N.Y., Feb. 11, 1993


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Investigation; F.B.I. Inquiry Failed to Detect Any Sign of Attack
For months before last week's deadly bombing of the World Trade Center, the Federal Bureau of Investigation had been investigating a radical Islamic cleric and people believed to be his followers in Brooklyn and Jersey City.
But despite an abundance of intelligence, the bureau picked up no warning that any of them, including a suspect arrested on Thursday, might be planning a violent attack on New York City's tallest towers.
Senior law-enforcement officials said that while Federal agents had been monitoring the cleric, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, and two mosques of his fundamentalist followers for more than a year, Federal guidelines had limited their ability to tail them or conduct other close surveillance.
Nothing suggesting the purchase of explosives or the assembling of a bomb was detected, the officials said.
Even close surveillance might not have picked up a surreptitious act, they said.


Payments By Merrill
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, which earned a record $894 million in 1992, rewarded its two top executives with salaries, bonuses and stock options worth $7.4 million each, a record for the company.
William A. Schreyer, Merrill's chairman, who plans to retire later this year after 45 years with the company, received a salary of $600,000, a bonus of $4.6 million, restricted stock worth $1.1 million when it was granted and options worth $1.1 million to buy additional shares.


Tadao Kashio, 75; Co-founded and Led Casio Computer Co.
Tadao Kashio, who led the expansion of the Casio Computer Company as it popularized the pocket calculator and developed other major consumer electronic products, died on Thursday at a hospital in Tokyo.
He was 75 and lived in Tokyo.
The cause of death was respiratory failure, company officials said.


Classical Music in Review
Oliver Knussen New York Philharmonic


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about Monday's stock market activity misstated Ryder System's stock price and change in some editions.
The stock closed at 27 3/4, down 1 1/2.


Storm Causes Accidents and 2 Deaths
The March lion ran amok.
A nightlong storm battering the New York metropolitan region with snow, sleet, freezing rain and whipping winds, ripped roofs off buildings, tore down power lines and sent cars spinning like tops.


Review/Music; Tanzanian Folk Songs Meet American Jazz
Multiculturalism as both an artistic stance and a way of life has an eloquent advocate in Jonathan Hart Makwaia, the singer, pianist and composer who performed some of his music in the first of six shows at La Mama/La Galleria (6 East First Street, East Village) on Monday evening.
At a glance, his idiosyncratic blending of Tanzanian folk song, American blues and jazz and European art music may seem trendy or calculated, but one must admit that he comes by it honestly: He was born in London in 1957, and after studying classical music as a child, he joined the music-theater troupe directed by his stepfather, Roy Hart.
But he also spent some time in Tanzania, learning East African musical traditions from his father.
Now he teaches voice at New York University.
Listening to his performance, one hardly dared imagine what Mr.
Hart Makwaia puts his voice students through, but if they follow his example they are likely to be unusually versatile.
In the course of 12 songs, he alternately whispered, roared, growled, sang in a sweet, gently floating tenor and in a full-throated theatrical style, and produced sustained, airy tones that might be likened to the sound of a boiling tea kettle or a howling wind.


Claim on Russia's Matisses Is Rejected
A French court today rejected an attempt by the heir of a Russian art collector to impound the catalogues for a Matisse exhibition at the Georges Pompidou Center on the ground that 14 of the paintings belong to her and not the Russian state.
Irina Shchukin, the 77-year-old daughter of Sergei I. Shchukin, a Russian textile millionaire who fled Russia for France in 1918, had filed suit arguing that the catalogues included illegal reproductions of the 14 works and that she should be paid royalties for them.


Classical Music in Review
Abbey Simon Pianist Carnegie Hall


Insight; Divergent Paths
The Dow transportation and utility averages each changed by more than 1 percent -- in opposite directions.
In recent weeks, the transports have been weaker, as utility stocks profited from lower interest rates.
But yesterday's strong employment report was everything a trucker or railroad could want.


Some Senate Democrats Push More Spending Cuts
Moderate and conservative Senate Democrats, who hold the swing votes to pass or modify President Clinton's economic package, are pressing the Administration for more budget cuts.
Specifically, they want Mr.
Clinton to slash his proposed $31 billion package of new spending and tax cuts intended to stimulate the economy, and they want him to tie any new spending to further budget cuts.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.00
3.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
2.91
4.03
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
2.98
4.22
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.50
5.44
7.35
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.73
6.73
8.04
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.67
7.65
9.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.79
5.71
6.79
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Dispute Over Insurance Imperils a Barnes Show
The opening of long-awaited exhibition of French paintings from the Barnes Collection in Merion, Pa., scheduled for early May at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, has been thrown into doubt after a Government lawyer said a Federal agency had acted unlawfully in approving Government insurance for the show.
David Fisher, a lawyer for the Federal Council on the Arts and the Humanities, notified the 14 council members last week that their approval in private of an application by the National Gallery for $300 million of insurance for the show had violated the Sunshine Act, which requires Federal agencies to conduct their business in public.


On Being Both a Catholic and a Good American; Sadly Losing Touch
To the Editor:
Your report on President Clinton's support of abortion rights and his relationship with this country's Roman Catholic hierarchy (news article, Feb. 3) reminds me again that the public debate over abortion rights never focuses on the essential sticking points between the two sides, of which there are two in my view: one theological and one legal.


For Joe Gibbs, Greatest Pain Is in Leaving The Redskins
With 12 seasons, 140 victories and three Super Bowl rings behind him as coach of the Washington Redskins, Joe Gibbs looked ahead today, resigning for what he described were health and personal reasons.
The owner, Jack Kent Cooke, quickly passed the Redskins' brilliant banner and quest for more success to Richie Petitbon, the team's defensive coordinator for the last 15 years and now the 18th coach in franchise history.
Gibbs's physicians had told him he had the symptoms of a migrane equivalent, a form of migraine that doesn't involve head pain but does include other symptoms that often accompany migraine headaches.
Gibbs said he had suffered through those symptoms -- dizziness, exhaustion, sleeplessness -- in the final five weeks of the last National Football League season and into the off season.
He said his physicians told him it might require a year of rest to fully recover.


CHRONICLE
Lillian Gish, who died last Saturday, left an estate worth $10 million, with most of it to endow an annual award in the performing arts, Reuters reported yesterday.
Miss Gish was 99, and her career spanned virtually the entire history of movies, starting with silent films.
Her 19-page will, filed in Surrogates Court in Manhattan and dated Feb. 21, 1986, distributes about $1 million to 20 people, including relatives and friends, in bequests ranging from $5,000 to $250,000.


THE TWIN TOWERS: Prevention; Authority Chose Access Over Tighter Security
In an effort that waxed and waned with the level of world terrorist acts, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey carried out several anti-terrorism planning reviews, including the mock bombing of a building and infiltration of secured areas to test preparedness, between 1984 and 1991.
Ultimately its officials rejected the sweeping restrictions on public access that might have prevented the World Trade Center bombing as too disruptive, unfair to merchants and contrary to the Port Authority's role as a public agency.


INSIDE
Rivals Meet in South Africa
Twenty-six South African delegations discussed the resumption of talks that broke off because disagreement on how to write a constitution.
Page 3.
U.N.
Tries to Reach Bosnians
The general commanding the United Nations operation in Bosnia set out to reach besieged Muslim refugees and help evacuate them.
Page 4.
O'Rourke Wants to Stay Put
Andrew P. O'Rourke, Westchester's County Executive, asked to bedropped from consideration for a Federal judgeship, saying he will seek re-election.
Page 23.
March Lion Run Amok
Storms battered the New York region with snow, sleet and freezing rain.
Two people were killed.
Page 27.
Less Than Welcome
Many of the 1,000 Haitian refugees who fled violence and ended up in New York are finding the welcome wearing thin.
Page 26.


Sharpton Begins a Jail Term for Leading Demonstration


Company Briefs
GASMARK LTD., a natural gas marketing company based in Houston, filed on Thursday for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection from creditors.
HELIONETICS INC., Irvine, Calif., has signed a letter of intent to acquire Sentinel Systems Inc., a maker of fault-tolerant computers based in Horsham, Pa.


Gen. George J. Keegan, 72, Dies; Warned U.S. About Soviet Arms
Maj.
Gen.
George J. Keegan Jr., a former Air Force intelligence chief who often annoyed the Pentagon with warnings about Soviet military preparations, died on Wednesday at Bethesda Naval Hospital.
He was 72 years old and lived in Oxon Hill, Md.
His family said he suffered a stroke in January.
General Keegan, a much-decorated former combat pilot, retired in 1977 after five years as assistant Chief of Staff for intelligence at Air Force headquarters in the Pentagon.
He then disclosed possibilities based on data collected by his staff that ran counter to interpretations held by his civilian and military superiors and by the Central Intelligence Agency.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Employers added 365,000 workers to their payrolls in February, the biggest jump in four years, as the unemployment rate edged down a tenth of a point to 7 percent.
The report ran counter to recent doubts about the vigor of the economic expansion.  [ Page 1. ]  New York City's unemployment rate fell sharply in February, to 11.3 percent, from January's rate of 13.4 percent, which was the highest figure in 25 years.  [ 47. ]
Moderate and conservative Senate Democrats are pressing for more budget cuts in President Clinton's economic package, and they want spending tied to cuts.  [ 1. ]
The Resolution Trust Corporation was criticized by its inspector general for doing business with the son of Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen after he defaulted on loans.  [ 45. ] Companies
A top weapons laboratory will buy an unproven supercomputer from a British company rather than from one of several American companies.
The decision to buy the $15 million computer from Meiko World raised questions about national security and economic competitiveness.  [ 35. ]
American Express will sell more than half its majority stake in First Data.
The sale could raise more than $1 billion.  [ 37. ]
Deutsche Bank agreed to acquire Banco de Madrid for $365 million, which would double its presence in Spain.  [ 37. ]
A former top May Department Stores executive was named president and chief operating officer of Neiman Marcus.  [ 37. ]
Russia is selling 35 percent of Zil, which has made armored limousines for Communist leaders from Stalin to Gorbachev.  [ 37. ]  International
Germany's central bank surprised world financial markets by lowering a short-term money-market interest rate and signaling an intention to continue guiding rates down.  [ 35. ]
In disbursing millions of dollars in Poland's shift to a market economy, the Polish-American Enterprise Fund has had to educate Poles in basic capitalism like what a loan is.  [ 35. ]  Markets
Treasury prices recovered after falling sharply in response to the strong February employment report.
The 30-year bond ended the day with its yield unchanged, at 6.73 percent.  [ 35. ]
Investors embraced cyclical stocks and shunned those sensitive to interest rates.
The Dow rose 5.67 points.  [ 36. ]
The dollar surged in heavy trading, bolstered by a cut in a German interest rate.
Gold advanced worldwide.  [ 46. ]
Livestock futures soared amid growing concerns that herds were not expanding fast enough to meet demand.  [ 46. ]  Your Money
Despite recognition of domestic partners by New York and other cities, unmarried couples must still draw up private legal agreements to protect their property rights.  [ 33. ]
As issuers of tax-exempt bonds redeem them to take advantage of lower rates, bond fund managers are putting investors' money into higher-risk issues to maintain high yields.  [ 33. ]
Even with their interest rate cut to 4 from 6 percent, savings bonds are still a good investment for many families.  [ 33. ]
A Pennsylvania family bought a new car at very low cost through the American Automobile Association.  [ 34. ]


O'Rourke Rejects Offer of Judicial Bid
Andrew P. O'Rourke, Westchester's County Executive, today wistfully turned down the offer of a nomination for a Federal judgeship.
He will seek re-election to the job he has held for 10 years.
The decision came as something of a surprise since Mr.
O'Rourke, a Republican, had been longingly waiting for a seat on the bench ever since President Bush nominated him in November 1991.


Unemployment Declines to 7% In Payroll Rise
Surpassing all expectations, employers added 365,000 workers to their payrolls in February, the biggest jump in four years, as the unemployment rate edged down a tenth of a point to 7 percent, the Labor Department said today.
The report, the first broad gauge of the economy's performance last month, ran counter to recent doubts about the vigor of the economic expansion, in which job growth has lagged behind improvement in other areas.


Q &amp; A
Social Security Checks
Q I am receiving a check from Social Security based on my late husband's earnings and his ex-wife also receives a check.
Upon her death, will my check increase?
MARGARET FLYNN, SOUTH PALM BEACH, Fla.
A No.
Under the basic Social Security computation rules, your widow's benefit is set by a family maximum that can be paid each month to all dependents, including spouses and children.
This maximum is based on the insured person's record of earnings and years of work.


Robert S. Enright, Lawyer and Executive, 46
Robert S. Enright, a leading tax lawyer and senior executive of Pepsico Inc., died Wednesday in Australia during a business trip.
A resident of Riverside, Conn., he was 46 years old.
Reporting the death, the company said it occurred in a swimming accident off a beach near Brisbane, Queensland.


Retired Detective Is Slain
A retired police detective was shot to death in his Manhattan apartment building yesterday morning, apparently in an attempted robbery, the police said.
The victim, Frank Prendergast, 70, was in the elevator of his building at 137 East 29th Street about 11:30 A.M. when he was shot in the head, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.
A man was seen fleeing the scene but no arrests were made, the officer said.
Mr.
Prendergast joined the New York Police Department in 1953 and retired in 1985.


Beliefs
Today, as on most Saturdays, Anthony Hibbert will go to someone's home in upstate New York and con duct a Bible class in hopes of winning a convert or two to his beliefs.
That task may be a good deal harder than it was only a week ago, because Mr.
Hibbert is a Davidian.
It is Mr.
Hibbert's misfortune that the religious group to which he is devoting his life shares a name and a heritage -- but virtually nothing else, he is quick to emphasize -- with the Branch Davidians, whose members killed four Federal agents in a gun battle in Waco, Tex., on Sunday and have spent the week under siege.


Money Fund Assets Are Up
The total assets of the nation's 623 retail money market mutual funds increased $2.51 billion, to $391.27 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said this week.
The assets of the 388 taxable retail money market funds rose $1.36 billion, to $308.14 billion, while the assets of the 235 retail tax-exempt funds increased $1.15 billion, to $83.13 billion.


Azinger and Norman Share Doral Open Lead
Two players with vivid histories at the Doral Ryder Open -- Greg Norman and Paul Azinger -- surged into a tie for the lead after the second round today, while some of the illustrious stayed in striking distance.
Norman had a four-under-par 68 while Azinger posted a 66 for a total of 11-under-par 133.
One shot behind was David Frost, who shot the tournament's low round of 64, while Peter Jacobsen and Fred Couples were another shot back at 135.


Corrections
An article by Bloomberg Business News in Business Day yesterday about David C. Mulford's promotion misstated his new title and his previous experience.
He was named chairman and chief executive of Credit Suisse First Boston Ltd., the European unit of the CS First Boston Group.
He is currently deputy chairman of Credit Suisse First Boston Ltd. and a vice chairman of the First Boston Corporation.
He was never a Harvard University professor.


Byrd Continues to Exceed Expectations
When Dennis Byrd was preparing to leave Mount Sinai Hospital in New York three weeks ago, he appeared at a news conference, walking with two crutches and with two physical therapist backing him up.
Today, his gait much steadier and his movement much smoother, Byrd walked into a news conference at St.
John Medical Center relying only on two canes.
He believes he is progressing well enough to win a bet he placed with one of his physical therapists at Mount Sinai.


Johnson Is Banned for Life After Testing Positive for Drugs a 2d Time
Five years after his humiliation at the Seoul Olympics, where he was stripped of his 100-meter gold medal for using steroids, Ben Johnson was barred for life from track and field today after testing positive for drug use a second time.
And, within hours of that announcement at the meeting of the International Amateur Athletic Federation doping commission, a spokesman for Johnson indicated that the Canadian sprinter might appeal the decision.


ABORTION CLINICS SAID TO BE IN PERIL
The directors of abortion clinics in Florida and Texas, whose clinics have been burned by arsonists or sprayed with noxious chemicals, joined Eleanor Smeal and the Fund for a Feminist Majority here today to denounce their attackers as "terrorists," "mercenaries," "conspirators" and "roving bands of thugs."
Not quite two months after a President who supports abortion rights took office, and about a month since legislation that would prohibit states from imposing certain abortion restrictions was sent on its way to likely enactment, these combatants in the long national fight over abortion maintain that the war is not over.


Bonds Recover After a Jolt From the Big Jump in Jobs
A surprisingly large jump in jobs in February knocked the bond market on its heels yesterday morning.
But the market rebounded as investors and traders used the lower prices as a buying opportunity.
The price of the 30-year bond regained almost all its losses by late afternoon, leaving its yield unchanged for the day at 6.73 percent.
Much of the sharp decline in prices of Treasury notes was also recouped.


Hebert Settles for $5.1 Million
New Orleans Saints quarterback BOBBY HEBERT, who sat out the entire 1990 season in a contract dispute, was out again yesterday to celebrate his $5.1 million lawsuit settlement with the National Football League.
In mid-April, Hebert is expected to receive a lump sum of $3.206 million after taxes.
He was not available for comment yesterday.
A babysitter at his home said he and his wife were in New Orleans celebrating.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 U.S. WEIGHS RUSSIAN BUSINESS AID
In an effort to bolster Boris Yeltsin's political position, the White House is considering offering him loan guarantees to house demobilized Russian troops and an enterprise fund to support emerging Russian capitalists, officials said. 1


Lonely Life: One Parish, One Priest
A knock at the door announces a member of the parish quilting club carrying a piece of homemade cake for the Rev.
James J. Roche, the pastor and only priest ministering to the 2,000 families of the Church of the Holy Eucharist.
The cake is moist and welcome, as are the occasional invitations to parishioners' homes for supper.
But in the end, they do little to ease the burdens of a solitary ministry and its long days of saying Mass, visiting the sick and the imprisoned, and overseeing a wide range of parish activities, as well as doing his own cooking and housekeeping.
Father Roche, 52, is candid about the frustration of life as the only priest in a parish and the inherent loneliness and frustration that have become common in the Roman Catholic Church today.


Observer; Must Be Hillary's Fault
It has been a bad season for practically everything.
Extremists and fundamentalists are always ready to do their worst but this winter's gloom has inspired them to unusual exertions in the struggle to make the world a little worse every day.
They always toil for praiseworthy causes, of course, which makes you reluctant to complain that it is rotten of them to be so indifferent to their fellow creatures.
One feels obliged these days to suffer for other people's praiseworthy causes, even if you have never heard of them.


On Being Both a Catholic and a Good American
To the Editor:
One wonders precisely what point Anna Quindlen is trying to make about New York City's St.
Patrick's Day parade in "Church and State" (column, Feb. 17).
She sees in the controversy over the parade an example of an imagined conflict between "what America expects of its citizens and what the Catholic Church expects of the faithful." But her position seems schizophrenic.


Review/Opera; A 'Vixen' With More Than Foxes and Forest
In the eternal conflict between faithfulness and fancifulness, the current Washington Opera staging of Janacek's "Cunning Little Vixen" has reached an inspired compromise.
Introduced by Simon Rattle three years ago at Covent Garden, this production of "Vixen," which runs through March 14, summons compelling new images that preserve both letter and spirit of the score.
On the surface, Janacek tells a story of foxes and their forest friends, of a gamekeeper and his tavern companions; underneath, he is picturing parallel cycles of love, loss, cruelty and compassion.
This production has managed to grasp not only Janacek's two-tiered conception, but also the complexities of his context.
A chief inspiration may have been Karel Capek, a major Czech writer of the 1920's who imagined human animals and also human machines, inventing the word "robot" for the latter.


CHRONICLE
The Donald greets the Princess, or put another way, Margaret meets Marla.
Given the hoopla normally generated by appearances by members of the royal family, to say nothing of those by DONALD TRUMP and MARLA MAPLES, a party that brought them all together on Thursday evening was markedly subdued.
PRINCESS MARGARET was in New York on a brief stopover on her way home from the Caribbean island of Mustique.
She went to the Trump Tower for a benefit to aid the British-American Chamber of Commerce Foundation, which provides scholarships to British and American students studying business.


The Maze of Alternative Medicine
WHAT rights does a doctor have to pursue and practice unconventional medicine?
What obligation do physicians have to denounce their colleagues for what they believe to be quackery?
And finally, will a patient's right to choose and undergo therapies be limited when physicians accuse one another of misconduct?
All of these questions have now been joined in a thorny case pending before the State Supreme Court.
Technically what the court must decide is whether state Department of Health investigators looking into complaints of misconduct made by one physician against another have the right to subpoena records over the objections of the patient involved.
But there are broader ramifications as well, involving such close-to-life-and-death issues as the nature of healing, the conflict between conventional and alternative medicine and the question of patient autonomy summed up by the title of that powerful play, "Whose Life Is It Anyway?"


Sports of The Times; Just a Guy Who Wanted To Do Well
AT precisely the same time that his father was stepping down as head coach of the Washington Redskins, Coy Randle Gibbs was saying "Hallelujah" from Palo Alto, Calif.
Finally, he was getting his dad back.
"It'll be neat, in a physical sense," he said.
"Maybe now my dad will be able to see more than one of my football games in the next two seasons."


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Spurs Upend the Bulls Dale Ellis scored 7 of his 29 points in overtime last night in Chicago as the San Antonio Spurs came back from a 21-point deficit to beat Chicago, 107-102, and end the Bulls' seven-game winning streak. (AP)


U.S. PLANNING AID TO HELP SHORE UP YELTSIN'S POSITION
In an effort to bolster President Boris N. Yeltsin's political position, the White House is considering offering him loan guarantees to house demobilized Russian troops and an enterprise fund to support emerging Russian capitalists, senior Administration officials said today.
These ideas are being considered as part of what President Clinton said would be "some innovative solutions" for aiding Russia that he will propose to President Yeltsin when the two meet next month, officials said.
Mr.
Clinton announced today that the meeting would be held in Vancouver, British Columbia, on April 3 and 4.


High-Velocity Winds Leave Damage in Their Wake


Celebrating 50 Years Of 'Fame' High School
Eartha Kitt, Sarah Jessica Parker and Ben Vereen are to join other musical, theater, film and dance stars in "Fifty Years of Fame," a salute to the Fiorello H. La Guardia High School of Music and the Arts on Monday at 8 P.M. at La Guardia Concert Hall, 65th Street and Amsterdam Avenue.
Also scheduled to appear are the Joffrey Ballet, cast members from the movie "Fame" and surprise jazz and classical musicians.
Tickets for the benefit are $65 for the performance; $100, which includes a pre-show reception; and $150, which includes the reception and a post-show toast with the performers.
Information: (212) 529-8648 or (212) 714-7198.


Classical Music in Review
Cracow Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall


Review/Dance; Moore Troupe Makes a Point On Popular Black Culture
"Traces," presented by the Charles Moore Dance Theater on Sunday afternoon at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, ought to be required viewing for anyone who believes that multiculturalism and traditional black American arts are inseparable concepts.
One of the great pleasures of this "American Suite," as the piece was subtitled, was the force and immediacy with which it made the point that black popular music and dance are an important and intrinsic part of American culture and its history.
The program opened with Louis Johnson's new "Spirit, a Dance for Charles," an exuberant, wistful celebration of the late Mr.
Moore and his belief in the expressive power of African traditional dance and music.
The performers then moved from Africa, in a lilting court dance called "Dahomey," to Harlem in the 1940's, in Pepsi Bethel's boisterous Lindy Hopping "Saturday Night at the Savoy," in dance and music adapted for the concert stage.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on Thursday about rebuilding houses destroyed by fire in Oakland and Berkeley, Calif., misidentified an architect who originally designed many of the houses.
He was Bernard Maybeck.


No. 2 Job at Neiman Marcus Goes to Former May Official
Gerald A. Sampson, a retailing veteran who spent much of his career with the May Department Stores Company, has been named president and chief operating officer of Neiman Marcus Stores, the retailer based here.
Mr.
Sampson will report to Terry J. Lundgren, who remains chief executive but will add the title of chairman.
Mr.
Sampson, 51, will supervise the company's information services, properties, new store development, operations and distribution and the financial divisions.


Bosnia Talks to Continue Today
Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen, the mediators seeking a peace accord for Bosnia, said tonight that talks would continue at least another day instead of breaking up in discord.
Their focus was on trying to get the Muslim head of the Sarajevo Government to accept the map and other terms of the peace plan aimed at ending the civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
After saying he would leave New York tonight, without signing the accord, President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia agreed to meet with Mr.
Vance and Lord Owen again on Saturday.
Croats Have Accepted Plan
The mediators are also expected to meet again on Saturday with Radovan Karadzic, the leader of the Bosnian Serbs.
Dr.
Karadzic also had planned to leave New York tonight but postponed his departure.
After lengthy talks on Thursday night with President Izetbegovic, the mediators appeared optimistic.
They said they believed he would accept the last outstanding part of their peace plan for the region, a map for dividing Bosnia into 10 semiautonomous provinces, today.
But this morning, the President apparently balked.


How Other Cities Deal With Fare-Beaters
To the Editor:
Mayor David N. Dinkins of New York, seeing riders on the Tokyo subway pass through a turnstile on exiting, said, "I like the idea because fare-beaters would have to pass through two gates -- one to get on and one to get off" (news article, Feb. 22).


Judge Approves Trial Runs for Waste Incinerator
In a mixed decision, a Federal district judge in Cleveland yesterday lifted an earlier order and approved a crucial series of trial runs for the nation's newest hazardous waste incinerator, possibly this month.
But the judge, Ann Aldrich, then barred the Swiss owners, Von Roll Inc., from operating the incinerator in Ohio commercially until the Federal Environmental Protection Agency conducts new reviews of its safety.


Corrections
An article by Reuters on Feb. 11 about the nomination of the Provincial Governor of Taiwan, Lien Chan, to be Prime Minister referred to his background imprecisely.
Although he is considered part of the native Taiwanese majority because his ancestors were born in Taiwan, he was born in mainland China and moved to Taiwan as a child.


In the Stock Market, but Not Too Deeply
Investors who want to be in the stock market, but conservatively, might consider buying shares in one of the 75 equity-income funds, which invest in a mix of high-dividend-paying stocks (usually 60 percent or more of the portfolio) and bonds or cash.
They focus more on the income side of the equation than growth-and-income funds and that shows up in their yields.
The average 12-month yield for equity-income funds is 3.5 percent, well above growth-and-income funds' 2 percent, according to Lipper Analytical Services.


New Prosecution, New Tack In Los Angeles Beating Case
After the first full week of testimony, the prosecution in the Federal civil rights trial of four police officers charged in the beating of Rodney G. King has chosen a far different path from the one taken in the state's failed prosecution of the four last year in Simi Valley.
From the start, prosecutors have avoided what experts called glaring pitfalls in the state trial on charges of assault and excessive use of force.
That resulted in acquittals that touched off three days of deadly rioting and caused nearly $1 billion in damage.


A Masterpiece On Canvas, With McGirt And Whitaker
Occasionally, boxing offers its fans a main event full of substance, which is why tonight's 12-round welterweight title fight at Madison Square Garden is regarded as something special.
James (Buddy) McGirt and Pernell Whitaker are more than simply capable boxers contending for a championship.
A belt will be awarded to the winner.
McGirt's World Boxing Council welterweight title is at stake in the bout, which will be televised by HBO.
But the winner will also get some support as the best pound-for-pound fighter and, perhaps, a chance to meet Julio Cesar Chavez.


Low Interest on Margin Loans Makes Them Attractive
Many new investors in stocks, bonds and mutual funds do not know that there may be untapped borrowing power in their assets.
So-called margin loans against the value of a portfolio may be made for any purpose.
Once established, such a loan operates like a line of credit.
"It's an excellent way to borrow money," said Lewis J. Altfest, president of L. J. Altfest &amp; Company, financial planners in New York City.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day on Feb. 22 about the performance of Glaxo Holdings P.L.C. misstated the highest price that the company's stock reached last fall on the London Stock Exchange and the decline from that point to Feb. 19.
The stock's high last fall was 869 pence in London, so the shares on Feb. 19 were 23 percent lower, at 666 pence.


THE TWIN TOWERS: Terrorism; Throughout Arab World, 20 Years Of Growth of Islamic Terror Groups
Islamic terrorist groups have mushroomed throughout the Arab world during the last two decades, multiplying into scores of tightly knit organizations.
Staffed mostly by young zealots, these terrorist cells, known as Islamic groupings, number anywhere from a handful to several dozens of hardened fighters, some of whom were trained in Afghanistan, Iran and the Sudan, today's strongholds of Islamic fundamentalism.
Even though they use a variety of esoteric labels that seemingly differentiate them, including names like Those Saved From Hell, The Army of Mohammed and Islamic Bugle, as well as the more familiar Holy War, Party of God and Hamas, virtually all these groups draw their logic from two convictions.


Bentsen Son's Tie to Bailout Is Questioned
The inspector general of the Resolution Trust Corporation, which manages the assets of bankrupt savings and loans, has criticized the agency for continuing to do business with Lan Bentsen, a property investor who is the son of Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, after he defaulted on loans owed to a Texas institution that failed.
Last month, according to Resolution Trust officials, the agency reached a settlement with Lan Bentsen over the defaulted loans, and the main property under his management that the inspector general investigated has been sold.


Savings Bonds: Lower Rates, but Still Safe
The surprise drop this week in the minimum rate on United States Savings Bonds to 4 percent from 6 percent caused immediate concern among many Americans who invest in these Federal securities through payroll deduction or direct purchase.
Yet even with the lower rate, when the bonds are compared with other guaranteed investments, they remain an attractive option for investors.
The Treasury Department lowered the rate for both Series EE and Series HH bonds, effective last Monday.
It said that this action was taken in response to the substantial decline in market rates over the last year or so.


COMPANY NEWS: Russia's Zil to Offer Stock; From Limos for the Rulers To Shares for the Masses
For decades, Russia's giant Zil enterprise was a Soviet showcase, producing big, black, armored limousines for Communist leaders from Stalin to Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
But like most Soviet showcases, Zil and its vehicles are now heading down the capitalist road.


A Trial Site for Miami Officer Charged in Death of 2 Blacks
A Dade County Circuit Court judge ruled today that the retrial of a Miami police officer in the deaths of two black men that ignited racial riots in Miami in 1989 would be held here regardless of pleas by both the prosecution and defense to move to another site.
A Dade County Assistant State Attorney, John Hogan, indicated that he would ask a state appeals court to prevent the trial from beginning next week as scheduled.
In joining in the plea for a change of venue, the state had shifted strategy today after a week of arguments on moving the proceedings.


The Other Davidians
Not all Davidians are holed up in a compound near Waco, Tex., and the others say they want nothing to do with those who are.
Beliefs, page 9.


Bridge
When in need of a word to represent one of the four suits or no-trump, the laws of the game refer to "denomination." This is clumsy, and some writers prefer "strain." This makes it possible to inquire whether it is better to play in the right strain at the wrong level or the wrong strain at the right level.
There is no clear answer, but either is liable to generate more interesting play than the right strain at the right level.
In the diagramed deal from the conclusion of the Long Island Regional Swiss Teams in Smithtown, L.I., on Sunday, North-South should have reached four spades.
The team leading into the last round overbid to six spades, the right strain at the wrong level, and failed by a trick.
The opposing North-South arrived, as shown, in four hearts, the wrong strain at the right level.


Charles Standen, 75, Advertising Executive
Charles R. Standen, a retired advertising executive, died Thursday in a hospital in Hinsdale, Ill., where he lived.
He was 75.
The cause of death was heart failure, his family said.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Suspect; More Light Is Shed On a Shadowy Life
He apparently lived in this country illegally, squeezed into a small disordered apartment here with three others.
Neighbors say he kept to a shadowy life penetrated by few people outside of a tight network of Muslims who shared housing and fraternized with him.
Some of these friends seem to have vanished in the last few days.
Mohammed A. Salameh, the 25-year-old man described by the police as an Islamic fundamentalist who was arrested on Thursday morning as the first suspect in the World Trade Center bombing, has lived for about two years in a one-bedroom apartment on an unobtrusive residential street here that he shared with two women and another man, neighbors said.
At some point, he may have driven a cab or worked in construction.


David B. Tyler, 93, Historian and Professor
David B. Tyler, an American naval historian and retired professor, died on Friday at a nursing home in Riverhead, L.I.
He was 93 and lived in Amagansett, L.I.
He died of a heart failure after a long illness, his family said.


CRYING WOLF OVER ELEPHANTS
Your article made a tremendous contribution to the public's understanding of how political and emotional the debate over wildlife conservation has become.


'Wipes Dream Away With Hand'
THE THEATRICAL NOTEBOOKS OF SAMUEL BECKETT
General editor, James Knowlson.
Volume Two: Endgame.
With a revised text.
Edited by S. E. Gontarski.
Illustrated. 276 pp.
Volume Three: Krapp's Last Tape.
With a revised text.
Edited by James Knowlson.
Illustrated. 286 pp.
New York: Grove Press. $75 each.


Kathryn Buckley, John S. Stevens
Kathryn Ann Buckley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Buckley of Pelham Manor, N.Y., was married there yesterday to John Stuart Stevens, a son of Helen J. Stevens of Pelham, N.Y., and William P. Stevens of Mount Vernon, N.Y.
Msgr.
Hugh D. Curran performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Perpetual Help Church.
Mrs.
Stevens, 27, is the business development coordinator of Partners &amp; Shevack Inc., an advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from St.
Bonaventure University.


Musical Personality Of a Less Vivid Sort
Since the turn of the century, when Toscanini first terrified ill-prepared orchestras, and a fearsome, fast-striding figure in the streets of Vienna was known simply as Der Mahler, conductors have been expected to assert themselves through force of personality.
Herbert Blomstedt, who will conduct the San Francisco Symphony at Carnegie Hall on Monday and Tuesday evenings, represents a different tradition.
He is relatively undemonstrative on the podium; no one seems to call him Der Blomstedt, and at a distance he might be mistaken for the political commentator George F. Will.
He is the sort of musician critics instinctively label a Kapellmeister, an old-fashioned time-beater (as New Yorkers have become accustomed to hearing about Kurt Masur).


Why We Need to Restructure the School Year; Standard English
To the Editor:
You report a drastic drop in reading scores in New York City public schools (news article, Feb. 20).
Small print reporting data for the citywide test from which these scores are calculated states, "Students with limited proficiency in English who have been in the school system less than two years were excused from taking the test." This provision and related issues may help explain the scores.


California's Secret Heart
IN THE OPENING PAGES OF HIS 1952 NOVEL, "East of Eden," John Steinbeck recalled the Salinas Valley of his childhood, 50 years before.
"I remember that the Gabilan Mountains to the east of the valley were light gay mountains full of sun and loveliness and a kind of invitation, so that you wanted to climb into their warm foothills almost as you want to climb into the lap of a beloved mother. They were beckoning mountains with a brown grass love. The Santa Lucias stood up against the sky to the west and kept the valley from the open sea, and they were dark and brooding -- unfriendly and dangerous."
When I first saw the same ranges 30 years ago, I felt differently.
The eastward Gabilans seemed to me subjected mountains, dulled with the piety of farmers and the misery of their hired labor.
The Santa Lucias looked romantic, mist-shrouded and filled with wild promise.


As a Last Resort in Fire, Break the Glass of Office Window
To the Editor:
In television news, a picture is worth more than 1,000 words.
The images captured by camera crews in the aftermath of the World Trade Towers disaster have been seared upon our national consciousness.
In the midst of this horror, minutes after smoke-filled rooms and staircases were crowded with office workers running for their lives, our newsroom received a phone call.
The caller, John Cuneo, a computer operator, described a situation of panic and confusion.
He begged for help, and the call was transferred to our news set.


F.C.C. Flunks Fred Flintstone
It may seem obvious to many parents that "The Jetsons" is not educational television.
But what about other cartoon shows like "Winnie the Pooh" or "The Smurfs," which emphasize friendship and sharing?
Last week the Federal Communications Commission said shows like "The Flintstones" cannot be used by a broadcaster to satisfy requirements under the Children's Television Act of 1990 to meet the "educational and informational needs" of children.


FEB. 28 - MARCH 6: The Wages of the 80's; Milken Leaves Custody With Cancer, Other Burdens
Michael Milken is a free man, sort of.
He was released from Government custody last week, although he still must perform three years of community service in a way yet to be determined.
Mr.
Milken, the man who made junk bonds famous and became one of the most notorious financial criminals of the 80's, served two years for a variety of securities law violations.
But he never really admitted having done anything that he thought was very wrong, and he indignantly denied allegations of insider trading, which were never proven.
To the relief of many on Wall Street, his cooperation with Federal authorities did not produce a new round of indictments.


Off-Season Offerings at Caramoor
For many years, Caramoor in Katonah was synonymous with summertime music, but now it offers interesting programs at other times of the year.
"This is probably the most exciting spring series we've ever planned," said Howard Herring, Caramoor's executive director.
"We are thrilled to be the crucible for an Andre Previn mentorship once again and are extremely fortunately to welcome Yefim Bronfman, one of the most outstanding pianists of his generation."
The mentorship is an unusual feature of the spring season, since eight gifted youngsters, aged 16 to 24, have been selected to be coached by Mr.
Previn, the cellist Gary Hoffman and the violinists Ani Kavafian and Krista Bennion Feeney.
These emerging artists and their preceptors will be featured in recitals in Caramoor's Music Room on April 24 and 25.
The room, incidentally, is noted for its fine acoustics.


CRYING WOLF OVER ELEPHANTS
Bonner tries to make it sound as if the international conservation community cynically used widespread public concern over elephants to raise funds for themselves.
Nowhere does he admit that the "alarmist" figures put forth by conservation groups were alarming because they were correct.
The grisly photos and tales of elephant slaughter were no more than descriptions of the sort of thing I saw happening as I traveled through Africa at the time.
This was almost all because of ivory poaching.
Odd that Bonner never mentions that poaching has fallen off some 90 percent, since the worldwide ban on ivory went into effect.
DOUGLAS H. CHADWICK
Whitefish, Mont.


90,000 Miles, $2,500, and It Runs
WHATEVER happened to planned obsolescence?
R.
D.
Sand's Original New York Auto Auction seems never to have heard of it.
Four times a week, it auctions off cars that have been around the block more than a few times.
One recent Saturday morning, in the auction's parking lot in Hollis, Queens, prospective buyers milled around before the sale, checking out, among nearly 200 other vehicles, a 1988 Chevrolet Blazer with 97,000 miles on it, a late-model Buick Park Avenue with 120,000 miles and a 1990 Plymouth Voyager minivan with all the toys and a whopping 167,000 miles on the odometer.
And yes, they run!
"We sell high-mileage cars," said Rob Sand, the owner and primary auctioneer.
"You get more value for the dollar."
Mr.
Sand, who bears a passing resemblance to the singer Michael Bolton, started his business four years ago.
"My clientele are average working people, looking to spend about $2,000," he said.
"An '88 Mercury Sable with 30,000 miles on it would sell for $6,000. I can sell one with 90,000 miles on it for $2,500."


Thousands in Korea Are Given Amnesty By New President
President Kim Young Sam granted amnesty today to more than 41,000 criminals and dissidents.
Among those released were the dissident leader Moon Ik Hwan, 73, a Presbyterian minister who was jailed in 1989 for visiting North Korea without Government permission, and about 140 other political prisoners.


Cuban Exiles Flex and Falter
Miami's most powerful Cuban exile group demonstrated its considerable clout at the national level last week, but stumbled on the home front.
The Cuban American National Foundation blocked the appointment of Mario Baeza, a Wall Street lawyer, as the State Department's chief of Latin American affairs, but foundation directors were unable to seize control of a radio station that often criticizes their policies.
By nominating Alexander F. Watson as his Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, President Clinton acknowledged that his original choice for the job, Mr.
Baeza, was unacceptable to the Cuban-American establishment.
Mr.
Baeza, a Cuban who was raised in New Jersey, enraged the Miami-based foundation by attending a trade conference in Cuba.
Foundation leaders want to tighten the economic noose around Cuba and feared Mr.
Baeza might nudge Mr.
Clinton in the opposite direction.


Message Outshines The Gimmickry
To the Editor:
I think it's sad that Caryn James feels that the most important thing to write about "The Crying Game" is its gimmickry.
The enormous popularity of the film goes well beyond the plot twist, because it educates us all on tolerance, understanding and, dare I say, love.
It is these virtures we need to expound on; not on just keeping the secret of the film intact.


STREET GUNS
It is apparent from your article that virtually all street guns are dependent upon the availability of 9-millimeter cartridges.
Why not ban the 9-millimeter cartridge and make all those street guns obsolete?
Guns can last forever.
But I do not think that there is more than a three-year supply of 9-millimeter cartridges in the entire country.
As the next cartridge of choice emerges, ban it, too.


The Seychelles' Golden Strands
I AM BASICALLY A beach person, a problem when it comes to traveling with my husband, Ray Bonner: he prefers the mountains.
But in the Seychelles, a group of more than a hundred islands in the Indian Ocean, 1,000 miles off the coast of Kenya, he succumbed.
We went several years ago, as a respite from hot and deserty Africa.
The Seychelles are usually considered part of the African continent, but, in fact, they are a place apart.
Their small population, only 65,000 or so, contributes to a sense of the islands' isolation.
Descended from French and other European settlers, Asian traders and African slaves, the Seychellois speak Creole, a language that sets a soft and unhurried tone in a place where there is little but natural beauty.


A Downhill Battle
WINTER wonderland, take one: The crenellated peaks are etched against an azure sky.
The snow, bedazzling as a bedsheet in a detergent ad, unfurls beneath perfectly parallel skis.
Come nightfall, as rose glow fades to fire glow, and a person's fancy lightly turns to thoughts of . . .
Cut.
Winter wonderland, take two: You arrive in some alpine village that, only a few years back, thought wealth meant an extra cow to hang a bell on.
You open your wallet and all the locals take all your money for ski rental, lift pass, ski school, genuine mountain goulash soup, tots of schnapps with real prunes in it.
The weasly-eyed ski instructor gets to pursue the likely thoughts.
You get to stay in Tante Waltraud's authentically half-converted attic-cum-pensione and central heating that would make Scott of the Antarctic feel right at home.


STREET GUNS
By calling the article "A Consumer Guide," you seemed to be suggesting that we each "choose our weapon" and further perpetuate this insane love affair America has with guns.
Is that why it was your Valentine's Day cover?
JEANNE BEAUMONT
New York, N.Y.


A Remembrance of Saigon Days
SAIGON WAS BATtered by the war when I lived there in the late 1960's and early 70's, and it was a sad and tired-looking place even a decade ago.
But now I hear things are picking up, and I'd like to go back again to see how the city is doing and to revisit old haunts.
The Continental Palace Hotel, in the center of town, is one of these; the Majestic, down what used to be Tu Do Street on the riverfront, is another.
The Continental was a blowsy old place, full of charm, when I lived there in 1971, with bougainvillea climbing all the way up to my third-floor room.
Pity if it's been soundproofed and air-conditioned.
I understand that the "dust of life" -- the beggars and prostitutes who reminded us daily of the war going on all around us -- have been banished from the hotel's veranda bar.
And that G.I.'s are coming back on nostalgia trips.


Melissa Clark, Max Jonson
Melissa Clark, a daughter of Dr.
Julian Clark and Dr.
Rita Clark of Brooklyn, was married on Friday to Max A. Jonson, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bjorn Jonson of Lund, Sweden.
Judge Edgar G. Walker of Criminal Court in the Bronx performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Clark, who is keeping her name, graduated from Barnard College.
She is a master's degree candidate in writing at Columbia University and an author.
Her father is a clinical associate professor of psychiatry at the State University Health Science Center in Brooklyn.
Her mother is a clinical assistant professor of psychiatry at New York University in Manhattan.


The Economic Czar Behind the Economic Czars
Roaming the narrow halls of the White House in perpetually loosened ties and gray suits, Robert E. Rubin looks more like a graying college professor than the titan of Wall Street he once was or the power behind the throne that he is now.
As one of a handful of advisers who meet with the President every day, Mr.
Rubin, the head of the National Economic Council, holds the keys to the issue Bill Clinton cares most about: fixing the economy.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Alexandria  $318,488
13 Shy Creek Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; hardwood floors, whirlpool, fireplace; taxes not yet available.
Haddonfield  $141,000
226 Rhoads Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 70-year-old colonial; tree-lined street, eat-in-kitchen, full basement; taxes $3,114.
Mahwah  $210,000
222 Mahwah Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, over 50-year-old Cape Cod; expansion possibilities, wooded lot, full basement; taxes $2,649.
Pittstown  $210,000
457 Machline Corner Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 11-year-old Cape Cod; pine floors, wooded lot; eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,276.
Ramsey  $280,000
334 Grove Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old split level; fireplace, deck, patio; taxes $5,378.
Wyckoff  $159,000
392 Lehigh Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old colonial; hardwood floors, front porch, full basement; $2,250.
OTHER AREAS Eastchester, N.Y.  $325,000
39 Waterside Close  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old condominium; eat-in kitchen, fireplaces, loft/den, 2-car garage; taxes $8,339.
Norwalk, Conn.  $215,000
3 Anderson Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod on cul-de-sac; heavily insulated, new roof, 0.5 acre; taxes $3,410.
Rocky Point, L.I.  $104,000
41A Noah's Path  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; den, basement, porch, skylights; taxes $2,300.


Reading Reagan's Favorite Arabic Sage
To the Editor:
Ronald Reagan, in "There They Go Again," his Feb. 18 Op-Ed response to President Clinton's economic proposal, quotes the Arab historian Ibn Khaldun.
When Ibn Khaldun wrote the words (from his study of history, "The Muqaddimah") that the former President cites, he was on the periphery of government, attempting to regain an official position.


A New Concept in Decorating Outlets
As damaging as the recession has been to many businesses, at least one family-owned company, the Fabric Design Center here, has managed to go against the tide by expanding rather than contracting.
Last week, in addition to its retail fabric store opened in 1990, the center opened a second outlet across the street: a showroom for both interior designers and retail customers.
Ernest A. Leckart, who started the company with his wife, Priscilla, says it is the two-tier system of pricing -- wholesale for the bona fide interior decorator and retail for the consumer -- that has helped him increase his customer base.
Seeking a Broad Customer Base
"It's a new concept in marketing in the county, stores selling home furnishings at both wholesale and retail," Mr.
Leckart said.
"What I had in mind was to clone the Design and Decoration Building on Third Avenue at 58th Street in Manhattan, but open it to a broader customer base. While the showrooms in the D&amp;D Building offer designer fabrics, wallpapers, furniture, rugs and accessories, they are restricted to the trade, or decorators, only. I thought a shop that offered one-stop wholesale and retail shopping for decorators and savvy customers would go over in Westchester."


IN SHORT: FICTION
PRIMAL FEAR By William Diehl. Villard, $20.


Argentina Gives Missile Parts to U.S. for Disposal
Using Spain as a go-between, Argentina has handed over most of the components of a secretive ballistic missile project known as the Condor II to the United States for destruction, Government officials here say.
The delivery in late January brought the Argentine Government close to fulfilling a promise made two years ago by President Carlos Saul Menem to dismantle the missile project, which was financed mostly by Iraq.
Had the program been completed, the medium-range missiles could have eventually been used to deliver biological, chemical and nuclear warheads within a 500-mile range.


Abortion Foes Should Return to Major Parties
Mary Jane Tobin misses the point of the Nassau County Republican Party's refusal to take cross endorsements from the Right to Life Party  [ "Cross Endorsements and Mondello's Stance," Jan. 31. ]
While in a small handful of particularly tight races Right to Life endorsement may provide candidates with the margin of victory, the overall effect of the Right to Life Party over the years of its existence has been to dilute the strength of pro-life advocates in both major parties.


The Message? Good Question
AS the guests entered a preview of the 1993 Biennial Exhibition at the Whitney Museum of American Art on Tuesday night, guards pinned them with tiny metal buttons designed by the artist Daniel J. Martinez.
Instead of having the usual "WMAA" logo, some of the multicolored admissions buttons said, "I can't imagine ever wanting to be white." Others had only one or two of these words.
They had the effect of turning each guest into a walking piece of performance art.
"I'm very happy being white," Judith Villard, a corporate lawyer, said when asked about the sentence braced on her chic black suit.
Mrs.
Villard, who is listed in the Social Register, was studying a plastic puddle of regurgitated food that was part of Sue Williams's installation, "The Sweet and Pungent Smell of Success." She was gamely trying to absorb some of the multicultural political statements that are the backbone of this year's Biennial.


Long Island Q&amp;A: Diane Waldman; 'Good Art Often Takes at Least 20 Years' to Be Appreciated
DIANE WALDMAN has written six monographs on art, in addition to numerous catalogues for exhibitions at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York, for which she was curator.She is now deputy director and senior curator of the Guggenheim.
She studied art with the abstract painters Robert Motherwell and William Baziotes at Hunter College and received an M.A. from the Institute of Fine Arts at New York University.
Ms.
Waldman lives with her husband, Paul Waldman, a painter, in New York and Southampton.


With U.N. Role, New Faces for Remote Cambodia
For more than two decades, this northeastern province of broad rivers, deep forests and scarce population was inaccessible to virtually all foreigners except the Vietnamese invaders.
Even in peacetime, few foreigners penetrated its nearly roadless wilderness.
But today, the extensive United Nations presence in this once reclusive country is startlingly evident here.
Foreigners are everywhere.


Wisconsin: Three Visions Attained
NEITHER THE PRAIRIE NOR THE Great North Woods, the two largest geographical features of the American Midwest, display themselves easily to the automotive tourist -- the prairie is simultaneously too vast and too subtle, and the northern lake country is secretive from the road -- you aren't really there until you're out on the water, in a boat.
But the Wisconsin glacier, which created the northern lakes as well as the northern prairie, left an untouched pocket in southwestern Wisconsin where the vistas unfold mile by mile in a picturesque landscape.
This area of a few counties is remarkable not only for its scenic beauty but also, I think, for a kind of deeply American, even uniquely Midwestern, eccentricity, much of which is on display for travelers.
Visionary groups and visionary individuals have a history here from the earliest days of the Wisconsin Territory, when the uplands and the river valleys attracted numbers of settlers' groups from Wales, Norway, Switzerland, Cornwall and other hilly or mountainous regions.
This whole section of the Midwest, including parts of Iowa and Illinois, belies the Midwestern stereotype of homogeneity -- the map is actually like an exploded version of ethnic Chicago, with one-nationality towns set miles apart instead of one-nationality neighborhoods blocks apart.
European communities, often local religious sects, were fond of sending out scouts to find a hospitable spot, soon to be followed by the rest of the group.
Most of these settlers returned to their inherently conservative ways as soon as the great immigration adventure was over.
Even so, later generations spawned their own visionaries, and some of their works are strangely juxtaposed within a few miles of each other.


What a Little Chicken Breath Can Do
EVEN on a blustery zero-degree day, it's so warm -- 80 degrees -- in Anna Edey's solar greenhouse on Martha's Vineyard in Massachsetts that the vents are open.
Let those blizzards with their raging winds pound the four layers of plastic glazing outside.
The greenhouse has survived hurricanes.
And every week, this 3,000-square-foot space produces 60 pounds of greens -- 25 varieties of leaf lettuce and 20 other greens and herbs, like chicory, arugula, beet greens, sorrel, cilantro, dill and parsley.
Nasturtiums and borage bloom.
Insects drink their nectar.
This winter greenhouse, which grosses $100,000 a year, is a Solviva greenhouse -- Ms.
Edey's own invention.
The name is her tribute to the good life that the sun can bring.
The greenhouse runs without oil or gas.
Its heat and electricity come from the sun -- and the body heat of 100 chickens.


The White-Crested British Raconteur
THE AYE-AYE AND I
A Rescue Mission in Madagascar.
By Gerald Durrell.
Illustrated. 175 pp.
New York:  Arcade Publishing. $22.95.


POSTINGS: 4 Levels, $12.5 Million; Athletic Center for Stevens Tech
Why a duck?
Why not, if it's the Stevens Tech Ducks.
Stevens Institute of Technology may never make it to the Final Four, but the 123-year-old school, which emphasizes engineering and science, is nonetheless putting up a $12.5 million athletic center on its campus in Hoboken, N.J.
"Athletics and recreation are given a high priority because of our intensive curriculum," said C. Thomas Lunghard, the school's vice president for operations.


A Voice for Life


Business Diary/December 20-25
THE ECONOMY Here's a Statistic That Matters: People Are Going Back to Work


Once, the Voice Was Melody Itself. In Fact, It Still Is.
Her voice, even now, is melody itself.
When Jarmila Novotna, the Metropolitan Opera's lyric soprano star of the World War II era, answers the telephone or welcomes a visitor to her apartment on the East Side of Manhattan, the syllables of "Hel-lo" are musical pitches.
When she tells an exciting or agitating story from the days of her singing career, which began in Prague in 1925 and ended 31 years later at the Met, she punctuates her sentences and paragraphs with a "la-la-la" that rings like silver bells.
"My friends laugh at me," she said during a recent visit.
"Oh, Jarmila, you never stop singing." And then comes a little snatch of vocalise, pure and high, and one wonders whether Miss Novotna ought not to be coaxed into recording a few of her old songs, even at 85.
Maybe a few more of the tuneful folk songs of her native Czechoslovakia.
In the 1920's and 30's, Miss Novotna was close to the family of President Thomas G. Masaryk.
His son Jan, later the Czechoslovak Ambassador to London, played folk songs with great fluency and inventiveness on the piano, and Miss Novotna often sang with him.


Flight Canceled
To the Editor: On Dec. 11, I was scheduled to fly to Chicago from New York on American's noon flight, to attend the opening of an art exhibition for which I was curator and deliver a lecture.
Because of the extreme weather that day, I called the airline several times about possible delays and was told -- by a live human being, not a recording -- that passengers were being asked to board for the scheduled noon departure.
The calls were made at 10:30 and 10:45 A.M.
On arriving at La Guardia at 11:15 A.M., I found it closed and all flights canceled until at least 6 P.M.
According to The Times on Dec. 12, La Guardia was officially closed at 10:22 A.M.
In these days of computer and fax technology, I don't think it is unreasonable to expect to be told an airport has been closed 20 minutes after the fact.


A Fiesta in Search of Global Community
The bright skirts and sashes swirling around the F. E. Bellows Elementary School auditorium here stood in sharp contrast to the swirling snow outside.
Despite the storm, the fourth graders swiveling their hips in a spirited merengue conveyed to their audience that they were in the middle of a Latin American carnival, not in a suburban school.
The abundant decorations added to the festive spirit.
A "worry doll" wreath from Guatemala, with small cloth figures arranged in a circular pattern on a quilted cloth background, hung outside the auditorium while paper-bag "pinatas," stuffed with crumpled newspapers instead of toys and candy, dangled from the ceiling.


Airdrop in Bosnia Is Reported to Hit Mark
In what may have been one of their most accurate airdrops yet, American crews dumped more than 27 tons of relief supplies early today into two besieged towns in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Within hours of the drop, amateur radio operators from both towns, Srebrenica and Konjevic, reported that crates had landed in areas accessible to hungry civilians.


Whitaker Is Winner Over McGirt
The shoulder was fine.
They said it last week, repeated it as the days passed and insisted that James (Buddy) McGirt wouldn't be bothered by it when he fought Pernell Whitaker for the welterweight title last night.
But it wasn't fine.
McGirt threw no more than a half-dozen left hooks, but they were ineffective and unimpressive.
And without the hook, McGirt didn't have a chance to keep his belt.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE THIRD KIND OF KNOWLEDGE Memoirs &amp; Selected Writings.
By Robert Fitzgerald.
Edited by Penelope Lourans Fitzgerald.
New Directions, $24.95.


Hominy Still Has Its Place in American Cooking
SUMMER'S glorious crop of fresh corn on the cob from local farms and the year-round availability of fresh, frozen and canned sweet corn have rendered dried corn kernels obsolete.
But now there is renewed interest in this traditional winter staple, also called hominy.
The popularity of Mexican and Southwestern cooking has led to new appreciation for dishes based on dried corn.
In these cuisines, hominy seasoned with chili is simmered slowly for hours, often with the addition of pork or chicken, resulting in a hearty, lusty rib-sticking stew -- good cold-weather fare.


Lisa J. Balbus, David H. Gilbert
Lisa Joy Balbus, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome H. Balbus of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married last evening to Dr.
David Harrison Gilbert, the son of Barbara Gilbert of Glen Cove, L.I., and the late Dr.
Michael Gilbert.
Rabbi Jacob Goldberg officiated at the Garden City (L.I) Hotel.
Mrs.
Gilbert is a senior accountant and a certified public accountant in New York for Aquascutum of London Inc., the clothing manufacturer and retailer.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.


'Age of Sail' In Salem, Mass.
Yachtsmen who can't wait for spring to launch their boats can feel the wind in their sails early this year by viewing an unusual exhibition called "The Great Age of Sail: Treasures from the National Maritime Museum of Greenwich, England" which opened last Sunday at the Peabody and Essex Museum in Salem, Mass.
Featuring more than 100 examples of maritime art and crafts, the show marks the first time most of these objects have traveled outside Britain.


A Virtuous Pursuit
There is only the faintest whiff of perfume about Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington, but, oh, how big is the scent of virtue.
Mrs.
Huffington -- the Titian-haired wife of the newly elected Representative Michael Huffington, Republican of California; author of controversial best sellers on Maria Callas and Pablo Picasso, and friend of Bernard Levin, Ann Getty, Barbara Walters and Mortimer B. Zuckerman -- has reinvented herself.
Again.


Gatehouse
To the Editor:
Your Posting on Feb. 7 headed "Gatehouse Sale, With Conditions" about the imminent sale of the gatehouse at Amsterdam Avenue and 113th Street made no mention of the charming garden immediately adjacent to the gatehouse, which is also to be included in the sale.


Guatemala, 1969: The Stillness Of Lake Atitlan
THE MERE MENtion of Guatemala returns me there.
At first, I recognize intense feelings, somewhat blurred.
Then slowly, as images take shape, Lake Atitlan comes into view, clear as the day I first saw it in the spring of 1969.
Yes, that is how I want to remember Guatemala.
Later, I met its other face of violence and suffering.
But it is the peace and beauty of Atitlan that I yearn to relive.
The lake sits about 5,000 feet above sea level, flanked by volcanoes -- San Pedro, Toliman and Atitlan -- and purple mountains, its shimmering surface changing constantly as the sky rushes by.
Nearby hills are patterned with coffee trees and red bougainvillea.
More than once, I rested by the water's edge, listening to the silence.
Perhaps there were birds, maybe there were distant voices.
I remember only the deep stillness of the lake and the mountains.


We Want Bank Deregulation? Eh?
To the Editor:
Regarding "Regulating Banks: Enough Already" (Viewpoints, Feb. 7), let's see if I have it straight.
Deregulation in the 1980's under President Reagan led to the savings and loan scandal, which led to the Federal bailout, which led to increasing the national debt -- and in the process caused some people to be led to jail.


The Name Is Barrymore But the Style Is All Drew's
At the age of 7, playing the little girl in "E. T.," she became a movie star.
After that, it was all downhill.
She began drinking . . . at 9.
At 10, she was out on the club circuit with her mother, and smoking pot.
By 12 she was snorting cocaine.
At 14, there was a suicide attempt.
"It's strange, very strange, how I survived with the upbringing I had, the life I led," says the 18-year-old Drew Barrymore.
"I sort of had to take care of myself my whole life. I know it's hard to believe, but I am actually now a well-rounded, somewhat normal -- not entirely normal -- person." She laughs.
"I really have no idea of what growing up in a normal household is like."


Amy Lankenau and Aaron McPherson
Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Lankenau of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy Barbara-Lillie Lankenau to Aaron Francis McPherson, a son of Grace Chapman of Pittsfield, Mass., and John McPherson of Worcester, Mass.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Lankenau, 23, is a student at Wellesley College.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Lankenau Kovner &amp; Kurtz.
Her mother, Alison Lankenau, is the head of student-support services at the Nightingale-Bamford School and a tutor in special education, both in New York.


Public Works Spending -- a k a Pork Barrel
To the Editor:
"Some Dos and Don'ts for a Clinton Public-Works Policy" (Feb. 7) on Federal public works financing as economic stimulus missed an important point: in other contexts, we call such spending pork barrel.


A Forest Of Strange Enchantment
THE TWO MOST CELEBRATED TEMple gardens in Kyoto are so starkly different that it is hard to frame a definition of a garden that includes them both.
Standing at one extreme is Ryoanji, the famous enigma in raked gravel and scattered rocks. (Imagine a walled tennis court covered in white sand and dotted with low rocky islands.) At the other is the Moss Garden of Saihoji.
Ryoanji carries contrivance and artificiality to an almost surreal plane.
But in the Moss Garden all the art is apparently to conceal art.
It borrows the disguises of nature in order to seem no more than a forest with a strange and powerful enchantment.
A visit to Saihoji, a Buddhist temple, is no casual encounter.
The preparation starts at least two months beforehand.
Admission is limited to 100 visitors at one time, and popular months like April, May and June are booked as much as 90 days in advance.
But there is no guide and it is not difficult, by straggling, to separate yourself from the initial line and wander alone with your thoughts.


Hominy Still Has Its Place in American Cooking
SUMMER'S glorious crop of fresh corn on the cob from local farms and the year-round availability of fresh, frozen and canned sweet corn have rendered dried corn kernels obsolete.
But now there is renewed interest in this traditional winter staple, also called hominy.
The popularity of Mexican and Southwestern cooking has led to new appreciation for dishes based on dried corn.
In these cuisines, hominy seasoned with chili is simmered slowly for hours, often with the addition of pork or chicken, resulting in a hearty, lusty rib-sticking stew -- good cold-weather fare.


The Bill Comes Due: Canada's Health Care Costs -- A special report.; Now Patients Are Paying Amid Canadian Cutbacks
This winter Fred Holmes took his two children, Monica, 15, and David, 13, both of whom had colds, to a medical laboratory to have their throats swabbed.
A few weeks later he received two bills, each for $19.80.
Never before under Canada's 27-year-old universal health insurance system did Mr.
Holmes have to reach into his own pockets to pay for such a common medical service.
But bills like that are the wave of the future.


Rocking for the Rain Forest
The over-50 set energized the crowd at the benefit for the Rainforest Foundation at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday.
While Tom Jones, who sang his 1964 hit "It's Not Unusual," was a surprise hit of the evening, everyone also seemed to be talking about how great Tina Turner looked.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
To Their Own Fashion
MINUS their husbands or lovers, female patrons of the Nassau County Museum of Art journeyed to Roslyn on Monday to view "Husbands, Wives, Lovers and Friends," the newest exhibition at the museum.
Love's influence on art was one draw.
Updating Long Island's dress code was the other.


In the Region: Westchester; Despite Market, Condos Still Being Built
VICKI COBB doesn't fit the usual description of the first-time home buyer.
In her 50's, with grown children, she finally reached a point in her life when she was "financially ready" to get the type of house she's always wanted.
"I had very specific things in mind," she said.
"I wanted a sense of community, no maintenance headaches, and tennis."


Wall Street; Mediocrity and the Market Timers
KIDS with average grades don't generally get into Harvard, and salespeople who barely make quota typically get booted out the door.
But stock market analysts who do a mediocre job of timing the zigs and zags of the market are out-and-out heroes in some corners of Wall Street.
It's a hopeful note for every C student resigned to a career of pumping gas.


'Dream Makers, Dream Breakers'
To the Editor:
I can ignore the inexplicable but transparent hostility in Laura Kalman's "review" of my book "Dream Makers, Dream Breakers: The World of Justice Thurgood Marshall" (Feb. 7).
But I must challenge two of her questionings of my integrity.


Where Many Elderly Live, Signs of the Future
Good memories and a phone book were all that Bill and Mary Lee needed here in Smith County, population 5,078, to determine that a large proportion of their contemporaries -- the 85-plus generation -- lived alone.
"There's Zola, she's 99. Mary, she's 98. She still drives her own car. Gladys'll be 88 the last of March. There's Sylvia. There's a lot," said Mary Lee, ticking them off.


Security Tighter In New York
Security was tightened at airports and tourist sites in New York City following the bombing Feb. 26 at the World Trade Center.
The twin 110-story towers themselves were expected to be closed at least a week for structural repairs.
All support systems were knocked out by the bomb, which exploded in the underground parking garage, blasting through four stories, killing five people and injuring more than 1,000.


Track Titles Are Decided
The Catholic High Schools Athletic Association squad took the boys' team title, and the New York City Public Schools Athletic League team won the girls' crown today in the New York State indoor interscholastic track and field championships at Barton Hall on the Cornell University campus.
The C.H.S.A.A. edged the P.S.A.L. boys' team, 81 points to 79, with Nassau County third with 77 points.


Just Browsing? Just Buy It!
It's a Conde Nast rite of passage.
You're having a bad day, so you decide to buy some chocolate at the newsstand in the lobby of the magazine company's headquarters at 350 Madison Avenue.
Innocently, you pick up a magazine, and just as you began to flip through the pages, the woman behind the counter barks, "This is not a lending library. The magazines are for sale."
Margit Larsen, who runs the newsstand with her husband, Helmut, (above) can be one of the most fearsome people at Conde Nast if you don't know her rule against browsing.


The Other Israel
SLEEPING ON A WIRE
Conversations With Palestinians in Israel.
By David Grossman.
Translated by Haim Watzman. 326 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.


Author! Author!
1.
I've seen the Atlantic: pretty but frantic. / I've faced the Pacific: nothing specific. / As for the continent, I'm not yet on to it. 2.
Any noun on which my eyes rested, a hill across the harbor, a lane between the fishermen's shacks, silently returned two sounds, one the patois, the other English. 3.
It seemed a haunted land.
I thought of witches, of the kingdom of Medea. 4.
But as I walk the streets of San Francisco, many of them have, for me, a familiar ring: Kearny, O'Farrell, Larkin, Geary, McAllister -- obviously some of my countrymen have left their mark here. 5.
Off the packed trail we experience the miracle of corn snow, skiing atop the crust, like skiing on an eggshell that has been sprinkled with sugar. 6.
Recently I returned to the old migration route of the Kiowas.
I had in me a need to behold again some of the principal landmarks of that long, prehistoric quest, to descend again from the mountain to the plain. 7.
There was a time when senescent gentlemen and ladies, down by the seawall, used to walk their dogs at the cocktail hour with leash in one hand and a martini in the other. 8.
When the spirit of adventure invades the historical process -- when states or their leaders or representatives go adventuring -- the results are usually catastrophic. 9.
One morning in Stockholm, after rain and just before November, a mysteriously translucent shadow began to paint itself across the top of the city. 10.
For the Rock and the desert are not nullities.
They have astonishing beauty and subtle habits, the desert seeming to overflow with an Old Testament plenty, the Rock shedding its skin evenly, through the process called spalling, like a live serpent. 11.
But Salem is a different matter.
It takes its name from no English county or cathedral town, and one comes to it without the weight of nostalgic associations. 12.
Paris with its long humanistic tradition, as a city known to value and respect those who create, was for the Tournon Crowd both a cultural and racial haven. 13.
The sally is the first tree to green and the first to wither; the rowan berries are an incredible orange in the light from the lakes each September. 14.
Parisian gloom is not simply climatic, it is a spiritual force that acts not only on building materials, on walls and rooftops, but also on your character, your opinions and judgments. 15.
Like the Pharoahs, the landscape itself is dead, enlivened only by the tourists who lend some movement and color to a barren and mortuary area. 16.
The next time I look, the sky above the far peaks has been painted with broad streaks of brilliant orange on a ground of cerulean, the last stars are fading overhead, and the bay is silent.
Then the voices of the waking birds begin. 17.
Speaking of venison, I do remember my first haunch. 18.
It isn't necessarily the great and famous beauty spots we fall in love with.
As with people, so with places: Love is unforeseen, and we can all find ourselves affectionately attached to the minor and the less obvious. 19.
From the coastal bluffs to the north, I now realize, I could easily watch Kurile seals cut the wild, jade-green water of the ocean.
Such animals draw a visitor quickly out of himself and into the land -- the sight of them alone is exhilarating. 20.
We have watched the Nakhi women coming down from the Snow Range, with their bundles of pine and artemisia; and one old woman with a bamboo winnowing basket on her back, and the sun's rays passing through it.
BRIAN MOORE SUSAN MINOT SAUL BELLOW SALMAN RUSHDIE N. SCOTT MOMADAY MARY LEE SETTLE W.S.
MERWIN LEON EDEL WILLIAM GOLDING CYNTHIA OZICK P.D.
JAMES PAULE MARSHALL JOHN MCGAHERN DEREK WALCOTT JULIA CHILD JOSEPH BRODSKY MURIEL SPARK BARRY LOPEZ BRUCE CHATWIN THOMAS KENEALLY The 20 quotations above have been garnered from a decade of Sophisticated Travelers; the names in the center column are those of some of the distinguished writers whose work has appeared in these pages.
Match the quotation with the author to prove your literary acumen (or to show off your long-term memory).
No prizes are offered, but give yourself extra credit if you can identify those writers who have also won the Nobel Prize in Literature. (Hint: there are four.) Answers appear on Page 100


Mutual Funds; The Tea Leaves on Interest Rates
WHERE are interest rates headed from here?
For three weeks, a big bond rally has pushed prices up and sent rates tumbling, interrupted by little but the strong job figures issued Friday.
For investors who have shifted billions of dollars from money market to bond funds, where rates will go is a crucial question.
A survey of some top-notch bond fund managers -- owning a mix of corporate, government and overseas issues -- found a consensus that short-term rates will stay basically stable in 1993, given the support lent by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan to President Clinton's economic package.
After that, their views diverge.


RABBIT IS RICH
I read with great interest how Molly O'Neill "began to distinguish between affection and appetite" (Food: "Rabbit Is Rich," Feb. 7), and I look forward to her recipe for cat.
ADAM MICHENNER
New York, N.Y.


Archibald to Coach
NATE (TINY) ARCHIBALD, a Hall of Fame member and a former National Basketball Association scoring leader and assist leader, is back in the game with the Connecticut Skyhawks of the United States Basketball League.
Archibald, 44, was named Friday as the team's coach.


Two Clown Princes Prove Comedy King
I saw very few of Broadway's legendary clowns live on a stage.
By the time I began going to the theater, they'd passed away.
Or else they were spending their waning days in television.
From the 1950's on, Broadway didn't have much use for their services, and vaudeville, as my parents' generation knew and loved it, was dead.
I had to read about people like Bobby Clark, Ed Wynn, Fanny Brice, Beatrice Lillie and Bert Lahr and take the heady descriptions of how they convulsed audiences on good faith.
I could watch old Marx Brothers movies, of course, but whenever I did, I'd find myself thinking that they'd cut their comic teeth on the stage.
Nutty as they were on celluloid, surely they had been even nuttier in person.
There's nothing like the spur of the moment -- and the expectant buzz of a full house -- to bring a clown up to full pitch.
But that era was over and, sad to say, I'd missed it.


Reopening Excitement
A Purim gala signals the June refurbishing of the Jewish Museum.


Pamela Sloan, Andrew Karpen
Pamela Sloan, a daughter of Joan and David W. Sloan of Weston, Conn., was married yesterday evening to Andrew Marc Karpen, a son of Ilene Wechter of Englewood, N.J., and Dr.
Sherman Karpen of Henderson, Nev.
Rabbi Robert Orkand performed the ceremony at the Rolling Hills Country Club in Wilton, Conn.
Mrs.
Karpen, 26, is an account executive at Thomson-Leeds, an advertising concern, in New York.
She graduated from Emory University.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from New York University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn.
Her mother is an artist in Weston.


BEST SELLERS: March 7, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
30
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
14
2
THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The fourth and concluding volume in a series about a fantasy land.
3
3
6
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $23.) The case of a woman journalist charged with killing an eminent novelist.
4
5
5
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a psychopathic serial killer in Washington.
5
4
27
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
6
2
7
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
7
6
6
CLOSE COMBAT, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) In the sixth volume of the series "The Corps," there are new challenges for the Marines all over the Pacific in World War II.
8
8
3
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) A series of fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a young clerk in a Swiss patent office.
9
7
6
DEVIL'S WALTZ, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware investigates the strange series of illnesses that befalls a small child. (LP)
10
10
35
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
11
9
21
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
12
13
15
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
13
2
DISNEY'S ALADDIN, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works/Penguin USA, $6.98.) An illustrated retelling of the ancient story of a street boy and a genie who provides unexpected experiences.
14
11
14
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) After being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells of killing her husband.
15
1
THE CHILDREN OF MEN, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $22.) In 2021, when Britain is a police state and the human race is approaching its end, an Oxford historian struggles with his fate.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
25
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
3
3
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians, scientists, therapists and patients about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
3 *
2
30
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
4
4
16
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
5
5
38
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
6
1
OFFICIAL AND CONFIDENTIAL, by Anthony Summers. (Putnam, $25.95.) The life of J. Edgar Hoover, head of the F.B.I. from 1924 to 1972.
7
10
3
AROUND THE CRAGGED HILL, by George F. Kennan. (Norton, $22.95.) Philosophical meditations on the world and its future by the foreign affairs expert.
8
9
12
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
9
6
24
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
10
15
2
MARLENE DIETRICH, by Maria Riva. (Knopf, $27.50.) The legendary actress as remembered by her daughter.
11
8
5
MAKING THE MUMMIES DANCE, by Thomas Hoving. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The reminiscences of the former director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
12
13
7
NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.
13
1
TURNING POINT, by Jimmy Carter. (Times Books/Random House, $22.) The 39th President recalls his first political race, a campaign for the Georgia State Senate in 1962.
14 *
11
38
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
15
1
LINCOLN, by Philip B. Kunhardt Jr., Philip B. Kunhardt 3d and Peter W. Kunhardt. (Knopf, $50.) An illustrated biography of the 16th President.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
52
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
2
4
34
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Advice on how to play golf.
3
5
2
COOKING WITH REGIS &amp; KATHIE LEE, by Regis Philbin and Kathie Lee Gifford with Barbara Albright. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips on cooking and more than 150 recipes from the talk show hosts.
4
3
52
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
5
1
RICHARD SIMMONS' NEVER GIVE UP, by Richard Simmons. (Warner, $17.95.) Inspirational stories told to the weight-loss guru by people struggling with personal problems.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,997 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE COLLECTED STORIES, by John McGahern. (Knopf, $24.) These stories, by a master of the clean, powerful description that conveys the immaterial significance in material things, offer a vision in which love is not an end but a means of gaining the world.
THE COLLECTED STORIES, by William Trevor. (Viking, $35.) A lifetime's worth of short fiction whose author enters into the lives of his characters with an intensity that uncovers new layers of yearning and pain in themes that live on however often explored.
THE COLLECTED WRITINGS OF ROBERT MOTHERWELL, edited by Stephanie Terenzio. (Oxford University, $39.95.) Essays, observations and pronouncements by the most articulate member of the New York School of painters that illuminate the ambitions and the ethos of the Abstract Expressionist movement.
THE CRYSTAL DESERT: Summers in Antarctica, by David G. Campbell. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) Mr.
Campbell, a biologist, spent three seasons in the Antarctic and returned with eerily clear perceptions of that sere and uninhabitable place.
CULTURE AND IMPERIALISM, by Edward W. Said. (Knopf, $25.) Mr.
Said argues for the centrality of imperialism to European high culture, especially when it hides itself in the periphery.
UPON THIS ROCK: The Miracles of a Black Church, by Samuel G. Freedman. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A report on a year spent with St.
Paul Community Baptist Church in a black section of Brooklyn, a locus of organization, rescue and healing.
THE ORACLE AT STONELEIGH COURT: Stories, by Peter Taylor. (Knopf, $22.) Mr.
Taylor's latest superb collection (a novella, 10 stories, 3 plays) concerns the ghostly influences from the past that can decide much of our destinies before we are born.


Hospitality Exerts A Pull on Players
WHAT do players on the tournament circuit look for in a competition?
First, good prizes.
Second, a comfortable climate.
Third, decent food.But what draws the top American players to the Bermuda Open is hospitality.
First prize at this year's event, Feb. 5-7, was only $1,000.
But the tournament committee is so famed for its parties and conviviality that it is said even the losers leave happy.


Into Grad School With Camcorders
Some modern parents regard video documentation of their offspring as an obligation.
Indeed, videotaping the baby is how most amateur video makers get started.
But by the time their favorite subject reaches kindergarten, parents have probably honed their videographic skills and branched out to fresh subjects, like travel, sports and hobbies.
At this point, many videophiles have outgrown their first camcorder and crave something more sophisticated -- an instrument through which to express creative flair and personal vision.


Rahman Errors Admitted
The State Department has acknowledged that Government officials twice acted in error in giving Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman permission to enter and remain in the United States.
In first granting Sheik Rahman a tourist visa in 1990, the United States Embassy in Khartoum, Sudan, apparently overlooked the fact that he had already been placed on a lookout list because of his role in fomenting violence in Egypt, a department spokesman said last week.


The Man Who Charged Up Mastercard
A beautiful couple romps on a sunny beach.
"You know those credit card commercials where they tell you to jaunt off to some exotic paradise," says a friendly announcer, Rob Morrow of "Northern Exposure" television fame.
"This isn't one of them, O.K.? We're taking our Mastercard to the supermarket." Suddenly, the camera, perched on a shopping cart, careens through the aisles.
The point of all this comes when it gets to the checkout counter.
"It's smart to use your monthly statement to keep track of your monthly grocery spending."
Until this Mastercard campaign, credit cards were sold as passports to glamour, luxury and prestige.
American Express, through most of the 1980's, sniffed that "Membership Has Its Privileges." Visa combed the world for intriguing locales that didn't accept the Amex card, claiming "Visa. It's Everywhere You Want to Be." Even Mastercard centered its previous campaign on people who "Master the Moment" through not-quite-so-conspicuous consumption.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: The Sophisticated Traveler/Magazine Part 2 The 10th Anniversary Issue.


History in the Training
A woman who made the cut for San Francisco Giants' public address announcer says she is ready for Wednesday's final, where she could make baseball history.
"There's never been a woman announcer in major league baseball," said SHERRY DAVIS, a legal secretary from Walnut Creek, Calif.
"And there's no reason there shouldn't be one."


TARGETING URGED IN ATTACK ON AIDS
With AIDS now entrenched in many American cities, some experts are reaching a startling and controversial conclusion.
They say the epidemic in the United States can be all but stamped out, even without a vaccine or wonder drug, by prevention efforts that zero in on 25 to 30 hard-hit neighborhoods across the nation.
"We could stamp AIDS out," said Dr.
Don C. Des Jarlais, a drug-abuse specialist and an AIDS researcher at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York and a proponent of the new approach.
"I think that's a realistic goal."


Foreign Affairs; Yeltsin as Monroe
Last week, in a speech pregnant with bad memories, President Boris Yeltsin called upon the U.N. for an extraordinary grant of authority: make Russia the "guarantor of peace and stability in regions of the former U.S.S.R."
The speech sent shivers of a new Russian imperium down to the toes of neighbors like Ukraine and Georgia.
But it was welcomed by some Central Asian republics momentarily less fearful of Moscow than of internal strife and, in private, by high Clinton Administration officials presently more worried about future "Yugoslavias" than a resurgent Russia.


The Twin Towers: Backlash; Muslims in the United States Fear an Upsurge in Hostility
Shortly after the announcement of Mohammed A. Salameh's arrest, Ghazi Khankan of Long Island began phoning friends to commiserate about the anticipated backlash against Muslims.
Responsibility for the bombing of the World Trade Center, he feared, would be laid at all Muslims' feet in a "frenzy of stereotyping."
"You can be sure there are going to be crazies throwing stones and firebombs at Islamic centers," said Mr.
Khankan, the Syrian-born president of the National Council on Islamic Affairs.
"And unfortunately, if the Persian Gulf war is any precedent, every Muslim will become suspect in the eyes of the law."


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bayport  $146,000
121 Northwood Court  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1-year-old condominium town house; eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600, common charges $170.
Blue Point  $135,000
44 Middle Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 20-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, sunporch, fireplace; taxes $2,800.
East Williston  $280,000
31 Sumter Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old split level; new eat-in kitchen, dining room, den, 1-car garage; taxes $5,200.
Manhasset Hills  $300,000
15 Ash Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, den, 1-car attached garage, cul-de-sac; taxes $6,200.
Rocky Point  $104,000
41A Noah's Path  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; den, basement, porch, skylights; taxes $2,300.
Shoreham  $135,000
10 Farm Boulevard  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 25-year-old ranch; dining room, den, fireplace, basement, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,300.
OTHER AREAS Eastchester, N.Y.  $325,000
39 Waterside Close  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old condominium; eat-in kitchen, fireplaces, loft/den, 2-car garage; taxes $8,339.
Norwalk, Conn.  $215,000
3 Anderson Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod on cul-de-sac; heavily insulated, new roof, 0.5 acre; taxes $3,410.
Pittstown, N.J.  $210,000
457 Machline Corner Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 11-year-old Cape Cod; pine floors, wooded lot; eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,276.


Sound Bytes; Becoming Washington's Policy Wonk on Technology
John Sculley's personal odyssey is continuing.
The former president of Pepsico was once sarcastically asked by Steven P. Jobs whether he wanted to spend his life as a sugar water salesman.
Since then he has made the transition to Apple Computer's chief technology officer and now is on the brink of becoming what President Clinton affectionately referred to as a Washington technology policy wonk.
Mr.
Sculley was prominently seated next to Hillary Rodham Clinton when the President presented his economic package before Congress last month.
A week later, when President Clinton and Vice President Gore visited Silicon Valley to introduce the President's high technology program, they dined as Mr.
Sculley's guests in Los Gatos, Calif.


Prosecutors Say Greed Prompted Husband to Poison Drug Packages
In opening arguments in a cyanide-poisoning trial this week, the prosecutors said an insurance salesman, Joseph Meling, insisted that his wife take a Sudafed decongestant capsule before she went to bed on the night of Feb. 2, 1991, to stop her nightly snoring.
Within minutes, they said, Jennifer Meling lost consciousness.
The prosecutors are trying to prove in Federal District Court here that Mr.
Meling had laced the Sudafed capsule with cyanide so that he could collect his wife's $700,000 life insurance policy.


Ready to Serve the Tired and Hungry at the World Trade Center


Greek Communities Gather to Protest Death of Doctor


Life in a Town of Picayune Sensibilities
They squabble over money and property, and they sometimes dwell upon death.
These are the preoccupations of vacant lives.
Besides mendacity and mortality, "Night Seasons," in its American Stage Company world premiere, is about the stultifying effects of existence in a provincial town of picayune sensibilities.
This is familiar Horton Foote terrain: Harrison, the made-up name for the playwright's hometown, Wharton, in Texas.


Honoring New York Citizens
The Municipal Art Society's salute, Feb. 28.


A 'Soap Actress': Days of Her Life
Someday it will be her moment, Kaitlin Hopkins says with certainty, just as it was Sigourney Weaver's moment and Meg Ryan's and Kathleen Turner's and all the other stars-in-waiting who paid their dues -- and the rent -- working in daytime soap operas.
"Even when I was waitressing, I still considered myself a star," says Miss Hopkins in her disarmingly direct manner.
"I just hadn't been given the right job yet."


Programs! Programs! Getcher Photos Of the Owners!
THERE is a new concept in sports marketing: the owner as superstar.
Come See Our Bigfoot.
Ticket advertisements for the 1993 New York Yankees depict the Boss himself, George M. Steinbrenner 3d, front and center, overshadowing a dozen generic-looking players.
Never has an owner been used so blatantly to promote a team.
Is it merely flattery or good business?
Ticket sales are up $2.1 million, or so Steinbrenner claims, and he swears the next wave of ads will feature the players.
Imagine that.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 7, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
7
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
3
11
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman's death leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
4 *
33
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
5
5
BYGONES, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A dinner party attended by a woman, her former husband and their two grown children reveals family strains and love.
6
58
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
7
3
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is still threatened by aliens.
8
7
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of the state of Nebraska on behalf of an Indian tribe.
9
47
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
10
1
UNTAMED, by Elizabeth Lowell. (Avon, $5.99.) A young woman's romance, in 12th-century Britain, with a man returning from the Crusades.
11
2
THE ELF QUEEN OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The third volume in a series about a fantasy land.
12
3
GROUNDED, by David Bischoff. (Pocket, $5.50.) "Star Trek" 's U.S.S.
Enterprise encounters a new form of alien life.
13 *
1
SILENT PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) Lieut.
Lucas Davenport on the trail of an escaped serial killer.
14
24
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a farming family.
15
6
GUARDIAN ANGEL, by Sara Paretsky. (Dell, $5.99.) The private eye V. I. Warshawski probes a case involving pet dogs and Chicago scandals.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
3
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
2
8
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
3 *
22
ALIVE, by Piers Paul Read. (Avon, $5.99.) How members of a rugby team survived a plane crash.
4
2
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) The memoirs of the retired commander of a counterterrorist unit.
5
487
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
6
10
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) Factors affecting the environment.
7 *
94
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
8 *
4
HILLARY CLINTON: The Inside Story, by Judith Warner. (Signet, $4.99.) A life of the First Lady.
9 *
19
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MALCOLM X, with the assistance of Alex Haley. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The life story of the black leader.
10
21
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist describes a war against women's rights.
11 *
5
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) Social life and women's sexual fantasies.
12 *
2
WRITTEN BY HERSELF, edited by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $15.) An anthology of autobiographical writings by American women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
124
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
107
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
82
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
7
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
5
2
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1993 edition.
6 *
3
THE TIGHTWAD GAZETTE, by Amy Dacyczyn. (Villard, $9.99.) Ways to save money.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


San Antonio Art
To the Editor: I read with interest Peter H. Lewis's article "What's Doing in San Antonio" (Nov. 29).
Your readers should also know that the city has two fine art museums, where I have spent many pleasant hours.
The Marion Kugler McNay Art Museum, 6000 North New Brunfels, has a diverse collection of European and American paintings, furniture and decorative arts.
The museum's library of theater and opera design, the Robert L. B. Tobin Theater Arts Library, has one of the best collections of its type outside of Manhattan..


Manhattan Advances; Iona Upset in MAAC
With 5 minutes 38 seconds left in the first half tonight, B. J. Pendleton of Loyola of Maryland sliced into the lane through a pair of Manhattan defenders and banked the ball off the backboard and into the basket.
What normally would pass for a rather routine score brought most of the 9,995 spectators to their feet roaring for more.


IN SHORT: FICTION
ANOTHER GOOD LOVING BLUES By Arthur Flowers. Viking, $20.


Guarding the Wild From Underground Markets
An important book has come to my attention.
It is one to share with gardeners because the subject is vital.
The book is "The Gardener's Guide to Plant Conservation" by Nina T. Marshall.
It was published by the World Wildlife Fund with The Garden Club of America.


Jane Alice Cantor, Matthew J. Tucker
Jane Alice Cantor, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael C. Cantor of Syosset, L.I., was married yesterday evening to Matthew Jay Tucker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stefan Tucker of Washington.
Rabbi Daniel Fogel performed the ceremony at the 24 Fifth Avenue Ballroom in New York.
Mrs.
Tucker, 25, is an associate with the law firm of Kruchko &amp; Fries in McLean, Va.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a law degree from American University.
Her father is a sales manager with Stevcoknit Fabrics Inc., in New York.
Her mother, Rosalie S. Cantor, is a developmental learning teacher at Baylis Elementary School in Syosset.


Wall Mountings Require Precision
Installing wall-mounted shelves and cabinets is seldom too difficult for amateurs, but it does require more care and skill than often meet the eye.
Adjustable wall shelves, the kind that rest on brackets attached to slotted metal standards fastened to the wall, are an example.
When buying them, be sure to obtain enough standards to support the shelves' load.
For heavy loads like books, the span between standards has to be no more than 24 inches.
For lighter loads, it can be up to 32 inches.
Provided the load on a shelf is evenly distributed to prevent tipping, the ends of a shelf can extend unsupported about six inches for heavy loads and nine for light loads.


Americans Feel Terror's Senseless Logic
THE puzzle in the bomb wreckage beneath the World Trade Center has become one of explanation.
Having taken a big step toward finding out who carried out the attack (and how), what no one can yet say is why it was done.
If the motive was revenge, why choose so anonymous a setting?
And why not do more to take credit?
Even the arrest of a 25-year-old Islamic fundamentalist on a charge of aiding and abetting the bombing seemed incomplete.
Five people had been killed and more than 1,000 wounded, the twin skyscrapers were decommissioned for at least a month with damages soaring toward $1 billion -- and the one suspect under arrest was a young immigrant who tried to reclaim a cash deposit for a blown-up rental van?
It seemed easy to reach for the familiar word to bemoan such violence: senseless.


For High School Girls, Norplant Debate Hits Home
Sixteen-year old Taressa Collins was home caring for her new baby the evening that politicians and clergy argued about the city's plans to offer the surgically implanted contraceptive Norplant to high school students.
"Social engineering" aimed at the poor, one opponent said.


Erasing the Ethnic Lines At a Show of Black Artists
What was the Council of the Arts in Westchester is now the Westchester Arts Council.
Three words saved may not seem like much, but in the prolix realm of bureaucracy the change is a giant step forward.
It also coincides with the council's new policy of organizing shows as well as supporting them.
There, too, the council is making waves.
Last year, it celebrated Black History Month routinely with a show of black artists staged at Reader's Digest.
This year, it has again borrowed the magazine's plush premises here but has retained a curator, Randy Williams, an associate professor of art at Manhattanville College, who in effect dismisses the whole idea of ethnicity.
That is, he has chosen artists for their work, not their lineage, and has titled the show "Americans All: Conversations Between Cultures."


THE TWIN TOWERS: Terrorism; Blast Shatters the Illusion That U.S. Soil Is Immune From Assault
For many years, particularly as terrorist bombs exploded in Europe and the Middle East, one question that experts constantly asked themselves was why Middle Eastern terrorists so seldom struck on American soil.
It seemed, as one expert put it, that the United States enjoyed a kind of "immunity" from the terrorism that afflicted France, Germany and Lebanon.
Maybe it was because there were plenty of American targets abroad for terrorists to attack.
Maybe it was because, whether deserved or not, the United States had a reputation for good law enforcement and for a willingness to retaliate for terrorist attacks, as it did with a bombing raid against Libya in 1987.


Why Doesn't Gaffney Act to Preserve Water?
When are we going to elect a Suffolk County Supervisor who really understands the connection between sound economic development on Long Island and the safety of our ground water?
Robert J. Gaffney is supporting efforts by certain shortsighted business groups to gut Article 7 of our County Health Code, praised nationally as a model safeguard for areas that depend solely on underground aquifers for their drinking water.
He wants to take away the only legal protection we have left to keep industry from warehousing dangerously large amounts of toxic chemicals on top of Suffolk's Special Ground Water Protection Areas.
This includes (coincidentally?) the one in Melville, where Parr Development would like to build a facility for the Olympus Corporation, which would be permitted to store photographic chemicals at its site.


SURFACING
HOLLYWOOD --
Inappropriate role models:
There's Michael Douglas unleashing heavy artillery in "Falling Down" and Arnold Schwarzenegger's 75-foot armed effigy in Times Square.
Such striking images of law and disorder seem particularly ill-timed these days.
PARENTHOOD --
Safe houses:
"I've checked for lead, so it's safe to come over" has replaced other considerations for anxious parents making play dates.
HAIR --
Shag redux:
A new/old look, with pointy bits of hair framing the face, has people thinking shag, if not quite Jane Fonda in "Klute." "It's 70's but 90's," explained Frederic Fekkai, the New York stylist.


Ripening in Pennsylvania
THE FOURTEEN SISTERS OF EMILIO MONTEZ O'BRIEN
By Oscar Hijuelos. 484 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.


Focus: Chicago; Seeding a Huge Project on an Old Railyard
MUCH of this city's Near South Side is just acres of vacant industrial land and underutilized railyards.
But in 1989 developers took in hand a 72-acre tract, named it Central Station and trumpeted it as a $3 billion development that would include commerce, houses, stores, hotels and exhibition halls.
Allotments to each category would be determined by demand.
Current zoning calls for a maximum of 19.5 million square feet of developed space.


How the Foreign Policy Machine Broke Down
For a half-dozen years, Iran-contra has haunted American political life.
The ghost arose anew on Christmas Eve, thanks to President Bush's pardons, and it is fated to reappear one day soon when Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel, releases his final report.
Next to the fashionable questions about the New World Order and the need for a "new vision" that now preoccupy many in the foreign policy community, Iran-contra seems a throwback, an irritating reminder of the way policy was actually made way back in the cold war.
In truth, however, Iran-contra tells more about what needs to be changed in the way Americans make foreign policy than any dozen discussions of Somalia or Bosnia.
The triumphalism of the last three years, the endless crowing about how "we won the cold war," has tended to distract attention from the simple fact that during the last decade American foreign policy often didn't work terribly well.
On occasion this resulted in initiatives of profound recklessness and stupidity -- most obviously in Iran and Lebanon, where hostages were ransomed and more seized, but also in Panama and Iraq, where enthusiastic appeasement followed by diplomatic bumbling forced the country to send its young on needless military actions.


Sports of the Times; Whitaker to Test Robinson's Legacy
POUND for pound, the best.
It's a phrase, Ray Arcel's wife Stephanie says, "that sounds like something being weighed in a butcher shop." And in a way, it is.
Sugar Ray Robinson is believed to have been the first to be described as pound for pound, the best.
It put a boxer other than the heavyweight champion in proper perspective.
Nobody around now seems to know who created the phrase nearly half a century ago that is now Robinson's legacy, but it might have been his longtime trainer, George Gainford.


The Editor as Gap Model
At this morning's staff meeting of The New Republic -- the elite weekly journal of political opinion that has counted Labor Secretary Robert Reich as a frequent contributor, Vice President Al Gore as a close friend and the moderate political philosophy known as "Clintonism" as something of an in-house invention -- Andrew Sullivan, the editor, has two major subjects on his agenda: Somalia and the Gap.
Somalia first.
With United States forces about to hit the beach, the 29-year-old Sullivan, a British, conservative, openly gay Roman Catholic who describes both himself and America in the 1990's as "post-ideological," plans to devote next week's lead editorial to the mission's ethical underpinnings.
Personally, he has reservations about Operation Restore Hope, doubting the depth and sincerity of our military commitment.
As befits a former president of the Oxford Union debating society, where budding dialecticians engage in sometimes fanciful controversies ("Coca-Cola: Refreshing Beverage or Imperialist Plot?"), Sullivan makes his case in broad, bold strokes before inviting reaction from his colleagues -- a wisecracking, startlingly youthful gang of largely white male and Ivy League-educated opinion makers.
Some of the senior staffers, like Michael Kinsley of "Crossfire" and Fred Barnes of "The McLaughlin Group" -- just two of the many celebrity alumni of The New Republic's informal finishing school for TV policy duelists -- have the vaguely indulgent air of elder statesmen.
The younger, 30-ish editors, like Michael Lewis and Jacob Weisberg (both of whom pursued graduate studies in England and both of whom, with Sullivan, reside in a renovated Washington schoolhouse nicknamed by Kinsley "the Kindergarten") exhibit the cocksure, sped-up expressiveness of young men stamped "gifted" from their earliest report cards.
If the nation's ruling bodies were chosen not by popular elections but according to scores on the verbal section of the Scholastic Aptitude Test, the Government might look and act much like this staff meeting of TNR, as the magazine calls itself.


For New Haven, No More Macy's. Maybe No More Hockey.
When the New Haven Nighthawks minor league hockey team was faced with the prospect of being moved to another city at the end of the 1986-87 season, the chairman of the team's advisory board, developer Joel Schiavone, decided on a flamboyant, attention-grabbing gesture in an effort to save the franchise.
For one full week in April, Mr.
Schiavone, a former owner of the American Hockey League club, camped out on the roof of the Veterans Memorial Coliseum.
Wearing a Nighthawks' jacket and sleeping in a small plywood shack, Mr.
Schiavone left his aerie only after the Nighthawks were able to guarantee the sale of 1,300 season tickets for the 1987-88 season.
As a result, the Nighthawks' parent club, the Los Angeles Kings of the National Hockey League, allowed the local ownership to keep the team in New Haven.


Private Citizens Can Move Governments
Cynicism about politics is a great American pastime.
Talk to neighbor, co-worker or cabbie, and you'll hear the same wisdom: you can't fight City Hall.
We've got the best politicians money can buy.
The only thing different about the convicted politician is that he got caught.
Our cynicism is broad, but it's shallow.
Americans are citizens the way Bogart was a detective.
Underneath our tough, wisecracking facade, we believe to the core of our being that American democracy works -- that it is indeed the last best hope of earth.


Too-Tricky a Lead Can Hurt the Opener
THERE is a great deal to be said for doing the obvious at the bridge table, particularly with opening leads.
Players, even some experts, who decide to make a tricky lead are likely to lose more than they gain.
An example is the diagramed deal, played in a regional team event in Orlando, Fla., last March.
The declarer was Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, one of the world's best card players, and he reached six hearts after his expert opponents had crowded the auction by bidding spades to the four-level.


Festively Pampering Patrons' Palates
RISTORANTE DA UGO has received an enthusiastic welcome from Rockville Centre, and why not?
The stunning newcomer epitomizes the kind of Italian restaurant that is dear to Long Islanders' hearts.
It is warm and gracious, with a handsome look and noteworthy food.
Diners are met at the door by the owner, Ugo Spaleta.
The suave host extends a friendly individual greeting to each person, and the well-trained service staff takes its lead from him.
The result is smiling, pampered patrons.


A Racial Slap In the Face
To the Editor:
Caryn James is right when she says that "The Crying Game" is overpraised and overhyped  [ " 'The Crying Game' Wins at Gimmickry," Jan. 31 ] .
But when it comes to being a "far too intelligent" film, I have to disagree.
An intelligent film would not have to lean so heavily on a "gimmick," especially one that works for a specific audience: a white one.


STREET GUNS
David C. Anderson's article "Street Guns" (Feb. 14) was little more than a catalogue of types, sizes, prices, names, general availability, etc. -- with photographs, I'll admit, so that purchasers can easily identify each item.
I expect better of your magazine.
What I wanted, of course, was some information on where a given gun (the TEC-9, for example) should be aimed for maximum effect.
As a gun fan, I also expected the names of outlets in my neighborhood where I can obtain a gun without a waiting period or proof of identity.
This is a shoddy guide if it can't tell me the names of the right people so I can pay the right price for the right gun I need right now.
RODERICK A. IRONSIDE
Chapel Hill, N.C.


An Easefull Family Voyage Up the Nile
IN MOMENTS OF stress or fatigue, I sometimes close my eyes and see the winged feluccas swaying in the soft breeze and the great monoliths of ancient stone etched against a fiery sunset.
I am back on the Nile, gliding slowly up that ancient stream, passing effortlessly through boundaries of time, history and myth.
Somewhere on the verdant banks children laugh and a muezzin mournfully calls the faithful to prayer.
In the deepening shadows, the child pharaoh Tutankhamen walks among the magnificent columns of the great temple he has restored at Luxor to appease the neglected god Amon-Re . . .
These are images from 1985, when we went from Moscow with our three kids to spend Christmas on a cruise ship on the Nile.
It was one of those years when some terrorist attack or another had frightened many tourists off, so neither the ship nor the temples were full.
The temperatures were mild, the food was good, the children were happy.
We would wander through the Valley of the Kings by day and sleep under the stars of the desert sky by night.


Miss Brinckerhoff, James Henderson
Carol Beckley Brinckerhoff, the daughter of William H. Brinckerhoff of Palm Beach, Fla., and Deborah Beard Brinckerhoff of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to James Robert Henderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter W. Henderson of Rumson, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark Anschutz, an Episcopal minister, officiated at St.
James' Church in New York.
The Rev.
Russell Abata, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Henderson, 28, is a marketing manager with American Baby magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president at HBM/Creamer, an advertising agency in New York.
Her mother is the collections manager at the Bruce Museum, an art and science museum in Greenwich, Conn.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Natalie Grace Brinckerhoff.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
ALPHA BETA CHOWDER.
By Jeanne Steig.
Illustrated by William Steig.
Michael di Capua/HarperCollins. $15. (Ages 3 and up) This alphabet of verse is by intent a chowder: "a robust goop / That's more akin to stew than soup." Thus, a wise analysis of "The Enigmatic Egg" is surrounded by an ode to "Adorable Daphne, Deplorable Dora" and "Feckless Father's Foolish Frolic." The illustrations are glorious, especially the sphinx.


Jeff Greenfield and Karen Gannett
April wedding plans have been announced for Karen Anne Gannett, a freelance television producer, and Jeff Greenfield, the political and media analyst for ABC News.
Both work in New York.
Ms.
Gannett is a consultant to the Museum of Television and Radio.
She graduated magna cum laude from Smith College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of William and Shirley Gannett of Victor, N.Y.
Her father retired as the executive director of the Rochester Convention and Publicity Bureau.
Her mother is a professional breeder of mastiffs in Victor.


Reading Reagan's Favorite Arabic Sage
To the Editor:
Ronald Reagan ends his Feb. 18 Op-Ed article with a quotation from the 14th-century Arab historian Ibn Khaldun, implying that Ibn Khaldun was advising that tax rates should be kept low.
When President Reagan first misused Ibn Khaldun in 1981, an alert reader, Manfred Halpern, pointed out in a letter you published Oct. 11, 1981, that Ibn Khaldun was merely observing his contemporary reality.


Pamela A. Greco, R. O. Hargrave Jr.
Pamela Ann Greco, a daughter of Ann Greco Meyer of Syosset, L.I., and the late Donald V. Greco, was married yesterday to Richard O. Hargrave Jr., the son of Mary Whigham Hargrave and Mr.
Hargrave of Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
Sanford Stamper performed the ceremony at the United Methodist Church in Huntington, L.I.
Mrs.
Hargrave, 30, is an associate with A. H. Haynes &amp; Company, an investment concern in New York.
She graduated from Berkeley College in Hicksville, L.I.
Her father was the athletic director of Cold Spring Harbor (L.I.) High School.
Her mother is a second-grade teacher at the Lloyd Harbor (L.I.) School.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Edward Meyer of Syosset.


Consenting Adults
In the thoughtful, laudatory essay at the end of MAPPLETHORPE (Random House, $125), a selection of 280 black-and-white photographs taken by Robert Mapplethorpe from 1972 until his death in 1989 -- studies of faces, flowers, navels, nipples, penises, celebrities and sadomasochists -- Arthur C. Danto raises the issue of consent.
Unlike Henri Cartier-Bresson, Garry Winogrand or Diane Arbus, who all caught their subjects off guard, unaware or simply not knowing how they would look, Mapplethorpe got his subjects' full trust because he was part of their world.
The thrill of these photographs, writes Mr.
Danto, the art critic for The Nation, is that of "the child who finds it delicious to be thrown in the air, certain his father will not let him fall." Thus, rather than catching the suspicious glare and passionate flurry of hostile strangers, Mapplethorpe caught the calm, clear look of those who want to be seen, say, urinating into the mouth of a friend, or up to their elbows in someone else's anus.
Whether he was photographing the artist Alice Neel's ragged face when she was near death, or his roommate, the singer Patti Smith, nude and clutching some radiator pipes like a mental patient, or Mr. 10 1/2 exhibiting his organ on a table like a slab of meat, the staginess, the stillness, the symmetry all indicate Mapplethorpe's subjects were not just about to walk out of his viewfinder or his world.
But what did he get from the luxury of consent?
In a word, domestication.
Even the most shocking photographs are tamed by the permission implicit in them.
The picture of Elliott grabbing the testicles of Dominick, who is chained upside down, is so planned that it looks, as Mr.
Danto says, like "a fisherman being photographed next to some immense tuna he has caught." And one of the best shots, "Man in a Polyester Suit," featuring a smooth, uncircumcised penis lolling out of a man's fly, is funny because it is so offhand.
Mapplethorpe got so much permission for so many things that he made us forget, at least occasionally, what he was getting away with.


The Scythe of AIDS Leaves A Generation of Orphans
AS the 20th century draws to a close, a new class of orphans is expected to alter the social landscape significantly: children from mostly female-headed households who will lose their mothers to AIDS.
Unless the course of the epidemic changes dramatically, experts project that by the year 2000 as many as 125,000 motherless children under the age of 18 -- the great majority of them uninfected by the virus -- will begin to affect already burdened social services in major American cities.
Things will get immeasurably worse in such places, where children already spend years going from foster home to foster home and caseworkers are overwhelmed by long lists of families needing everything from housing to medical care.


By Bus in 1909
To the Editor: Apropos "A Busman's Holiday With a Vengeance" (Jan. 24), Baedeker's United States (1909) reported:


London For Ladies And Gents
LONDON IS NOTORIOUSLY A CITY OF VILlages.
But there is one central village that has always been, for a certain kind of person, quite simply, London.
Beyond it lay a no man's land of which one knew nothing and into which one never penetrated.
Islington?
Fulham?
Where on earth is that, my dear?
This heartland is the square contained roughly within Piccadilly Circus to the east, Curzon Street to the west, Green Park and Pall Mall to the south and Savile Row to the north.
And the certain kind of person is the well-heeled upper-class nob of yesteryear.
Actually, such people are still around, but sparser and less prosperous, and their children -- or grandchildren -- are probably living in Islington or Fulham and considering themselves fortunate.
But, once upon a time, from around the middle of the 19th century until around the middle of this century, for a particular bunch of privileged people, London meant simply that small group of streets and buildings, highly esteemed for their central location, which satisfied their every need.
You did your shopping there, you wined and dined there.
If you were a man, your club was there, to which you resorted daily to escape your family with a bout of male bonding.
If you were a lady (and you were in every sense, of course), you stayed at Brown's Hotel when you came up from your country home, met your friends at the Ritz for lunch or tea, bought your groceries at Fortnum &amp; Mason and maybe stopped into the Royal Academy of Arts at Burlington House for a drop of culture.
Old Bond Street provided your clothes and jewelry.
Your husband had his suits made on Savile Row and bought his shoes and shirt on Jermyn Street.
You might make the occasional foray to Knightsbridge, but you would barely have heard of Oxford Street, let alone Kensington High Street.
You hardly ever needed a taxi; you could walk from one end of London to the other.


Noto: An Older, Quieter Japan
THE NOTO PENINsula juts out into the Sea of Japan, a wild mane on the nape of the main Japanese island of Honshu.
We spent a few days there half a dozen years ago, when were were living in Tokyo, bouncing around with visiting friends.
Japan is a great country for travelers, often beautiful, almost always friendly.
But as in the United States, the relentless incursions of modernity often make it hard to distinguish one place from another.


A Book of Knowledge On the 35-Millimeter
ONE of the most comprehensive guides to 35-millimeter photography, "The Complete 35-mm. Sourcebook" by Michael Busselle (Amphoto), has been revised to address up-to-date tools in this popular, ever-changing field of small-camera photography.
The book, first published in England in 1977 by Mitchell Beazley Publishers, was brought to the United States in 1988 by Amphoto, an imprint of Watson-Guptill, and eventually sold out in its first American printing of 12,000.
The new printing of 10,000 books last August includes new information on subjects like 35-millimeter cameras, film and accessories, as well as previously unpublished pictures.
The soft-cover version sells for $24.95; hard-cover, $32.50.


Digable Planets' Jazzy Raps
A year ago, one member of the rap group Digable Planets worked at a record store in Manhattan, a second sold sneakers to tourists in midtown, and the third was a security guard.
This year, stardom.
The group, which fuses elements of jazz with rap, has a hit single, "Rebirth of Slick (Cool Like Dat)," and a hit first album, "Reachin' (a New Refutation of Time and Space)," which made its debut two weeks ago at No. 15 on Billboard's pop chart.
Digable Planets' growing acclaim is unusual.
Over the last five years, the world of hip-hop has fragmented, reflecting the backgrounds of its protagonists -- lower-middle-class youngsters talking gangster talk and middle-class bohemians talking art.
The cultural division has been mirrored in sales figures as well.
The gangster rappers take the money and the opprobrium, while the bohemians get the critical raves but can't sell records.


A Pianist Who Swallows Composers Whole
In effect, Andras Schiff will be New York's pianist in residence over the next three weeks.
So the music lying open recently on facing Steinway grand pianos in his orderly studio here came as no surprise to a visitor from New York.
On the right was Bartok's Piano Concerto No. 1, which Mr.
Schiff will play on Thursday evening at Carnegie Hall, with the Cleveland Orchestra conducted by Pierre Boulez.
On the left was a volume of Schubert piano sonatas; Mr.
Schiff will perform all 18 Schubert sonatas in the six concerts of the 92d Street Y's annual Schubertiade, beginning on March 17.
But a further glance around the upstairs study of the rustic house, across the Salzach River from the old city of Salzburg, began to reveal the real Andras Schiff, a probing, rounded musician whose concerns extend well beyond his instrument and his next few programs.
Neat piles everywhere bespoke a rich variety of musical interests: books on Schubert and Debussy; scores of Bruckner's Seventh Symphony, a Reger string quartet, Bartok's "Cantata Profana," Haydn's "Theresienmesse," Schubert's Mass in E flat.
Come to think of it, there was music for everything but piano; Mr.
Schiff stocks most of his extensive repertory in his phenomenal memory.


FEB. 28 - MARCH 6: Colombia; Hunted Drug Lord Seems Near the End of the Line
Pablo Escobar, the fugitive Colombian drug lord, appears to be having second thoughts about escaping last July as the Government tried to move him from a luxury prison compound.
Last week, in an interview-by-fax with The New York Times, he offered to surrender to the Colombian authorities if the United States granted protection to his wife and children.
The United States said no, but the offer was a measure of Mr.
Escobar's desperation.


Cuts Threaten Investigations Of Campaigns
The watchdog commission that investigates political spending chicanery in New Jersey, often held up as a national model of campaign reform, says budget cuts and hiring freezes are making it an ineffective public guardian.
Last year, for example, its only state car was cut from the budget and its lone field auditor, Shreve Marshall, became office-bound, no longer able to crisscross the state conducting random audits on local campaign spending reports.


CRYING WOLF OVER ELEPHANTS
Elephantgate goes a long way to prove that questionable business ethics are not the exclusive problem of the managements of profit-making corporations.
The only addition to Bonner's fine article might be an analysis of how the wildlife organizations have spent the increased largess that the unsuspecting donors have heaped on them.
JOHN D. CARRICO
Butler, N.J.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
WHITHER THE WORLD?
Nicholas A. Robinson, co-director of the Center for Environmental Legal Studies at Pace University School of Law, was a delegate to the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro last June.
Today at 5 P.M. he will deliver a lecture titled "The Road From Rio: Can We Protect the Environment?" at the Rye Presbyterian Church.
Admission is free.
Professor Robinson is chairman of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's Environmental Advisory Board, and in 1973 was appointed by President Jimmy Carter to the first Environmental Law Delegation.
In that capacity he took part in negotiations over environmental agreements with the Soviet Union, and he has continued to serve under subsequent administrations.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Rivalry; Animus Surfaces Between Rival Agencies
It was the biggest arrest in a New York City case since the apprehension of the "Son of Sam" killer in 1977 -- but the official announcement came at two oblique news briefings held in Washington.
The briefings were notable not only for their scant information but for the absence of crucial New York City figures like Mayor David N. Dinkins and the heads of the local law-enforcement unitsthat shaped the World Trade Center investigation.


Cambodia Arms Flow Back to Thailand
The arms that flooded into Cambodia from across the Thai border for more than a decade, enabling the Khmer Rouge and other guerrilla groups to wage their civil war against the Cambodian Government, have begun streaming back out into Thailand.
The flow has stirred suspicion among Thailand's civilian leaders, including the Prime Minister, that a new wave of cross-border arms trading is benefiting both the military and police Thailand and the Maoist-inspired rebels of the Khmer Rouge.


Will Tomorrow Come for 'Annie Warbucks'?
April 21, 1977: Dandy 'Annie' -- "Annie" opens on Broadway at the Alvin Theater (now the Neil Simon).
Produced for $800,000, it will run for 2,377 performances, win seven Tony Awards and earn a profit of between $20 million and $30 million, including a $9.5 million movie sale.
March 21, 1982: Celluloid 'Annie' -- The film version of "Annie" opens.
Made for a reported $40 million to $50 million and directed by John Huston, it stars Albert Finney as Daddy Warbucks, Aileen Quinn as Annie and Carol Burnett as Miss Hannigan.
It bombs, but the sound doesn't seem to reach the musical's director and lyricist Martin Charnin.


Taking the Trip From Drawing Board to Fruition
Design drawings can be surprisingly seductive, especially when they evoke the vaguely familiar or the outrageously fanciful.
Such works are among the delights in "Drawing for Design: Christopher Dresser to the Present," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art through April 4.
The show's 112 drawings of everything from chairs to keys to shop interiors span a century of styles, from flamboyant Victorian to functional Bauhaus to voluptuous 1980's modern.
At its core are two recent additions to the museum's collection: an album of 38 ornamental drawings by Christopher Dresser (1834-1904), Britain's first industrial designer, and 35 sketches and watercolors by the Bauhaus artist Andor Weininger (1899-1986).


Childhood Memories Of Coat Checking
To the Editor:
Re: "Coat-Check Esthetics" by Scott Cohen (Jan. 31).


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Suspect; Suspect's Origins Bring Turmoil of West Bank Into Investigation
The fact that the primary suspect in the World Trade Center bombing is of Palestinian origin has opened yet another line of thinking into his possible politics and motive.
The Jordanian Government said the suspect, Mohammed A. Salameh, 25, was born on Sept. 1, 1967, in Biddiya, a village near the town of Nablus on the West Bank of the Jordan River.
Born After Six-Day War
His birth came at a convulsive time in the Middle East, just three months after Israel captured the West Bank in the Six-Day War.
The cease-fire line split many Jordanian Palestinians from their relatives in the occupied region.


Summit Journal; Town Takes an Amateur Playhouse to Its Heart
For 75 years, a tiny stone building here with a stubby, ivy-covered tower has been the setting for murders, marriages and mayhem; uproarious laughter has shaken the rafters, and gallons of tears have been shed.
Leading citizens of this Union County community, with a population of 21,000 people, have done things there they would never dream of doing any other place.
Since 1918, the onetime Summit Library has been the home of the Playhouse Association of Summit.
Its members contend it is the oldest continuously operating amateur theater in the state.


Uncaged at the Whitney
Artists, performers and both at the 1993 Biennial exhibition.


Conversations/T. J. Rodgers; Not Everyone in the Valley Loves Silicon-Friendly Government
ON the surface, at least, it appears that things aren't going well for T.J.
Rodgers, Silicon Valley's most flamboyant cowboy capitalist.
His Presidential candidate was drubbed in the election.
Sematech, the government-industry chip consortium he loves to hate, is being given all the credit for the resurgence of the United States semiconductor industry.
And his name wasn't on the list of invitees to the high-tech tete-a-tete that Bill Clinton and Al Gore Jr. had with Silicon Valley leaders last month at the California Cafe.


The Campus Crime Wave
International House is a sturdy victorian mansion at the edge of the Brown University campus in Providence, R.I.
On a late morning, just before the start of fall classes, Brown undergraduates in backpacks and Birkenstocks flow past its steps, heading for the cappuccino bars and bookstores of Thayer Street, the main campus shopping avenue.
But inside the international center, incoming students from more than 80 nations, some just hours off the plane, are being given the drill on basic survival tactics, learning what alumni and parents are rarely told, what many students discover too late: no American campus in the 1990's is as idyllic as it looks.
"If threatened, do not -- how do you spell 'struggle' in English?" mutters a doctoral candidate from South Korea.
In the back row, an agitated hand.
"With 34 assaults near this campus last year, do you recommend that we equip ourselves with stun guns or Mace?" ("He's from Beirut," whispers a Danish student.)


Holding On and Letting Go
ANNA
A Daughter's Life. By William Loizeaux. 213 pp. New York: Arcade Publishing. $19.95.


The Value of Cigarette Taxes
Elected officials, from Bill Clinton on down, are pondering an increase in cigarette taxes.
Such taxes would be doubly welcome.
Any increase is likely to discourage smoking.
And the money raised from those who won't quit can help pay for vital services.
Because smoking is declining, cigarette taxes will raise less money now than they might have a few years ago.
But that is no reason to give up on this "sin tax." The health gains alone are worth the price.
The American Lung Association says every 10 percent increase in the cost of cigarettes cuts smoking by 4 percent.
Young people may never start smoking if the cost is high.


In the Region: Westchester; Recent Sales
Eastchester, N.Y.  $325,000
39 Waterside Close  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old condominium; eat-in kitchen, fireplaces, loft/den, 2-car garage; taxes $8,339.
Scarsdale, N.Y.  $330,000
50 Popham Road  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old co-op; foyer, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, terrace; maintenance $1,200.
Mamaroneck, N.Y.  $5.75 million
Beach Road, Premium Point  10-bedroom, 8 1/2-bath, 101-year-old colonial; marble entry, game room, fireplaces, pool, tennis court; 2.8 acres; taxes $38,413.
Norwalk, Conn.  $215,000
3 Anderson Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod on cul-de-sac; heavily insulated, new roof, 0.5 acre; taxes $3,410.
West Hartford, Conn.  $125,000
7 Edmund Place  2-bedroom 1-bath, 34-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, expansion room on second floor, 0.25 acre; taxes $2,2820.
Wilton, Conn.  $340,000
43 Collinswood Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 28-year-old colonial; security system, finished playroom, 2 acres; taxes $3,040.
OTHER AREAS East Williston, L.I.  $280,000
31 Sumter Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old split level; new eat-in kitchen, dining room, den, 1-car garage; taxes $5,200.
Pittstown, N.J.  $210,000
457 Machline Corner Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 11-year-old Cape Cod; pine floors, wooded lot, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,276.
Wyckoff, N.J.  $159,000
392 Lehigh Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old colonial; h/ w floors, front porch, full basement; $2,250.


Dutch Do the Unthinkable: Sea Is Let In
In the soggy lowlands south of Amsterdam, 18 feet below sea level, the Netherlands is rolling back history: a large expanse of farmland reclaimed a century ago is to be flooded again to revert to marshland and lakes.
In the uplands farther east, an arm of the Rhine, tightly hemmed in by walls and jetties, will be set free to meander.
In some places the unthinkable is already happening: bulldozers are punching holes in several dikes to let a river spill into its flood plains and recreate alluvial forest.


World Markets; Bears Still Circle Edper Bronfman
ALTHOUGH the Canadian economy is starting to show the kind of robust activity that in the United States has sent bulls rampaging through Wall Street, bears still inhabit Bay Street's canyons, feeding on the troubles of Canada's biggest conglomerate, the Edper Bronfman empire.
Financial reverses of Edper-controlled companies like Royal Trustco Ltd., a financial services concern, and Bramalea, a big real estate developer, create another multibillion-dollar headache for Canadian banks after writedowns of nearly $2 billion (all figures are in Canadian dollars) from the meltdown last year of the Reichmann family's Olympia &amp; York.


South African Parties Agree to Resume Talks
A diverse assembly of parties from across South Africa's political constellation agreed today to resume negotiations within a month on the ending of white rule.
After a two-day conference that brought together white separatists, militant black nationalists, and almost every faction in between, the parties agreed to meet again by April 5 to work out details of a new democracy.


Westminster Choir College: A Merger's New Challenges
In 1990, the notes echoing through the halls of Westminster Choir College here were beginning to sound like a swan song.
The college, renowned for producing fine musicians since its founding in 1926, was staggering under a $2.5 million debt.
Its borrowing power had been exhausted, its enrollment was declining and its physical plant was in decay.


ENDPAPER: Life and Times; Supremely Sheltered
With its soaring columns and grand public spaces, the Supreme Court building seems designed to inspire awe.
That is especially true of the courtroom itself, a high-ceilinged sanctum of hushed formality where the Justices emerge precisely at 10 o'clock from behind a velvet curtain to face rows of lawyers and tourists standing respectfully at attention.
Reporters stand too, and few would deny having felt a touch of awe on the occasion of a major decision.
The sheer power invested in those nine individuals would guarantee that, even if they convened in a shack.


Tranquil Forest Hills Is Pained by a Nude Cabaret
For years, people in Forest Hills have thought of their neighborhood as one of the finest, most proper places in all of New York City.
For as long as anyone can remember, the premier shopping district in this premier neighborhood has been Austin Street, a tony, tranquil strip of boutiques and bistros.
But now, discord has come to Austin Street.


Colony Houses And State Houses
In reference to the letter published Feb. 21 questioning how Connecticut's Old State House could be the oldest:
The Old State Houses in Boston (1712), Providence (1739) and Annapolis (1772) were built as Colony Houses under England.
The Old State House in Hartford (1792-1796) was built under the Constitution.


BABY SITTERS' BOSS TELLS ALL
'Baby Sitters' Boss Tells All" (Hers, Feb. 7) should be read by all those bureaucrats who wonder why no one is hiring. I'll keep the casual labor, and make sure I don't use the same person more than once in a quarter. What a sad commentary on the present state of affairs. NAME WITHHELD
Albuquerque, N.M.


Fleming Is Delayed
DAVE FLEMING, a 17-game winner as a rookie last season with Seattle, will miss the start of the Mariners' season because of an ailing left elbow, the club announced Friday.
Fleming, 23, underwent a bone scan and a magnetic resonance imaging test Thursday.
Fleming said he has felt discomfort in his left elbow as far back as late last season, when he pitched a career-high 228 1/3 innings.


No Headline
I am almost afraid to tell people that I am Egyptian, to tell people that I am a Muslim.
For those who judge us by the act of one, this is not a fair thing.
SAMIR EL-SAYED, a Jersey City cabdriver.  [ 38:3. ]


RABBIT IS RICH
Molly O'Neill laments, "For such a gentle creature, rabbit toughens and dries quickly when cooked." Lucky for me, I don't have that problem.
My eggplant is always tender, my carrots always sweet, my tofu always smooth.
Even better, I don't have to push images of family pets, furry tails and wiggly noses to the back of my mind before I eat.
ALISA MULLINS
Herndon, Va.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about condominium sales at 1405 Eighth Avenue in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn referred incompletely to the developer.
It is ZR Empire Corporation, a partnership of Raymond Zagami and Stephen M. Raphael.


The Twin Towers: The Cost -- Inching Back to Life, Trade Center Tallies the Cost; Businesses Concerned How Far Insurance Will Cover Them
After a week of frantic efforts, hundreds of companies exiled from the crippled World Trade Center have come back to life in temporary quarters, but the bombing itself is nevertheless shaping up as one of New York City's most costly financial disruptions.
Crude estimates place the cost of the economic havoc as high as $1.1 billion.
While it will be some time before the real figure is known, it is already clear that the disaster has produced many thousands of hours of lost work, tens of millions of dollars of lost business and huge relocation expenses.


At Work; The Struggle for Minority Managers
IT can happen in unobtrusive ways: a subtle disregard by a subordinate for an assigned task, an absence of urgency in completing a chore, a neglect of comments made during a meeting.
Or it can be a feeling of always having to prove oneself or of not being seen as a team player because of a lack of interest in after-hours socializing or weekend golf.
As middle- and upper-level managers, African-Americans reaching for the next rung on the corporate ladder are often confronted with these day-to-day challenges.
Most often, their colleagues -- usually white and male -- are oblivious to these problems.
But they are all too real to black managers.


Susan Lee Miller, Donald P. McNeill
Susan Lee Miller, the executive assistant to the deputy commissioner of the New York City Bureau of Highways, was married yesterday evening to Donald Paul McNeill, an equities trader in White Plains.
Don Robert Johnson, the senior leader of the New York Society for Ethical Culture, performed the ceremony at the "21" Club in New York.
Mrs.
McNeill graduated from American University.
She is a daughter of Cecily Miller Rosenthal of Fort Lee, N.J., and the late Dr.
Edward M. Miller.
Her father was a surgeon in Englewood, N.J.
Her maternal grandfather, H. Jerome Berns of New York, was a founder and a former owner of "21," where her mother is the banquet coordinator.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Stanley Rosenthal of Fort Lee.


Fishing A Far North Wilderness
BUOYED UP ON ITS ALUMINUM PONtoons, our red-and-white Cessna taxied in wide ellipses in front of the floatplane base in Schefferville, Quebec.
Then we were ripping down the lake straight into the waves and lifting off the surface like some primitive reptile trying to fly for the first time: airborne, with the vast array of northern Quebec's stunted boreal woods and water stretched out below us like a gigantic green and blue jigsaw puzzle of a world only partially completed.
Jacques Cartier once called Canada "the land God gave to Cain," certainly an apt description of the interior Canadian barrens bordered by Hudson Bay on the west, the Labrador Sea on the east and Ungava Bay on the north.
A huge, infertile wilderness of uninhabited and often mountainous terrain, interspersed by tens of thousands of unexplored lakes and rivers, who else but banished Cain would want it?


A Cinderella Story Of a Foreign-Aid Effort
THE country is torn by civil war.
Communists, some of them fanatics, are aggressively trying to purge the nation of their rivals, who are losing ground and calling on the United States for aid.
Winter is closing in on millions of hungry people.
This all seems very familiar, but the country is not Yugoslavia or the remnants of that federation.
It is China, and the year is 1947.


Florida Moves On Visitor Safety
Gov.
Lawton Chiles of Florida has appointed a task force on tourist safety, part of a campaign to protect and reassure visitors who generate more than $25 billion in tourist-related business.
Recent international news reports have depicting Florida as a "state of terror," as one British tabloid put it.
Gov.
Chiles formed the task force, which is made up of tourism and law-enforcement officials, after the Canadian Automobile Association and Canadian Government officials warned of dangers in Florida following the recent fatal shooting near Miami of an Ontario tourist during an attempted robbery.
Other well-publicized crimes include the New Year's Day burning in Tampa of a black New York tourist, characterized by police as a race-related incident, and an attack in February on an Argentine man during a carjacking in St.
Petersburg.


With a 62, Norman Ties Mark to Lead by 6 Strokes
Greg Norman shifted into a gear few other players possess, equaling his course record of 62 and opening a six-stroke lead in the Doral Ryder Open today with one round to go.
Putting on the same kind of blitz that won him the tournament in 1990, Norman had 10 birdies en route to a three-round total of 21-under-par 195, with Paul Azinger alone in second.


Shcherbo And Miller Do Not Disappoint
Many of the world's top gymnasts found themselves slipping and sliding today, producing humbling scores as they strained to come up with theatrical twists to do well under a new scoring system.
There were no gasps of appreciation for perfect 10's as one of the sport's most important events, the McDonald's American Cup, ended its two-day run.


A la Carte A Mix of Tuxedoed Musicians and Coffee Served in Mugs
The Silver Spoon on Sunrise Highway in Merrick will never be confused with the "21" Club in Manhattan, but that is where its owner and chef, James Sieminski, cooked before opening his restaurant late last year.
In addition to working as executive chef at "21" for three years, Mr.
Sieminski, who was born in Farmingdale and is a graduate of the Culinary Institute of America, was a sous chef at Maxim's de Paris in New York City for almost a year.


At the Whitney, Common Objects in Uncommon Contexts
A visitor entering the Whitney Museum of American Art at Champion will right away see a billiard table ahead, four vacuum cleaners to the right and, on the left, some of the female figures in a concrete relief.
This is a cross section of a cross section of a 1980's sculpture show (with a few pieces from the 90's) that is drawn from the Stamford museum's collection and titled "The Elusive Object."
Actually, it is not the objects that are elusive but their meanings.
Pamela Gruninger Perkins, director of the Whitney branches and curator of the show, has cut a slice of art that makes the last decade seem one of the century's weirdest, if not the most innovative.


Hominy Still Has Its Place in American Cooking
SUMMER'S glorious crop of fresh corn on the cob from local farms and the year-round availability of fresh, frozen and canned sweet corn have rendered dried corn kernels obsolete.
But now there is renewed interest in this traditional winter staple, also called hominy.
The popularity of Mexican and Southwestern cooking has led to new appreciation for dishes based on dried corn.
In these cuisines, hominy seasoned with chili is simmered slowly for hours, often with the addition of pork or chicken, resulting in a hearty, lusty rib-sticking stew -- good cold-weather fare.


First Time in First: Seton Hall Stands All Alone
Uncertainty has been replaced by resolve.
Inconsistent moments have given way to emphatic ones.
For the first time in a once-bleak history as a member of the Big East, the Seton Hall basketball team has arrived at the end of its regular season, all alone, looking down at the rest of the league.
The emotion of senior day, which included the retirement of Terry Dehere's No. 24, propelled the Pirates to a 92-73 victory over St.
John's this afternoon that spoiled the Redmen's hopes to share first place for a second consecutive season.


Better Above Than Below
LOSS OF EDEN
A Biography of Charles and Anne Morrow Lindbergh.
By Joyce Milton.
Illustrated. 520 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $25.
THE NAMES OF THE MOUNTAINS
By Reeve Lindbergh. 237 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.


RUSSIAN GIVES U.S. CHALLENGE ON AID
Russia's Foreign Minister said today that he was looking to the United States to put some substance into its protestations of support for Moscow at President Clinton's meeting next month with President Boris N. Yeltsin, not only through material aid but by making room for Russia in the international market for high technology and arms.
Interviewed in the Stalinesque ministry building where he seemed to be working almost alone on a holiday weekend, Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev said the United States could not sit back waiting for Russia to sort out its domestic problems but must rather "actively support the reformers" -- above all Mr.
Yeltsin.


Wall Street; Where Low Is High: the Long Bond
Interest rates on 30-year Treasury bonds are very low.
Or they are high.
It all depends on whether you look at absolute levels or at relative rates.
Last week the yield on 30-year bonds fell to 6.68 percent, before surprisingly strong employment figures pushed it back to 6.75 percent.
A year ago, the figure was 8 percent.


Ruined by Self-Importance
To the Editor:
As to Andrew Sullivan's belief that British journalism is "an opinionated, coarse and alcohol-driven undertaking," whereas American journalism is "a selfless and objective pursuit of the public good," it may be so, though it is perhaps a little pharisaical of the editor of The New Republic, even if British-born, to say so.
In fact, I am reminded of what Frank Cobb of The New York World is said to have told Walter Lippmann: that more good journalists have been ruined by self-importance than by alcohol.
And what are we to make of the other proposition in Mr.
Sullivan's review of William Shawcross's biography of Rupert Murdoch (Jan. 17), that "Australian and British journalism is based on far lower principles than American journalism"?
For, like him or loathe him, Mr.
Murdoch is an American citizen.
GODFREY HODGSON Oxford, England


Going to School in Harlem -- To Live
THE gem of housing redevelopment in Central Harlem has gone on the market on St.
Nicholas Avenue, bringing adults back to an elementary school transformed.
The school is the former P.S. 157, between 126th and 127th Streets.
It served for more than 70 years and closed in 1975, gradually deteriorating thereafter amid failed attempts at redevelopment.
But Elzee Construction of Flatbush took it in hand four years ago and has rebuilt it as rental apartments to standards befitting its status on the National Register of Historic Places.


Some Holes Don't Come From Bullets
Michael Douglas's life in "Falling Down" is a critical mass of all-American problems.
Divorced, unemployed, caught in traffic on a sweltering morning, he walks away from his car to face gang violence, vagrants begging for money, bad service at a fast-food joint.
These things could happen to any of us.
But would any of us respond by: beating a Korean grocer, shooting a Latino street gang, stabbing a neo-Nazi, terrorizing a Whammyburger restaurant and using a rocket launcher to blow up a construction site?
Even if we were having a really, really bad day?


Those Overpaid Pilots . . . And the Overpaid Union Officials
To the Editor:
It was disheartening to read that ALPA was successful in the recent voting at Federal Express.
Unions in general have, over the years, shifted their focus from being an advocate of the employee to a self-serving political machine.
The more dues they can extract from payrolls, the more power they have.
Their political clout is becoming enormous.


Almost Literally Reborn, a Director Finds His Play
In May of 1990, Michael Maggio boarded a plane in Chicago to fly to New York for the first meetings about a "Richard II" he was to direct at the Public Theater.
It could have been a pivotal moment in his career -- a big production with the New York Shakespeare Festival.
But just as the flight reached altitude, Mr.
Maggio, then 38 and seriously debilitated from a lifelong battle with cystic fibrosis, a congenital disorder that brutalizes the lungs, found himself suddenly unable to breathe.
A stewardess put him on emergency oxygen, and, facing the grim reality of his condition, he decided to withdraw from "Richard II" and stay on the plane, which was returning to Chicago.
"But when we landed at La Guardia," he recalls, "a pilot and a gate agent said to me: 'You have to leave the plane. We can't be responsible for you.' In effect, they abandoned me at the airport." The airline, he adds, with some satisfaction, has since gone out of business.
"But I'm still here."


Results Plus
N.H.L.
Roy Injured in Loss In the Minnesota North Stars' 4-3 home victory last night, Montreal All-Star goalie Patrick Roy had to leave the game after straining a hip flexor muscle.
He will be sidelined for seven to 10 days.
Roy, who won the Vezina Trophy as the league's top goalie in 1989, 1990 and 1992, left with 4 minutes 53 seconds to play in the first period.
He allowed two goals on seven shots before being replaced by Andre Racicot.
Mike Modano had a goal and three assists in front of a rowdy sellout crowd that repeatedly voiced its displeasure about the North Stars' impending move.
Minnesota, coming off an 0-3-1 road trip, was home for the first time since its owner, Norm Green, solidified plans to relocate his team to Dallas after the season. (AP)


POSTINGS: Bombing Aftermath; 2 Nearby Hotels Fill The Vista Vacuum
While the main focus of real-estate activity following the Feb. 26th explosion at the World Trade Center has been on office space, hotels and security specialists are also coping with new demands.
With the Vista Hotel likely to remain closed at least a month, and with safety uppermost in the minds of many office tenants, downtown hotels and security consultants are on the receiving end of a lot of welcome inquiries and sales.
Although the Hotel Millenium, directly across from the World Trade Center, may see its food and beverage sales drop because of the falloff of lunch and dinner trade from World Trade Center tenants, the financial shortfall could be more than made up in rentals to guests that had to leave the Vista.


Corrections
A listing on Jan. 3 with an article about the Lemon Festival in Menton, France, misidentified a restaurant at 5 Rue Pieta.
A reader's letter received on Feb. 18 points out that the restaurant is Occitan, not Le St.-Michel, which is at 23 Rue St.-Michel.


Yankees Get Plenty of Distractions to Go With Game
On a gorgeous day when Buck Showalter would have rather been solely concerned with Mike Witt's testing his twice reconstructed elbow against major league hitters for the first time in almost 21 months, there were other topics the Yankee manager was forced to tackle.
Showalter and Gene Michael, the Yankees' general manager, suppressed smirks while discussing catcher Matt Nokes's bizarre comments Friday about his value, and, of course, George Steinbrenner was attending his first Yankee spring game since 1990 and the Mets were the opponent.
Just what Showalter needed when he wanted to concentrate on Witt.
Steinbrenner has often made meaningless games with the Mets seem monumental in importance.


U.N. GENERAL VISITS BESIEGED BOSNIANS
The United Nations military commander visited two besieged Bosnian Muslim towns today but failed to obtain agreement between Muslim and Serbian commanders on allowing the evacuation of wounded and sick people or healthy women and children from the enclaves.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon, the French commander of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in Bosnia, visited the snowbound enclaves of Cerska and Konjevic Polje and said afterward that residents were living in conditions of deprivation, but that the suffering was not as severe as he had been led to expect from local radio reports.


ANSWERS TO THE QUIZ ON PAGE 102
1.
JOSEPH BRODSKY, "Postcard From the U.S.," March 18, 1984 2.
DEREK WALCOTT, "On the Beat in Trinidad," Oct. 5, 1986 3.
MARY LEE SETTLE, "Up the Black Sea to Byzantium," May 20, 1990 4.
BRIAN MOORE, "Golden City by the Bay," Oct. 4, 1987 5.
SUSAN MINOT, "Skiing in Austria's Arlberg," Oct. 20, 1991 6.
N.
SCOTT MOMADAY, "Sacred and Ancestral Ground," March 13, 1988 7.
LEON EDEL, "My Good Green Place," March 18, 1984 8.
SALMAN RUSHDIE, "Adventures and Epics," March 16, 1986 9.
CYNTHIA OZICK, "Enchantments at First Encounter," March 17, 1985 10.
THOMAS KENEALLY, "The Mysteries of Ayers Rock," March 16, 1986 11.
P.D.
JAMES, "A Salem Sampler," March 17, 1985 12.
PAULE MARSHALL, "Chez Tournon: A Homage," Oct. 18, 1992 13.
JOHN MCGAHERN, "The Plain Ways of Leitrim," May 17, 1992 14.
SAUL BELLOW, "My Paris," March 13, 1983 15.
WILLIAM GOLDING, "In the Realm of Osiris," Oct. 6, 1985 16.
W.S.
MERWIN, "Camping Out in Baja's Remotest Reaches," March 3, 1991 17.
JULIA CHILD, "In Praise of Partridge," Oct. 21, 1990 18.
MURIEL SPARK, "Side Roads of Tuscany," Oct. 7, 1984 19.
BARRY LOPEZ, "Japan's True North," Oct. 5, 1986 20.
BRUCE CHATWIN, "In China: Rock's Kingdom," March 16, 1986
Extra credit: Joseph Brodsky, Derek Walcott, Saul Bellow and William Golding have all won the Nobel Prize.


The Executive Life; Democrat Days In Silicon Valley
WHEN President Clinton sat down for dinner with Silicon Valley chief executives recently at the California Cafe in Los Gatos, sitting on one side of him was John Sculley, chairman of Apple Computer.
That wasn't surprising.
But on the other side of the President sat Regis McKenna, head of a locally based marketing firm.
Although Mr.
McKenna is a well-known figure in tech circles, his placement next to the new President was notable.
So was the seating of David J. Barram, Apple's vice president of worldwide affairs and public policies, next to Vice President Gore at a nearby table.


When Art Takes Wing, The Owners Cross Their Fingers
Several years ago, Jean-Luc Bordeaux lent a small painting he owned to a Francois Boucher retrospective that traveled from New York to Detroit to Paris.
He never got it back.
"I think it was thrown away," says Mr.
Bordeaux, an art historian who works for Christie's in France.
His guess is that because it was wrapped in a crate with larger works, someone mistakenly disposed of it with the packing materials.


From Vatican
Etruscan art at Morris Museum, Morristown, N.J., Feb. 27.


Emily Grossman, Joshua Prince
Dr. and Mrs.
Bertram Grossman of Westport, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Emily Grossman to Joshua Prince, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harvey Prince of New Rochelle, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Grossman, 28, is a vice president and a management supervisor at Clarion Marketing and Communications in Greenwich, Conn.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is a pediatrician in Norwalk and Darien, Conn.


The Airdrops Begin, but Below the C-130's, the Sieges Intensify
WHEN American C-130's began dropping bundles of food and medicine to the besieged Bosnian Muslims, the Clinton Administration said the operation struck a blow against the Serbs' "ethnic cleansing."
The Administration's argument went this way: Washington would not stand idly by while the Serbs tried to starve the Muslims in eastern Bosnia into submission.
Once the Serbs saw that the United States was determined to get food to the Bosnians one way or another, they would lift their sieges and allow ground convoys to pass.


Somewhere, Under The Rainbow
So David Letterman will change networks but not cities.
New York won't have to suffer yet another blow to its civic pride.
But what will happen to that triumph of urban semiotics that is the Letterman stage set?
Should it be allowed to go the way of Penn Station, the old Met and Luna Park?
Actually, since we've got the VCR, there's no need to burden the Landmarks Preservation Commission with petitions to protect the "Late Night" set from imminent destruction.
Just push a button, and the set is spared.
Push another, and we can watch it whenever we want.
There's no need to preserve the physical object.
Talk show sets aren't designed to be seen in person, anyhow, despite the fans who line up for seats.
They're made to be captured in electrons that flicker across the screen for an hour or so, then disappear forever into the dimmer recesses of the brain.


ASPIN IS PREPARING A BROAD NEW PLAN FOR BASE CLOSINGS
The Clinton Administration is about to propose a sweeping new round of military base closings that seeks to reflect declining troop levels and changing military missions, senior Pentagon officials say.
Under orders from Defense Secretary Les Aspin, the armed services recommended in the last 10 days that at least 30 major installations be closed and as many as 150 other depots and smaller sites nationwide be consolidated or reduced, military officials said.


Throughout Bosnia's Bitter Ordeal, a Muslim Town Holds On
At noon today, beneath the shell-pocked bridge that crosses the Drina River in the center of this old eastern Bosnian town, children were skipping stones across the river's surface.
As they played, men in wading boots cast in the cold, blue-green water for fish.
Above, friends paused beside the twisted and blasted railings of the bridge to take in the winter's sun and air.
In Gorazde, things that would have been unremarkable on any winter day for decades have become the measure of a striking success.
Only here, of all the towns that once were predominantly Muslim flanking the Drina as it flows lazily through the heart of eastern Bosnia, has anything of a life been retained.


As Indian Point Ages, Regulators Take Pulse
The United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission tomorrow begins an unusual, broad-based review of the performance of the Indian Point 3 nuclear installation, the first ever at that 17-year-old plant, following a series of unfavorable periodic evaluations by the Federal agency.
"We are concerned about Indian Point 3's performance," said Curtis J. Cowgill, chief of the reactor projects branch, which oversees nuclear plants in the Northeast, known as Region I. The inspection team, led by Wayne Lanning, deputy director of the division of reactor safety, will evaluate operations, maintenance, engineering, safety assessment and quality-verification procedures during a two-week visit, Mr.
Cowgill said.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Overview; Inquiry Traces Suspect To Occupied Territories
Amid growing signs of possible international links to the devastating bombing of Manhattan's World Trade Center, the 25-year-old illegal immigrant arrested last week was identified yesterday by United States and Jordanian officials as a Jordanian citizen of Palestinian origin.
A Clinton Administration official in Washington said that the Jordanians had told the American Embassy in Amman that the suspect, Mohammed A. Salameh, was born on Sept. 1, 1967 in Biddiya near Nablus, in the Israeli-held West Bank.
They pledged to cooperate in the investigation.


Doctor in Abortion Case To Appeal Assault Count
The doctor who was found guilty last month in the first illegal abortion case in several years in New York State will appeal part of his conviction, his lawyer has said, based in part on the landmark abortion rights ruling in the case of Roe v.
Wade.
Dr.
Abu Hayat will contest his conviction for assaulting the baby, who survived the attempted abortion, on the premise that a fetus is not a person and therefore cannot be assaulted, said the lawyer, Ronald J. Veneziano.
The assault conviction was based on Dr.
Hayat's having severed the right arm of the baby, Ana Rosa Rodriguez, during the attempted abortion in October 1991.
The baby was born a day later at Jamaica Hospital in Queens.


For Law and Order
Police Foundation benefit dinner, March 4.


Sting Plays a Modern-Day Chaucer
In Sting's witty vision of hell, a newly arrived St.
Augustine finds himself rubbing elbows with high-court judges, failed saints, cardinals, archbishops, barristers, certified accountants and music critics in a smoke-filled room.
Presiding over this assembly is a Satan who welcomes newcomers with a cigar and an invitation to "make yourself at home."
St.
Augustine has been banished to the underworld for his consuming lust for a woman he describes as "Blessed St. Theresa, the whore of Babylon, Madonna and my mother all rolled into one." His punishment, it turns out, is to suffer a surfeit of pleasure.
"The less I need the more I get," he complains.
"Make me chaste but just not yet."


U.S. Pleads With Cult Leader to Let His Followers Go
Facing a bank of 31 television cameras at a news conference today, Federal agents used the opportunity to plead with David Koresh, leader of the Branch Davidian sect, to release his 100 or so followers, including the dead and wounded.
"If he's listening, we want to give him assurances that he and everyone involved will be treated fairly and humanely," said Bob A. Ricks of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
"We appeal to Mr. Koresh to let those people go who want to go."


Looking for a Good Player? The Padres Will Give Him to You Wholesale
Most general managers spend the spring scouring rosters for players who could add to the talent on their teams.
San Diego's Joe McIlvaine has spent his spring seeking ways of subtracting money from the payroll of his team.
Yet McIlvaine remains determined to overcome the built-in economic problems buffeting the Padres.
"There are a lot of things here I can't control," McIlvaine said, "but come hell or high water, we're going to put a good team out there."


New York State and Estate Planning
To the Editor:
"Estate Planning in an Era of Change" (Your Own Account, Feb. 7) reported on potential estate tax increases at the Federal level, and the need to plan to minimize the bite from such taxes.


Club Scene Is Booming In Bergen County Area
WHEN Erik Howard, a 300-pound noseguard for the New York Giants, opened a nightclub in northern Bergen County last fall, he provided the critical mass for a social explosion.
Mr.
Howard's new club, the Neutral Zone, along with two older clubs and a pair of 24-hour diners, all within shouting distance of each another, are drawing thousands of weekend revelers to the quiet suburban Bergen County communities of Ramsey and Mahwah.


Bank Examiners Will Monitor Mortgage Bias
The Treasury Department's bank examiners will soon adopt tougher procedures to keep national banks from discriminating on the basis of race when they approve home mortgages.
Stephen R. Steinbrink, the acting Comptroller of the Currency, said Friday that examiners would soon begin comparing groups of residential loan files at the banks they regulated to see whether nonwhite applicants for home mortgages had been denied loans at a higher rate than white applicants who were comparably financially qualified.


Q and A
Mortgage Tax Redux  Question: I am considering refinancing my mortgage.
The bank that gave me the mortgage told me that it had sold it and that I must again pay the mortgage tax, which is 1.75 percent.
Another bank told me that with the help of a lawyer, if I got proof of payment for the mortgage tax, I would not have to pay it again.


Catherine Strong, Peter G. Mitchell
Mr. and Mrs.
William L. Strong 3d of Rumson, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Catherine Burke Strong, to Peter Gilfoil Mitchell, a son of Irene G. Mitchell of Boston and the late Paul E. Mitchell.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Strong, 26, is a national sales representative in Boston for Troy Mills Inc. of New Hampshire, textile manufacturers in Troy, N.H.
She and her fiance graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.
Her father is a senior vice president of Fiduciary Trust Company International in New York.


If You're Thinking of Living in: North Tarrytown
WITH the right wind and tide, a 17th-century traveler from Manhattan could anticipate an eight-hour sail up the Hudson to a sheltered harbor that early Dutch sailors called "Slaeperingh Haven," or safe haven.
The bay is gone now, filled in by General Motors in 1929 for an assembly plant.
The Dutch have gone too, but not their inscriptions on the headstones in Sleepy Hollow Cemetery, in street names like Van Tassel, DeVries and Van Wart and in legends of the "enchanted region" a nearby resident made famous.


At the Whim of Leader: Childhood in a Cult
SOME 40 children hid under their beds in an armed camp outside Waco, Texas, last Sunday while their parents followed a failed rock musician who believes he is the Messiah into a bloody gun battle with Federal agents.
As the standoff with authorities dragged on throughout the week, David Koresh, the leader, repeatedly broke promises to allow all the children to leave the compound.
Instead, he used the youngest members of the Branch Davidians as human bargaining chips.


Awaiting Compensation For Vaccines That Injure
In 1982, Doreen McIlwaine of Farmingdale took her baby daughter Jennifer to the doctor for a routine vaccination.
Three hours later Jennifer was gripped by seizures in her crib.
"I heard something funny coming from her bed," Mrs.
McIlwaine recalled.
"I'd never seen a convulsion before in my life, and there was this little baby shaking."


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
NEW CANAAN FIELD DAY
Home gardeners and birders will have a field day at the New Canaan Nature Center on Saturday.
An organic gardening symposium will be in progress from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M., followed by a trip to watch the mating display of timberdoodles, also known as woodcocks, from 5 to 9 P.M.
Using the center's model 8,500-square-foot Naturalists' Garden, three of the center's staff members will demonstrate how similar landscaping may be accomplished at home.


CRIME
After witnessing a killing in an underworld bar, Sarah and her lover are marked for assassination by both parties in a territorial gang war.
Although the plot takes the requisite crooked turns on its way to a violent finale, the characters are what give this series its hard-bitten brilliance.
Saving the psychological realism for dreary people like Sarah ("stuck in that wrong, bleak marriage"), Mr.
James lets his language soar with his criminals, characterizing mobsters like Benny Loxton and Leo Tacette in a mock-heroic style that confers dignity as well as absurdity on their aspirations for greatness.
Let other chroniclers revile them for their evil deeds and vulgar accents; in the eyes of their poet laureate, men like Benny and Leo are epic villains.


Credit the Son
To the Editor:
On Dec. 27 you ran a letter about the credit line for the photograph that appears on the back jacket of "JFK: Reckless Youth." The letter writer claimed that the photo of John F. Kennedy at his sister's birthday party was taken by the renowned photographer Erich Salomon and not by his son, Peter Hunter, as indicated in the book jacket credit.


Piquant Dishes, Turquoise and Pink Decor
What once seemed a marathon of new Thai restaurants has slowed to a walk.
The latest (and first in more than two years) to open in Fairfield County is Siam Rialto in South Norwalk.
Ensconced in a fin de siecle building that was once a theater (the Rialto), the restaurant replaces one named Old Rialto.
The decor now combines light tones of Thailand with turquoise walls and turquoise-and-pink tablecloths and napkins.
A small turquoise fountain bubbles away in the lower dining area, and a brick wall is hung with Thai art and photos of Thai kings.
Upstairs is a balcony with additional tables.


Wetteland Out 6 Weeks
Montreal Expos reliever JOHN WETTELAND, third in the National League in saves with 37 last season, fractured his big right toe when he kicked a batting practice screen in anger yesterday and will not be able to pitch for six weeks.
Wetteland was pitching batting practice on a back field before a game between the Expos and Atlanta in West Palm Beach, Fla., when the injury occurred.


BABY SITTERS' BOSS TELLS ALL
The quest for an Attorney General simply points up the difficulty of finding a law-abiding political hack.
Your clandestine author can't be married to a law professor.
Apparently,
she
made all the arrangements. J. J. SMITH
Bronx


Jerome A. Ambro, 64, a Leader In Curbing House Seniority, Dies
Jerome A. Ambro, who helped change Congressional seniority rules and campaign financing as the leader of 82 freshmen members elected in the aftermath of the Watergate scandals, died on Thursday at a hospital in Falls Church, Va.
He was 64 and lived in nearby Dumfries, Va.
His death resulted from diabetes, his family said.


Haitian Dissident Loses Plea for U.S. Refugee Visa
In a case that international human rights groups say exemplifies the flaws in a Clinton Administration program to grant asylum to Haitians fleeing persecution in their country, a dissident who fled his hometown after being severely beaten by the military has been denied a visa to the United States.
The dissident, Ferleau Norde, a 27-year-old guitarist, whose story of detention and torture was recounted in The New York Times last month, said he was recently called in by the United States Embassy here and handed a form letter saying that his request for a refugee visa had been rejected.


FEB. 28 - MARCH 6: NBC Cuts From the Top; News President Resigns As Budget and Morale Drop
Even in an age of diminishing network profits, some cutbacks may not be worth it.
Last week, following a string of embarrassments for NBC News, Michael Gartner, the president of the division, announced that he was resigning.
Mr.
Gartner, a 54-year-old former newspaper editor, took over the news division in 1988 with a clear mandate from NBC's parent company, General Electric: restore the division to profitability.
He cut or eliminated bureaus, got rid of scores of employees and succeeded in making the ink run black.
But Mr.
Gartner also alienated many staff members.
They warned that such stringent cost-cutting was undermining the network's ability to maintain its standards.
He embraced "I Witness Video," featuring amateur videotapes of crimes and disasters.
Last month, when it was revealed that "Dateline NBC" had broadcast a rigged crash test featuring a General Motors truck, their worst fears seem to have been borne out.


Holtzman, After the Flood; Trying to Heal the Wounds From Her Own Attack
An hour after Elizabeth Holtzman conceded defeat in her bid for the United States Senate last September, she graciously visited the victory party for the winner of the Democratic primary, Robert Abrams.
And rather than sulking or licking her wounds after the humiliating last-place defeat in the bitter four-way race, the 51-year-old City Comptroller astonished even her closest aides by buttonholing Democratic leaders and asking their support for re-election in the comptroller's race a year away.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Jobless Benefits: vote on a $5.7 billion program of extended unemployment benefits for the long-term jobless.
1
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
Y
Lieberman (D) . . .
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Y
Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
Y
Moynihan (D) . . .
Y
House
1. Hatch Act: Allows Federal workers to participate in more political activities.
1
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
5. Franks (R) . . .
N
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
3. Saxton (R) . . .
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .
A
6. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
7. Franks (R) . . .
Y
8. Klein (D) . . .
Y
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
Y
10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
13. Menendez (D) . . .
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
2. Lazio (R) . . .
Y
3. King (R) . . .
Y
4. Levy (R) . . .
Y
5. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
Y
7. Manton (D) . . .
Y
8. Nadler (D) . . .
Y
9. Schumer (D) . . .
Y
10. Towns (D) . . .
Y
11. Owens (D) . . .
Y
12. Velazquez (D) . . .
Y
13. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
14. Maloney (D) . . .
Y
15. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
16. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
17. Engel (D) . . .
Y
18. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
19. Fish (R) . . .
Y
20. Gilman (R) . . .
Y
21. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
22. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
23. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
24. McHugh (R) . . .
Y
25. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
26. Hinchey (D) . . .
Y
27. Paxon (R) . . .
N
28. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
29. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
30. Quinn (R) . . .
Y
31. Houghton (R) . . .
N
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Miss Cutler, Mr. de Vicq de Cumptich Jr.
Fearn Cutler, the daughter of Mrs.
Ralph H. Cutler Jr. of Harding Township, N.J., and the late Mr.
Cutler, was married yesterday to Roberto de Vicq de Cumptich Jr., the son of the late Mr. and Mrs. de Vicq de Cumptich.
Judge Kenneth K. C. MacKenzie of the Superior Court of New Jersey officiated at the home of the bride's mother.
Mrs. de Vicq de Cumptich, 33, is the design director at Pantheon Books, a division of Random House Inc., in New York.
She graduated from Hampshire College.
Her father was a vice president of the former C. Tennant Sons &amp; Company, an importer and exporter of ore, in New York.
Her mother, now retired, was a technician in cancer research at the Health Research Institute at Fairleigh Dickinson University in Madison, N.J.


Wendy Livingston, A. E. Kirschenbaum
Dr.
Wendy Ellen Livingston, a dermatologist in Garden City, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Abram Eugene Kirschenbaum, a resident in orthopedic surgery at New York University Medical Center in Manhattan.
Rabbi Meir Berger performed the ceremony at the Puck Building in New York.
Dr.
Livingston, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a medical degree from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Lenore M. Livingston of Deerfield Beach, Fla., and Dr.
Robert M. Livingston of Boca Raton, Fla.


Miss Susskind, Noel Mannion
Samantha Maria Susskind, the daughter of Joyce Davidson Susskind of New York and the late David Susskind, was married yesterday to Noel Thomas Mannion, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Mannion, also of New York.
The Rev.
Sam B. Matarazzo performed the ceremony at the St.
Vincent Ferrer Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Mrs.
Mannion is a legal assistant in New York for the Federal Bureau of Prisons.
She graduated from New York University and received a law degree from New York Law School.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
4th qtr. nonfarm productivity, pct. change
4.0
4.4
Jan. wholesale trade, percent change
1.5
0.2
Thursday
Feb. retail sales, percent change
0.3
0.3
Friday
Feb. producer prices, percent change
0.2
0.2
Jan. business inventories, percent change
0.4
0.1
Monday: G10 central bankers meet  Tuesday: Mitterrand and Clinton meet  Wednesday: Federal Reserve "beige book" released  Thursday: Bundesbank council meets


Skater Impatient With Reaction to AIDS
As the world figure-skating championships begin this week in Prague, a former Olympic champion, Robin Cousins of Britain, is challenging the amateur governing body to become more active in helping people with AIDS in the professional skating community.
"The people we lost in pro skating were lonely and on their own," said Cousins, the 1980 champion at Lake Placid, N.Y.
"AIDS hasn't hit the amateur level hard yet, but the International Skating Union can't ignore pro skating. AIDS has absolutely affected our sport."


For CBS, a Case of Hoya Paranoia
We're coming round to that blessed time of year when college basketball starts making sense to me (Queens College '79), when the giant, bloated whale of college hoops shrinks into something small enough for liberated men to give a hug.
Thankfully, the start of the National Collegiate Athletic Association men's tournament in 11 days means I won't have to surf over scads of channels (where Bill Raftery calls every game) but can find all the information I ever really need on CBS.
With the regular season about to conclude, CBS has determined that all it really lacked this season was a strong Georgetown team to go with the strong, 10th-ranked Seton Hall and a steadily resurgent St.
John's.


Sculpture Garden
To the Editor: Brookgreen Gardens is an enchanted place, and I was delighted to see the article about it by Stephen May.
It sent me on a nostalgia trip.
Brookgreen and I were born the same year, 1931, and I grew up in those wondrous gardens.
My family lived in nearby Conway for the six cold months, and at Myrtle Beach the six hot months.
Each week, we would ride down two or three times to see the work progressing.
I well remember watching some of the statues put into position, and seeing the latticed gray brick walls built.


Spirits Warmed By Winters Past
Phantoms of Edwardian elegance seem to have re-emerged in the last decade of the 20th century in silhouettes that amazingly recapture that vanished period of exotica that marked the beginning of this century.
At dusk, along Fifth Avenue and Central Park South, one glimpses women in below-ankle-length black mink or cloth coats.
Are they refugees from the era of Poiret, Bakst, Diaghilev and Marchesa Casati (who left a trail of musky sandalwood perfume in her wake)?


After Heart Surgery,Unitas Listed as Resting
The Hall of Fame quarterback JOHNNY UNITAS underwent coronary bypass surgery early yesterday morning at the University of Maryland Medical Center in Baltimore.
His family said that doctors told them the operation went well and that the former Baltimore Colts quarterback was expected to make a full recovery.
He was said to be resting comfortably.


Jeanette Pincus, Adam L. Lipson
Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Pincus of Tappan, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jeanette Leila Pincus to Adam Laurence Lipson, a son of Phyllis Lipson of New York and Ben Lipson of San Rafael, Calif.
A June wedding is planned.


Pursued


INSIDE
Bridge on the Drina
In Gorazde, a quiet noontime hour on the bridge is a measure of the hope the town's defense holds to Muslims of eastern Bosnia.
Page 10.
In Waco, an F.B.I.
Plea
Federal agents used a televised news conference to appeal to the cult leader David Koresh "to let those people go who want to go." Page 30.
Growing Old Alone
Five percent of the people in one Kansas county are 85 or older.
Many live alone, and like it.
Page 20.
Ex-Kingmaker Held in Japan
Shin Kanemaru, until recently Japan's most powerful politician, was arrested on tax charges.
Page 17.


Suddenly, the Doc Is In for the Knicks
With a rare three-day weekend off for the Knicks, Coach Pat Riley let his players relax on Friday, but he held a workout today and will have another one Sunday as they prepare for the arrival of Shaquille O'Neal.
O'Neal, the leading contender for rookie-of-the-year honors in the National Basketball Association, will arrive with the Orlando Magic at Madison Square Monday night, so the Knicks can hardly look back on their victory over the Utah Jazz last Thursday.


Volvo Aims (Gasp!) at Sports Fans
IT is always nice when your garage attendant knows you.
It means that you occasionally get decent service, even in New York.
Even when you show up with a different car.
Mine calls me "Mr. Marshall" because he can't pronounce my last name, but we always converse.
As on the day when I pulled up in the boxy aqua Volvo.


Battered City Gets Visitor: Baseball
The bruising gales of Hurricane Andrew stopped battering south Florida last Aug. 24.
But the tremendous chunks the storm ripped out of properties and lives are still apparent in the Dade County communities south of Miami.
Evidence of the severe damage still lingers in cities like Homestead, where there are huge piles of debris and pitted buildings.
Farms that produce winter crops for the entire nation will not be able to grow limes, avocados and mangoes for at least three more years, as farmers replant the thousands of trees that blew away.


Or St. Louis?
To the Editor:
We were disappointed that Allan Kozinn did not mention the St.
Louis Symphony Orchestra's broadcasts on National Public Radio.
Aside from the Chicago Symphony, ours is the only ensemble whose broadcasts are heard nationwide 52 weeks a year.
The broadcasts have been underwritten for the last six years by the Southwestern Bell Corporation.
BRUCE COPPOCK St.
Louis The writer is executive director of the St.
Louis Symphony Orchestra.


ENDPAPER: Life and Times; Supremely Sheltered
With its soaring columns and grand public spaces, the Supreme Court building seems designed to inspire awe.
That is especially true of the courtroom itself, a high-ceilinged sanctum of hushed formality where the Justices emerge precisely at 10 o'clock from behind a velvet curtain to face rows of lawyers and tourists standing respectfully at attention.
Reporters stand too, and few would deny having felt a touch of awe on the occasion of a major decision.
The sheer power invested in those nine individuals would guarantee that, even if they convened in a shack.


Bloomie's Beach
Mademoiselle co-sponsors party, March 3.


Here Come The Nerds, Again
Rock's recyclers, tired of hippie ponchos, bell-bottoms and psychedelic jams, are ready to raid another closet.
Grunge's gloom is losing its allure, and today's politically correct guitar heroes have nearly drowned fans in earnestness.
So new wave is coming to turn the world Day-Glo once again.
People are bound to welcome the return of short, sharp pop songs with happy beats and sing-along melodies, of skinny ties and plastic dresses, polka dots and crazy-color hair.


A Hudson River School, But Kinder and Gentler
The largest of the shows now holding the floor at the Hudson River Museum is "Westchester Landscapes: Pastoral Visions 1840 to 1920" and, regardless of its title, this is not another exercise in nostalgia.
On the contrary, the guest curator, Kenneth Maddox, means to show how Westchester yielded a subgenre of Hudson River School painting more domesticated than the extravaganzas inspired by the wilderness and notions of Manifest Destiny.


Students Speak Out on Racial Discord in Their Lives
BLACK students told of being followed by distrustful administrators, stared at by suspicious store clerks and insulted by strangers on the telephone.
White students spoke of impenetrable walls of resentment and hate, hurtful epithets directed at them and a fear of reprisals for decades-old grievances.
A hundred and fifty students vented their feelings at a White Plains High School "Speak Out" assembly held late last month on the theme: "Martin Luther King 25 Years Later: What Happened to the Dream?" The two-hour program, organized by the White Plains Y.W.C.A. and co-sponsored by the White Plains Youth Bureau and the high school, gave a disquieting view of the effect of racial trouble on young lives here.


Clinton Approves Extended Jobless Benefits


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Bomb; Stored Chemicals Were Blast Waiting to Happen
Investigators working on the bombing of the World Trade Center said yesterday that some of the chemicals found at a self-storage locker in Jersey City had been combined in a highly volatile mixture that could have exploded with great force at any time.
"All you needed for a big explosion was a drastic change in temperature or for someone to knock over one of the containers," said one explosives expert who has been monitoring the investigation.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Restaurant; Windows on the World: Where Hundreds Would Dine, Silence
On an average Saturday, Windows on the World feeds more than 1,500 customers, including a dozen parties in private rooms on the 106th and 107th floors.
But yesterday was not an average Saturday.
This entertainment machine, one of the five largest-grossing restaurants in the country, sits eerily idle.
According to some who have been there since the World Trade Center bombing Feb. 26, the dining room tables remained set with silver and linen through much of last week, wine glasses were full, chairs were pushed in neatly -- as if every diner had decided to visit the restroom at the same time.


Blood on the Syllabus
JAPANESE BY SPRING
By Ishmael Reed. 225 pp. New York: Atheneum. $20.


How G.M. Is Losing Its Hold on the Crucial Family Sedan
THE big battle for the midsize family sedan market isn't going well for the General Motors Corporation.
Sales of the Chevrolet Lumina, a linchpin of G.M.'s strategy to shore up its eroding domination of the midsize market, have been slow -- slow enough that the company is laying off 1,450 workers this month at its Lumina plant in Oshawa, Canada.


Clearing the Air
Sincerity, the fresh, clean scent of the 90's, is in the air, especially at the salon.
The people who style your hair want to do more.
At least Maibritt Kokholm does.
Kokholm and her husband, Gil Gamlieli, co-owners of the Gil Gamlieli Beauty Group, are in the vanguard of the latest strain in beauty culture: the "eco-friendly" salon, an environmentally sound, nontoxic place to practice and pursue beauty.
Ideally, that is.


Q and A
Marrying in Spain
Q.
What is the procedure for an American couple to marry in Barcelona or Seville? -- Stephanie D. Caceres, Sunnyside, Queens


Wall Mountings Require Precision
Installing wall-mounted shelves and cabinets is seldom too difficult for amateurs, but it does require more care and skill than often meet the eye.
Adjustable wall shelves, the kind that rest on brackets attached to slotted metal standards fastened to the wall, are an example.
When buying them, be sure to obtain enough standards to support the shelves' load.
For heavy loads like books, the span between standards has to be no more than 24 inches.
For lighter loads, it can be up to 32 inches.
Provided the load on a shelf is evenly distributed to prevent tipping, the ends of a shelf can extend unsupported about six inches for heavy loads and nine for light loads.


A U.S. Hotel List Notes Fire Safety
FIRE safety for travelers moved ahead as this year opened.
The Hotel and Motel Fire Safety Act of 1990 began to have an impact on the marketplace with a drastic revision of the Federal Travel Directory.
This makes it the first guide to American lodging that lists only places that have a smoke detector in every room, wired into the hotel's electric system, and, in the case of buildings taller than three stories, have installed a sprinkler system.
Battery-operated smoke detectors are unacceptable because batteries wear out and can be stolen.
The Federal Travel Directory has been published for years, but now the safety act dictates that it may list no American hotel or motel unless it conforms to the law's provisions.
To accomplish this, the Government gathered a list of conforming properties from the states and territories and then purged from the Federal Travel Directory all the places not on this master list, shrinking the directory from 9,000 listings in December to 4,164 in January.
Federal Travel Directory
The Federal Travel Directory is not a likely rival for the Mobil Guide or the A.A.A.
Tour Book, because the type is pretty small and there are no pictures.
You have probably never seen it unless you are a Government employee, but it is revised and published anew each month, and anyone can buy a copy for $13.
The initial issues for 1993 by no means include all the places that have taken the fire-safety steps; some have not gotten their reports into the system, although Government officials expect the data gathering, which is being accomplished through state fire marshals, to catch up soon.
In any case, unless a hotel offers a "government rate," meaning a discount, it is not included.
Some foreign hotels offering discounts for Government travelers are included, but they are not subject to the law.
The installation of detectors or sprinklers is noted.


On Sunday; When Men Hit the Women They Love
"I WAS a real basehead," said Juan Rios, 27.
"Then I got off drugs, I started doing good. I got myself a nice girl." That was Eve.
They'd grown up friends in the Chelsea part of Manhattan.
Their mothers played dominos together.
For some reason, three years ago, Eve decided to call Juan's beeper.
They started hanging out, then dating.
"I'm like wow -- do you see what I see happening to us?" said Eve.
"He said, 'It's definitely not like before.' "


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Providence, R.I.; A Plan to Open The Waterfront
SINCE the 1940's, Providence has been as cut off from its waterfront as effectively as any city in New England by a jumble of highways, oil tanks, factories and other industrial sprawl..
But Narragansett Electric, the utility that serves most of Rhode Island, has started work on a park that will open a quarter-mile window on Narragansett Bay.
And with highway reconstruction now being planned it may be possible in a few years to walk from the State Capitol to the bay along the Providence River.


EDDIE HASKELL WINS AGAIN
Calling Jay Leno obsequious for not being rude to guests, or faulting him for not engaging in political advocacy, disregards the tradition of "Tonight." Johnny Carson set a standard for civil behavior and keeping his political views private.
I'm especially surprised that, as a theater critic, Frank Rich finds David Letterman's fumbles, gaffes and garbles charming.
If an actor took the Letterman approach to a performance, Rich would probably emasculate him in a review.
ROBERT HIRSCHFELD
Washington


Margo Krody and Mitchell Blutt
AS a ballerina in the corps of the New York City Ballet, Margo Krody rarely meets people from outside the dance community.
Between classes, rehearsals and performances, she usually spends 12 hours a day, six days a week, inside the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center.
"There's no windows in the whole building, so we really don't know what's going on in the outside world," she said.
"Mostly we're in the mirrored ballet studios and the dressing room, which becomes almost like a locker room where we trade secrets."


Knee Sidelines Bream
First baseman SID BREAM of the Braves underwent surgery late Friday night in Atlanta to remove a bone chip from his right knee and he might not be ready to play when the major league season opens in Chicago on April 5.


Merce at Work. And Thinking Aloud.
Merce Cunningham's long career in dance has been a process of opening doors.
He has padded into each new room quietly and inquisitively, seldom shutting the door behind him.
And the process continues for the septuagenarian choreographer and his company, which begins a two-week season at City Center on Tuesday.
Hard at work in his studio and his small, comfortably cluttered office high up in the Westbeth complex in the West Village, Mr.
Cunningham has allowed two of his veteran dancers, Chris Komar and Robert Swinston, to take over some of the daily chores of running the troupe.
They also work with the RUGs, or Repertory Understudy Groups -- young dancers used for Cunningham revivals.


After a Fireman Dies, Questions About Staffing and Equipment
It was just a matter of time, firefighters said, because there were too few men to do the job and substandard equipment to work with.
Warren Ogburn, 39, a professional firefighter here, died Feb. 24 in an elevator in a burning high-rise apartment building.
As fellow firefighters mourned his loss at a funeral last Monday, they also expressed feelings of outrage, saying that their comrade perished because government leaders had failed to take their concerns seriously.
"How far can government keep cutting us back before the system cracks?" asked Duncan MacRae, president of the 170-member White Plains Professional Firefighters Association.
"Morale was bad before this, but now it's worse than ever."


The Genius Was Not a Jerk
To the Editor:
I find great satisfaction in having my biography of C. S. Peirce favorably reviewed in your pages (Feb. 7).
I regret that the pleasure is mixed with pain, because of certain aspects of the event.


Italy Chief Tries 'Political Solution' to Scandal
Confronted by a bribery scandal of unprecedented proportions, the Italian Cabinet pulled back on Friday night from the brink of a full-scale purge and approved a package of measures presented as a "political solution."
Opposition politicians immediately called the move a triumph of corruption over justice in the affair, which has cost the Italian state an estimated $20 billion and led to the investigation or jailing of hundreds of politicians and businessmen.


Wall Mountings Require Precision
Installing wall-mounted shelves and cabinets is seldom too difficult for amateurs, but it does require more care and skill than often meet the eye.
Adjustable wall shelves, the kind that rest on brackets attached to slotted metal standards fastened to the wall, are an example.
When buying them, be sure to obtain enough standards to support the shelves' load.
For heavy loads like books, the span between standards has to be no more than 24 inches.
For lighter loads, it can be up to 32 inches.
Provided the load on a shelf is evenly distributed to prevent tipping, the ends of a shelf can extend unsupported about six inches for heavy loads and nine for light loads.


Playing a Drive by Ear
GIVEN the odds, there must be travelers who actually enjoy driving the nation's Interstate highways.
For dedicated blue-highway people like me, however, what the Interstates provide in speed, comfort and safety is often outweighed by the ennui they induce.
But a useful remedy is at hand, a steadily expanding group of audio tapes that bring both countryside and dimly recalled school lessons to life.


Mary Lawson-Johnston, N. S. Howe 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Lawson-Johnston of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mary Stevenson Hammond Lawson-Johnston to Nathaniel Saltonstall Howe 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howe Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Lawson-Johnston, 26, owns One Trek Beyond Inc., a student travel agency in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is the president of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, which was established by Mr.
Guggenheim, the bride's paternal great-grandfather.
The foundation operates the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York and the Peggy Guggenheim Collection in Venice.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE RAINBABIES
By Laura Krauss Melmed.
Illustrated by Jim LaMarche.
Unpaged.
New York:  Lothrop, Lee &amp; Shepard Books. $15. (Ages 5 to 9)


Seeding a Huge Chicago Railyard Project
Much of this city's Near South Side is just acres of vacant industrial land and underutilized railyards.
But in 1989 developers took in hand a 72-acre tract, named it Central Station and trumpeted it as a $3 billion development that would include commerce, houses, stores, hotels and exhibition halls.
Allotments to each category would be determined by demand.
Current zoning calls for a maximum of 19.5 million square feet of developed space.


Douglas Marland, 58, a Recipient of Emmies for Television Writing
Douglas Marland, a head writer on major television soap operas who won three Emmy Awards, died yesterday at the age of 58 at a hospital in Norwalk, Conn.
He resided in Fairfield County, Conn.
His death was caused by complications from abdominal surgery, his family said.


East Timorese Want Their Conquerors Out
To the Editor:
Your informative survey of ethnic struggles around the world mischaracterizes relations between Indonesia and East Timor (front page, Feb. 7).
The independence movement in East Timor is simply not a "separatist movement." Nor is it just another group clamoring for a place in the limelight.
Some clear international legal rights are involved here.


Those Overpaid Pilots . . .
To the Editor:
In "Labor's Showdown at Federal Express" (Feb. 7), the Federal Express pilots' victory in voting for Air Line Pilots Association representation was spotlighted.


ISRAELIS ATTACK ON LEBANON COAST
Israeli helicopter gunships today attacked a marine base on the Lebanese coast belonging to a hard-line Palestinian group, Lebanese security officials and the Israeli radio reported.
Lebanese police reported that four people had been wounded in the raid.
An Israeli military spokesman, quoted by the state radio, said all helicopters had returned home safely.


VCR's Are Facing Two Revolutions
THE videocassette recorder is on the verge of two technological upheavals that promise to shake up a business that has been relatively quiet since the VHS format finally vanquished the Beta system five years ago.
During the next few years, the consumer VCR will begin its conversion from analog to digital technology, which will provide cleaner, static-free pictures, much as digital compact disks offer music free of the hisses and pops found on analog records.
Also coming are video recorders capable of capturing and playing high-definition television images, which contain much more detail than conventional television images.


Sculpture Garden
To the Editor: One feature not mentioned in the Brookgreen Gardens article ("Art Against a Green Backdrop," Jan. 31), is that among the works the Huntingtons purchased one finds sculptures by 40 women, a high percentage of female artists. .
Did Anna Hyatt Huntington say to her husband, "Archer, let's remember the ladies!"?
That these two Americans, in the 30's, chose works by so many women and exhibited them in gardens open to the public is worthy of notice and must bring a smile to the lips of the Guerrilla Girls.
CESI KELLINGER Chambersburg, Pa.


Shaky After 100 Million Years
ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA
By John McPhee. Illustrated. 304 pp. New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.


Southern Homes and Gardens
Starting in the middle of this month, historical societies in South Carolina and Georgia will offer tours of private and public houses and their English-style gardens, featuring the indigenous azaleas and camellias along with live oaks draped in Spanish moss.
From March 19 to April 17, the Historic Charleston Foundation is sponsoring the 1993 Festival of Houses and Gardens, a series of walking tours of 18th- and 19th-century houses and gardens in Charleston's historic district.
On March 19, March 29 and April 8, oyster roasts will take place at Drayton Hall Plantation, a Georgian Palladian house built between 1738 and 1742 that escaped destruction during the Civil War.
Tours are $25 each and last three hours.
Information: Historic Charleston Foundation, (803) 722-3405.


Public &amp; Private; It's A Girlcott
It's time for a girlcott.
A girlcott is, of course, the opposite of a boycott, and there's a need for one now that there's a chance to bring RU486 to the United States.
RU486 is a drug that induces abortion very, very early on in pregnancy, with no surgical invasion, no anesthesia and no risk of infection.
"An antihormone," the French researcher Etienne-Emile Baulieu, one of its inventors, calls it.
"A muscular little molecule that interferes with hormonal messages." But RU486 could be a muscular little molecule that interferes with the anti-abortion movement, too, and that is why you are going to be hearing so much about it, and about boycotts as well.


Bosnian Peace Talks Recess For Leaders to Return Home


To This Generation, Advertising's a Laugh
To the Editor:
Re: "Lost in the Name Game," by Betsy Israel (Feb. 14).


Sicily in Youth and Springtime
IT WAS THE SPRING OF 1963, in the depths of my youth.
John F. Kennedy was still the President, and I was trying to find myself by hitchhiking through Europe.
At the time a nice hotel room on the Left Bank of Paris cost $5, and $1,600, earned through odd jobs at college, could finance nearly a whole year abroad -- as long as one was willing to bed down in youth hostels and travel by thumb, by "autostop," then the universal means of transport for young people in Europe.
My thumb had taken me to southern Italy, to Naples, the staging ground for my foray into Calabria and Sicily, down the Amalfi coast.
At Positano, a picturesque little resort, I briefly encountered my parents, who were on vacation in a first-class hotel, and then I pushed farther south.


More on Suspect's Background
The man arrested last week in the bombing of the World Trade Center was identified as a Jordanian citizen of Palestinian descent.
Page 19.


April 15 Alert: More Taxpayers Owe the State
WHEN the first three state income tax returns arrived at the state Department of Revenue Services in January, A. J. Janschewitz got an inkling of what kind of year 1992 was for taxpayers: each return had a check attached.
"More people are going to have to pay this year than paid last year," said Mr.
Janschewitz, the spokesman for the department.
"I wouldn't be surprised if 80 to 90 percent of the returns we receive owe us money." Last year, more than half the people who filed returns were due refunds.


In Big Sur, a Spa for the Psyche
THE first thing I wanted to do when I got to the Ventana Inn in Big Sur was leave.
Maybe it was the drive on Highway 1, which is like riding the Cyclone, only with ocean views.
If I wanted this much excitement traveling I could take the D train alone at midnight where it would also be warmer.
The Ventana Inn is set on a mountain, like most everything else in Big Sur, and prides itself on its proximity to nature.
Two deer nuzzled a bush while we parked the car, barely looking up.
The proper response to such pastoral beauty is instant enchantment.
But all I could think of was Bambi.
And death.


Health Plan Blamed in Vermont Mayor's Loss
For 12 years Vermont's largest city has been governed by mayors from the left side of the political spectrum: Bernard Sanders, who was one of the nation's few socialist mayors, and then his protege, Peter Clavelle.
But this week all that changed unexpectedly.
Mr.
Clavelle lost his job in an election on Tuesday to Peter Brownell, who will be Burlington's first Republican Mayor in three decades.
Although Mr.
Clavelle's call for increased property taxes clearly figured in the outcome, the issue at the forefront of the campaign was his advocacy of a plan to extend health-care coverage to the unmarried partners of city employees.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  IN CANADA, HEALTH COSTS ARE UP


Courier Continues March Through the Desert
Don't wait for this guy to miss the ball, warned the loser, because he'll surely disappoint you.
Jim Courier continued to treat invincibility as just another trusty ingredient of his oft-imitated, rarely duplicated professional repertory today as he dismissed defending champion Michael Chang, 6-4, 6-4, in the semifinals of the Newsweek Champions Cup.


Peter, Paul and Mary: 'Blowin' Into the 90's
Peter, Paul and Mary (left) want to introduce themselves to a new generation.
This month, Warner Brothers Records is releasing the folk-music trio's new children's album, "Peter, Paul &amp; Mommy, Too." Next Sunday, WNET/ Channel 13 will broadcast a children's special with the same title.
Filmed with grade-school students from Greenwich Village and Hoboken, N.J., the show includes standards like "Puff (the Magic Dragon)," and "Blowin' in the Wind."
"Something emerged from the mixture of songs, the ethos of the times and the combination of people to make the circle extend to the kids around us and become infectious," Peter Yarrow said.


Finis for Fordham: Late Rally Falls Short Against Holy Cross
Fordham's topsy-turvy basketball season ended today when the Rams were defeated by Holy Cross, 86-78, in the semifinals of the Patriot League tournament.
In a game that typified Fordham's up-and-down season, the Rams led by as many as 10 points late in the first half and then seemed to be out of contention when Holy Cross opened a 15-point lead midway through the second half.
But Fordham got within 3 points near the end before a crowd of 1,667 at the half-empty Hart Center.


Children's Choirs Are Flourishing In County Churches
Music, which is gasping for breath in the county's public schools, is alive and well in its churches.
A growing number of religious institutions have formed children's choirs where youngsters can share in the pleasures of singing.


Sorcery on the Side
Winter hunger is a primitive thing, the prowling of a big burly bear.
The rabbit and sparrow appetite of summer is easier to gratify.
It can be appeased with light dishes that satisfy both contemporary health concerns as well as the senses.
But between winter's last chrysanthemum and spring's first daffodil, eating lean is a Sisyphean task.
Contemporary diet wisdom is no match for the primordial instinct to eat fat for solace, fat for energy and fat for padding.
Woe to the waistline.
As long as the mornings are cold and the evenings long, the trajectory of taste and habit is inexorable.


Wall Mountings Require Precision
Installing wall-mounted shelves and cabinets is seldom too difficult for amateurs, but it does require more care and skill than often meet the eye.
Adjustable wall shelves, the kind that rest on brackets attached to slotted metal standards fastened to the wall, are an example.
When buying them, be sure to obtain enough standards to support the shelves' load.
For heavy loads like books, the span between standards has to be no more than 24 inches.
For lighter loads, it can be up to 32 inches.
Provided the load on a shelf is evenly distributed to prevent tipping, the ends of a shelf can extend unsupported about six inches for heavy loads and nine for light loads.


The Israel-Arab Soap Opera: Actors Change, Plots Don't
SOMETIMES, it seems, the Middle East resembles a long-playing soap opera; a viewer can tune out for quite a while and tune in again to find that the basic story line remains the same and the main difference is that the heroes and villains look a little older.
Two years ago, James A. Baker 3d made his first trip to the region as Secretary of State and told the Arabs and Israelis that he had no blueprint for peace, but instead wanted "to listen, to cajole, to plead and to offer our good offices." He said he had seen "signs of new thinking," adding, "I think the time is now for us to seize the moment, to take advantage of these opportunities."


Israel Set to Use U.S. Loan Guarantees
For many months they held center stage in United States-Israeli relations, becoming a barometer of how the countries were getting along.
President George Bush withheld them from Israel to punish one Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, then handed them as a reward to a triumphant new leader, Yitzhak Rabin.


Haverford's Ill-Fated Proposal
How could something that seemed so right end up going so wrong?
That's a question being asked these days by officials at Haverford College in Haverford, Pa., and major league baseball.


Buying More Flash For Less Cash
The '85 Nissan Pulsar, a two-door coupe with front-wheel drive, was Japan's squared-off answer to the Batmobile.
This high-mileage example, with not a scratch on it, sold last weekend at R. D. Sand's Original New York Auto Auction for $2,100.
A salesman at Bay Royal Nissan in Brooklyn said that price was just about right.


Portraying Seduction As a Game
The game of love is not shared by all, and in a sort of backhanded acknowledgement to human attraction, the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst is presenting "Les Liaisons Dangereuses" through Saturday.
This work by Christopher Hampton is a dramatization of the French novel by Choderlos de Laclos.
It was a Broadway hit a few years ago and later a movie starring Glenn Close, all of which served to bring this chilling classic into public consciousness.


Regents' Plan Would Benefit Poor School Districts
The New York State Board of Regents has sent the Legislature a proposal that would simplify the way school aid is calculated and give substantially more money to larger cities and poor rural districts.
In several ways, the proposal mirrors a plan by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, which also calls for eliminating many complex aid formulas and for giving additional aid to districts with large concentrations of poor students.


Bracing for Message From Glen Ridge Jury
For 21 weeks, as the jury fidgeted, the seasons shifted and holidays slipped by, those who sat through the trial of four men charged with sexually abusing a mentally retarded schoolmate in a Glen Ridge, N.J., basement one afternoon four years ago saw the matter as a grand morality play.
Protesters came and went.
So did priests and law students, high school jocks, idle observers, red-coated members of the Guardian Angels and their leader, Lisa Sliwa.
At least one book is already in the works.
Others may follow.
Lawyers on both sides spoke often and openly of "An American Tragedy," as though to miss the courtroom drama was to miss a fragment of history itself.


Susan Parrott, Horace Crary Jr.
Susan Sheffield Parrott, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Parrott of Washington, was married yesterday to Horace Ingraham Crary Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Crary of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
John G. B. Andrew performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Thomas Church in New York.
Mrs.
Crary is a senior manager in the client-services division of Sotheby's in New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father, now retired, was a senior official in the Central Intelligence Agency in Langley, Va.


Keith W. Fletcher, M. Renata Cobbs
M.
Renata Cobbs, the daughter of Dr.
Price M. Cobbs of San Francisco and the late Evadne L. Cobbs, was married yesterday to Keith Warrick Fletcher, a son of Dolores Fletcher of East Orange, N.J., and Kenneth Fletcher of Lakewood, N.J..
The Rev.
Richard Norris performed the ceremony at the Mother Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Cobbs Fletcher is a development associate at the People's Light and Theater Company in Malvern, Pa.
She graduated from Spelman College and studied acting under Sanford Meisner at the Neighborhood Playhouse School of the Theater in Manhattan.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Feb. 20  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $192,000
240 West 23d Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; dining area, 12-ft. ceilings, common roof deck, south exposure; maintenance $539, 75% tax-deductible (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman &amp; Associates)  Greenwich Village  $300,600
74 Fifth Avenue (13th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,750-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, new windows, 2 exposures; maintenance $927, 53% tax-deductible (Brokers: Corcoran Group-Debra Kameros Co.)  Greenwich Village  $505,000
20 East 9th Street  (Brevoort East)  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, Washington Square Park view; maintenance $1,622, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group-Bellmarc Realty)  SoHo  $325,000
136 Grand Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 2,100-sq.-ft. open-loft co-op; elevator, 11-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $880, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Upper West Side  $245,000
895 West End Avenue (104th St.)  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; part-time doorman, maid's room, dining room, 3 exposures.
Hudson River view; maintenance $812, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: A.J. Clarke Realty)  BRONX  Gun Hill Road Area  $150,000
3322 Hone Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, attached 1-car garage, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,202 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  Wakefield  $157,000
4060 Lowerre Place  3-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family detached brick house; dining room, den, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, detached 2-car garage, 30- by 120-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: ERA/Best Match Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Ditmas Park  $300,000
417 East 19th Street  9-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, one-family detached, brick 1907 colonial ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, carriage house built over 2-car garage, landmark district, 60-by 120-ft. lot; taxes $2,376 (Brokers: Mary Kay Gallagher-Wilke Real Estate)  Midwood  $200,000
877 East 28th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family detached house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, hospitality suite in finished basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $967 (Broker: Maryl Real Estate)  Park Slope  $305,000
429-A 8th Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family, 3-story brownstone; dining room, parquet floor, original moldings and detail, 17- by 82-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Marilyn A. Donahue)  QUEENS  Forest Hills  $186,000
67-82 Exeter Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family attached town house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Sarah Jones Real Estate)  Rego Park  $200,000
102-09 63d Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family attached brick town house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, balcony, finished basement, 1-car garage, 20- by 134-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  STATEN ISLAND  Manor Heights  $180,000
201 Perry Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 1-car garage, 50- by 124-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/ DeSimone Realty)  Tottenville  $116,000
432 Manhattan Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached ranch; aluminum siding, full basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 85-ft irregular lot; taxes $600 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)


Ready to Sniff Out Trouble


Besieged Muslims Place Their Dignity Over Life
IF there were anywhere in Bosnia and Herzegovina where Muslims might favor an end to the war at any price, it might be Gorazde.
This old Turkish town on the Drina River has been as ravaged by Serbian nationalist guns as any major population center, more so even than Sarajevo.
Almost every building in the town has been hit by shells, many of them scores of times.
A walk through any district provides a panorama of gutted and burned structures.
Amputees and other walking wounded are a common sight.
With food scarce, the typical weight loss among adults runs 25 to 30 pounds, and the common appearance is one of deathly pallor.
But as they waited through the nights last week for the sound of aircraft engines that would herald the first American airdrop of relief supplies, nobody here seemed to want an accommodation to end the siege on the basis of anything like the status quo.


EDDIE HASKELL WINS AGAIN
Frank Rich approvingly describes David Letterman as a "post-modern" comic "who leaves jokes unfinished." By post-modernist standards, I suppose it's also irrelevant that, even when he finishes one, it's seldom funny.
CARL KERN
Topton, Pa.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
117.60
118.30
131.85
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6698
1.6380
1.6675
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2466
1.2595
1.1616
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4460
1.4540
1.7187
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Talking: Accounting; New Rules Sounding Alarums
IN the last few weeks, hundreds of co-ops, condominiums and homeowner associations have been discovering to their alarm that changes in accounting procedures recently adopted by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants could require them to annually compile a detailed study of how future capital projects are to be organized and financed.
The guidelines, which take effect for the reporting on any fiscal year ending after September 1992, will require footnotes on the anticipated useful life of common elements such as roofs, elevators or plumbing, and the likely replacement costs.
It will also require disclosure of how this work is to be paid for.
Though the guidelines were promulgated about 18 months ago, board members admit they never realized their full impact.


Data Bank/March 7, 1993


Nancy Cascella, Steven Flatow
Nancy Jane Cascella, an associate at the New York law firm of Hahn &amp; Hessen, was married yesterday to Steven David Flatow, a vice president and the director of marketing for NHL Enterprises Inc., the marketing division of the National Hockey League.
The Rev.
Walter F. Modrys officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Cascella, who is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is a daughter of Claire Cascella of New York and the late Ralph A. Cascella.
Her father was a lawyer in New York.
Her maternal grandfather, James J. Crisona of New York, a former State Senator and Queens Borough President, retired as a State Supreme Court justice.


Former President Competes for a Different Title


The Southern Strategist
STROM THURMOND AND THE POLITICS OF SOUTHERN CHANGE
By Nadine Cohodas. Illustrated. 574 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.


Opening Up on Health Care
People, get ready.
The health care debate is about to go public.
That means life will get more complicated for the President's Task Force on National Health Care Reform.
The White House's effort to keep secret the deliberations of Hillary Rodham Clinton and 400 others involved in the task force is unseemly, possibly illegal and wrong.
Secrecy is contrary to the spirit of the public forums planned by President and Mrs.
Clinton later this month on the gritty questions awaiting the voters and Congress.
Two of these questions are:


Recent Hijacking Highlights Aeroflot Disarray
The petty corruption that recently allowed an Azerbaijani to smuggle two hand grenades onto a domestic Aeroflot flight in an effort to get to New York is a small glimpse into the larger corruption that has followed the collapse of the Soviet Union.
After his surrender in Sweden two weeks ago, Tamerlane Musayev said he paid 30,000 rubles (about $54) to ground staff in Tyumen, in Siberia, to get his baggage aboard without a security check.
"They let you take the bag through another entrance and no one knows what's in it -- narcotics, weapons or something else," he said.
Mr.
Musayev said he also paid a bribe to get the ticket to St.
Petersburg.
Some travelers now pay bribes to use waiting rooms, to bump other passengers or even to get a drink from flight attendants.


The Executive Computer; Owners Love the Powerbook, but Also Have Complaints
THE scene would alarm the owner of any portable computer.
The technician at the local computer store looked at the tiny new Express modem from Apple Computer Inc. that he was preparing to install in a Mac Powerbook Duo and said: "I've never done one of these before. The tech over at the Berkeley store said his first one took him three-and-a-half hours."
Apple's new high-speed modem-on-a-chip is several months late to market, and expensive and difficult to install.
It also serves as an effective illustration of the refinements needed in the Powerbook, which has become not just the nation's most popular laptop computer but also the best-selling computer of all time.


Anyone Here Miss Anderson?
With the Nets ahead of the Denver Nuggets by 28 at one point tonight -- you knew New Jersey was coasting when Coach Chuck Daly rested his $1,000 loafers, sat down, and didn't say a word -- it was time to have some fun.
So on a Nets fast break, Drazen Petrovic, instead of going to the basket for an easy layup, glided to the left corner, near the 3-point line, and looked for the shot.
He got the ball and peeked to make sure he was behind the stripe.
When he saw that wasn't, Petrovic -- as he sometimes does -- took a few baby steps backwards just to be certain.


ARREST IS SHAKING JAPANESE LEADERS
In an unexpected move tonight that shook Japan's governing party, Tokyo prosecutors arrested Shin Kanemaru, until recently the country's most powerful politician.
They said that he had evaded millions of dollars in taxes on donations to secret political accounts that he controlled.
The arrest of the 78-year-old Mr.
Kanemaru seems bound to raise anew a series of scandals that the governing Liberal Democratic Party believed until tonight it had successfully buried.
But it is still unclear how severely it will hurt the party in general elections for the lower house of Parliament, expected sometime later this year.


Commercial Property: Marketing Americas Tower; A Silver Lining Behind the Cloud of Legal Troubles
NO one could conceivably call Americas Tower's ordeal a blessing.
The 50-story building, originally scheduled to open in late 1989, instead spent all of 1990 perched forlornly on 44th Street and Avenue of the Americas, half-built and naked to the elements, bankrupt.
Its Japanese and American owners, embroiled in legal battles, halted construction indefinitely.


Peace Waits, Dinner Doesn't
What this war-shattered nation needs is hospitals, schools, factories, roads.
What it's got instead is fresh pasta -- plates and plates and plates of it.
"All of our pasta -- and all of our ice cream -- is freshly made," said Graham Burgess, a safari-suited Englishman who owns two successful new Italian restaurants in Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital.
He expects a handsome return on an initial investment of about $250,000.


Old Role, New Setting


Love Triangle


Tech Notes; A Computer Cum Printer
IBM Japan and Canon have teamed up to make traveling computer users more productive than ever.
Japanese executives, using a new I.B.M. portable PC with a built-in Canon bubble-jet printer that went on sale in Japan in January, can already print out their letters and reports no matter where they are.
On Wednesday, Canon is expected to show the hybrid machine, the ThinkPad 550BJ, at a news conference in New York, and possibly to announce the availability in this country of a similar model later this year to be marketed by Canon Computer Systems Inc., a new subsidiary formed last year in Costa Mesa, Calif.


THE ART OF LOVE
How wonderful that Robert Gober and Donald Moffett were invited to participate as a couple in your special valentine piece, "The Art of Love" (Feb. 14).
Yes, Valentine's Day does tend to be an "annual cult spasm of heterosexual caring," but it need not be exclusively so.
Your issuing an invitation to Moffett-Gober and their acceptance of it has enriched us all.
KENDALL W. ZELLMER
Brooklyn


Live and Local
To the Editor:
It is not the job of the 50 or so full-time commercial classical radio stations to serve as an outreach service for a handful of orchestras.
Our task is simply to broadcast classical music to as many people in our respective markets as we can.


Monroe Is Proud Of Its Tradition
To the Sports Editor:
While the article "Good Stats, Good Grades and a Second Chance" (March 3) accurately reflects how one former drug abuser turned his life around at Monroe College in the Bronx, it has unfortunately created the wrong impression about the vast majority of our student body, many of whom feel maligned.


Distorting Language For Political Control
To the Editor:
Michiko Kakutani's analysis of the leftist politically correct campaign to twist the English language into a political weapon of the left wing's own design is quite accurate ("The Word Police," Jan. 31).
Yet, toward the end of the article is the out-of-place comment that "Jesse Helms and his supporters are up to exactly the same thing when they propose to patrol the boundaries of the permissible in art."


For Gay People, a Time of Triumph and Fear
After enduring weeks of vitriol in battles over homosexuals in the military, the St.
Patrick's Day parade and school curriculums, gay and lesbian New Yorkers are taking stock -- many hurt and angry, others scared but defiant.
"It's terrifying that outright bigotry against us is acceptable public discourse," said Howard Cruise, 48, a cartoonist who lives in Jackson Heights, Queens.
"People wouldn't dare talk about any other group, blacks or whatever, the way they talk about us."


POSTINGS: In the Waiting Room; Red Grooms For Openers
A small city itself -- fantastic, exaggerated, crazily angled and vividly hued -- the "Red Grooms at Grand Central" installation in the terminal's former waiting room would easily qualify as a milestone on its own.
But officials see it as an opening act for something bigger.
"What Red Grooms should do is begin to bring people back to the terminal," said Susan E. Fine, director of real estate for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which operates Grand Central through the Metro-North Commuter Railroad.
"And as they look through the art, what they're seeing behind it is a restored space of a quality we'd like to see the whole terminal look like."


Welcomed Back By Langstrath
GOING BACK TO A place is easy; going back in time is not, especially when the absence had been too long, in my case, some 30 years.
I had visited the Langstrath Valley, an offshoot of Borrowdale in the Lake District of England, as a teen-ager.
There I had learned the rough-edged art of clambering over mountains in smooth-soled boots -- pitting a young man's arrogance against the fissured rock faces -- and then spending the night in a billowy bell tent.
Returning recently, middle-aged, I was prepared for the worst: the region's pristine beauty would be gone, the streams polluted, the mountains,
my
mountains, signposted in neon.


Mutual Funds; The New Allure of the Long Term
INVESTORS finally have more money in bond and income funds than in money market funds as falling interest rates pushed yield-seekers into longer-term instruments.
The switch has big implications.
First, it brings more stability to the financial structure of corporations and governments by increasing the pool of long-term capital available to them, said Jeffrey M. Schaefer, research director for the Securities Industry Association, in New York.


Kara Mulcahy, Stuart Valentine
Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Mulcahy of Bernardsville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kara Keegan Mulcahy to Harry Stuart Valentine 4th, the son of Mr.
Valentine 3d of Annapolis, Md., and Elizabeth W. Gardiner of Far Hills, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Mulcahy, 23, is a media planner at Young &amp; Rubicam New York, the advertising agency.
She graduated from Villanova University.
Her father is the president of Mulcahy Realty in Bernardsville.


A Good Deal For K.K.R., But Will It Sell?
IS Henry Kravis, a man who gained wealth and fame through leverage and capital gains, actually embracing the idea of wealth through dividends?
That is the apparent aim of the latest dramatic restructuring of RJR Nabisco, the tobacco and food giant that Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company took private in 1989 in the biggest leveraged buyout ever and then took public again in 1991.


EDDIE HASKELL WINS AGAIN
Many of us have to deal with overgrown male adolescents all day long.
The last thing we want to do at night is watch, Jay, David
or
Arsenio. MARIA O'MEARA
Brookline, Mass.


Ann Marie Mara, Timothy Cacase
Ann Marie Mara, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wellington T. Mara of Rye, N.Y., was married there on Friday to Timothy Burke Cacase, a son of Mary Louise Cacase of New Rochelle, N.Y., and the late Robert Cacase.
The Rev.
John J. McCarthy performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection.
Mrs.
Cacase graduated from Marymount University.
She is a sales representative for Saks Fifth Avenue in New York.
Her father is the president and a co-owner of the New York Giants, the football team founded by the bride's grandfather, Timothy J. Mara.


Kathleen Tynan, Stephen Cooke
Kathleen Therese Tynan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Tynan 3d of Garden City, L.I., was married yesterday to Stephen Anthony Cooke, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David G. Cooke of Birmingham, England.
The Rev.
Stan Moseley performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Cooke is a computer analyst in the banking group of Lazard Freres &amp; Company, the investment bank in New York.
She graduated from Washington College in Chestertown, Md..
Her father is the president of William F. Tynan Jr.
Inc., in Garden City., a surety bond agency founded by Mr.
Tynan Jr., the bride's late grandfather.


BABY SITTERS' BOSS TELLS ALL
The baby sitters' boss fails to mention that year-end forms must be filled out in sextuplicate.
It's the one time all year that I used (remember it?) carbon paper.
Should the I.R.S. or you, the payer, make a mistake, it will take months of letters, phone calls and repeated copying of canceled checks (front and back) to straighten matters out.
Meanwhile, the I.R.S. will send two kinds of form letters: (1) incomprehensible and (2) threatening, sometimes over very small amounts.


Jodi Krasilovsky and David Miller
July wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Krasilovsky of Forest Hills, Queens, for their daughter, Jodi Robin Krasilovsky, and David Haim Miller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Miller of Houston.


CRYING WOLF OVER ELEPHANTS
Thank God that "elephants are sexy" (as indicated in Ray Bonner's article "Crying Wolf Over Elephants," Feb. 7).


Goodman Obeys Adage to Vote Early and Often
State Senator Roy M. Goodman took no chances when his legislative counsel and fellow Republican, Andrew S. Eristoff, faced a stiff race for election to the New York City Council two weeks ago.
He voted early and he voted twice.
According to unofficial returns, Mr.
Eristoff trailed Jane R. Crotty, a Democrat, by a mere 67 votes after the polls on the East Side of Manhattan closed on Feb. 23, which meant that the hundreds of absentee ballots would probably decide the race.


How Much Health-Care Reform Will the Patient Go Along With?
EVERY politician learned the lesson in 1991 and 1992: health care has become a source of great anxiety for the middle class.
Every politician learned to use the issue -- as Democratic poll takers and strategists constantly urged -- to show their empathy for the middle class.
But on health care, more than on any other issue, election-year politics is easy, policy is hard and the details can be downright killing.
The Clinton Administration's official working groups on health care are confronting the biggest challenge in domestic policy since the Great Society, and arguably since the New Deal.
The difficulties begin with the very basics: What does the public really want?


Hominy Still Has Its Place in American Cooking
SUMMER'S glorious crop of fresh corn on the cob from local farms and the year-round availability of fresh, frozen and canned sweet corn have rendered dried corn kernels obsolete.
But now there is renewed interest in this traditional winter staple, also called hominy.
The popularity of Mexican and Southwestern cooking has led to new appreciation for dishes based on dried corn.
In these cuisines, hominy seasoned with chili is simmered slowly for hours, often with the addition of pork or chicken, resulting in a hearty, lusty rib-sticking stew -- good cold-weather fare.


Corrections
Because of editing errors, an article in some editions last Sunday about improvements to the train station in South Norwalk, Conn., misstated the length of trains stopping there and, in one passage, misidentified the station section being restored.
Ten-car trains run on the line, but only seven cars can now be accommodated on the platform being extended.
As noted elsewhere in the article, it is the section serving eastbound trains that is being restored.


Guarding the Wild From Underground Markets
An important book has come to my attention.
It is one to share with gardeners because the subject is vital.
The book is "The Gardener's Guide to Plant Conservation" by Nina T. Marshall.
It was published by the World Wildlife Fund with The Garden Club of America.


As New Taxes Hover, the Rich Shrug
Jim Clayton, the owner of a Knoxville, Tenn., company that builds mobile homes, is one of the millionaires whose taxes would soar under President Clinton's economic recovery plan.
His personal tax bill would probably increase to $3.5 million, from the $2.8 million he paid last year.
But he's not complaining.
"The proposed tax increase is clearly livable," said Mr.
Clayton, whose net worth was estimated by Forbes magazine at $370 million.


Data Update
*4*NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Dec. 92
Dec. 91
Change
Starts
1,302
1,118
+16.5%
Completions
1,184
1,021
+16.0%
Sales
656
578
+13.5%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.72
7.83
8.98
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.03
5.11
6.10
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.59
7.71
8.83
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.87
4.97
5.89
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.56
7.74
8.90
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.59
4.66
5.88
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.77
7.93
9.04
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.55
5.65
6.53
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.31
3.36
4.41
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.49
7.53
8.02
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


On the Fast Track From the Courtroom to Death Row
LENELL GETER.
Clarence Brandley.
Randall Dale Adams.
Joseph Green Brown.
James Richardson.
And now Walter McMillian.
All were plucked briefly from obscurity when they were freed from Death Row or a life sentence after being cleared of the crimes for which they were convicted.
These cases and others raise a troubling question: how often do prosecutors and law officers bend the rules to make a case and railroad innocent people?


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions; American Academy and 70 West 45th St.
This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about New York's changing streetscapes.
American Academy
Q.
Our organization, founded in 1894, was at 101 Park Avenue from 1913 to 1964.
What kind of building was it? . . .
Jerry Max, American Academy in Rome.


Susan Novak Swain, Wilford Smith
Susan Elizabeth Novak Swain, the director of marketing of the Southport (Conn.) Racquet Club, was married yesterday to Wilford Alexander Smith, the managing director of the consulting group at Keiler &amp; Company, an advertising agency in Farmington, Conn.
The Rev.
Graham Horn, a minister of the American Fellowship Church, performed the ceremony in Chadds Ford, Pa., at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward T. Novak, the bride's brother and sister-in-law.
Mrs.
Smith, 37, graduated from the University of Virginia.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Novak of Plymouth Meeting, Pa.
Her father, formerly the director of scouting and player personnel for the Detroit Pistons, now scouts for the Minnesota Timberwolves, both of the National Basketball Association.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


A 'St. Joan' Among the Meatpackers
In the beginning the works of Bertolt Brecht came with the territory at Yale Repertory Theater in New Haven, where no fewer than three versions of "Mahagonny" were produced under the artistic direction of Robert Brustein, who even unearthed a chunk of Brechtian esoterica -- a comedy yet -- "Mister Puntila and His Chauffeur Matti" in 1977.
Following a 12-year Brecht-free spell under Lloyd Richards, save for a couple of student productions, Yale Rep is once more singing hosanna to the hell-raising spirit of the German playwright who goes on barging in and out of theatrical fashion, but never lags behind the real world's concerns.


The New Tatterdemalions
It's late winter in Soho.
On Wardour Street, a smart, young film producer wears six-inch platforms by Vivienne Westwood, a mink-cuffed dress unsnapped over shorts and leggings, a Jimi Hendrix T-shirt and a toque from the 1940's.
She towers over her aristocratic companion in his stretched-out black turtleneck, Oxfam charity vest and gray tweed pleated pants patched inside the thighs with glen plaid.
But somehow it all works: perhaps it's the old maroon cravat tied like a noose at his neck that does it.
He heads across town and picks up a bouquet of miniature black irises from the flower cart at Conran's, then meets his wife in Sloane Ranger territory, at Joe's Cafe, part of Joseph Ettedgui's shopping and eating empire.
She's wearing a flowing rayon dress -- very Kansas afternoon -- and bobby socks, brown penny loafers and a Pendleton jacket, her blond hair sprigging out around one of those rumpled-fabric elastics designed to hold ponytails when they're not worn around the wrist.


Right Next Door, But Worlds Apart
Shearson Lehman Brothers and Merrill Lynch.
They're next-door neighbors in lookalike towers in the World Financial Center.
And Shearson, in the taller tower, is the only firm on Wall Street that comes close to powerhouse Merrill, both in selling securities through a network of branch offices and in corporate finance, the business of creating new securities to be sold.
Still, the neighbors are different indeed.
Merrill has molded itself into a model of a diversified, profitable securities firm; Shearson aspires to do the same, but has much to overcome.
Merrill Lynch's growth has been largely internal, with no major acquisitions in the past 10 years; Shearson was a second-tier firm until it acquired Lehman Brothers, a leading trading and corporate finance firm, in 1984 and the troubled E. F. Hutton in 1988.
Merrill Lynch has chalked up record profits; Shearson foundered, and its parent, American Express, rescued it in 1990 with a $750 million cash infusion.
Now Shearson is rebuilding with an eye to becoming strong enough to stand alone.
Shearson is expected to return to profitability this year, but whether the profits will be great enough to repair its damaged reputation is uncertain.
At Shearson's Helm
The new faces in the executive suite at Shearson Lehman belong to two Lehman executives - J. Tomilson Hill, a 44-year-old investment banker, and Richard Fuld, a 46-year-old former trader.
Although they lack experience in Shearson's brokerage business, they have the support of American Express's chairman, Harvey Golub.
His mandate: Reduce costs and make Shearson profitable.
At Merrill's Helm
Merrill's two top executives - William Schreyer, the 65-year-old chairman, and Daniel Tully, the 61-year-old president and C.E.O. - both rose through the branch office system.
Mr.
Schreyer, who will retire this year, was a key executive when Merrill expanded into government securities and corporate finance in the 1970's Mr.
Tully, a sales specialist, has managed other parts of the business deftly in recent years.
At Shearson, Round Two of Cost-Cutting; Profitable Merrill Stays The Course
Shearson Lehman, having lost $116 million in 1992, a year of record profits for other Wall Street firms, is on the verge of its second cost-cutting drive in three years, seeking to eliminate duplicate overhead costs at the Shearson and Lehman Brothers parts of the firm.
No major line of business is to be abandoned.
In contrast to 1990, when the broker network was slashed, Shearson will continue expanding its broker staff, in the hope it will produce higher revenues without significantly higher costs.
If Shearson Lehman matches other financial companies' 5 percent to 10 percent cut in fixed costs, the savings would come to $120 million to $240 million, moving it closer to its profit goal of $500 million.
Profits will be greatly helped, analysts note, by the end of special charges for past mistakes, like the $245 million written off last year from an investment in Computervision.
Shearson Lehman executives are also looking for ways to reduce the cost of salaries and bonuses, perhaps by offering equity in the firm.
At Merrill, where employees own about 25 percent of the company, stock acquired on favorable terms is an important part of total compensation.
Merrill Lynch, flush with two consecutive years of record profits, aims to stay the course.
The cost control learned in the past few years put Merrill in good shape to weather the industry downturn that is sure to come eventually.
Its brokerage force has been stable at just under 12,000, but it has been able to reduce the number of support workers in the last six years.
Merrill has mostly avoided major miscues in its trading and corporate finance departments.
Its interest-rate and currency swaps business has emerged as a major profit center, making the compnay less dependent on commissions and corporate finance fees, both of which are high now, but could decline.
"We want to be a sales-driven company that is a dominant force in every product line" said Daniel Tully, president.
"Then we can be indifferent as to what the customer is buying, so long as they buy it from us."


A Bowling Film Shatters Illusions
"WHEN you hear thunder, God is bowling," is how a new seriocomic thriller, "Spare Me," by Matthew Harrison, begins.
The audience is confronted by a dark and twisted story, and initially wonders whether to laugh or cry.


Africa, From The Cold War To Cold Shoulders
HAVING been carved up and colonized by European powers and turned into pawns, knights and rooks on a cold war chessboard by the superpowers, Africa now faces a devastating new problem: indifference.
Writing in the current issue of Foreign Affairs Quarterly, Marguerite Michaels, a fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, noted that the disintegration of the Soviet Union "set America free to pursue its own interests in Africa -- and it found that it did not have any."


FEB. 28 - MARCH 6: Lou Gehrig's Disease; Discovery of a Gene May Speed Treatment
As a first date is to a marriage, so the discovery of a gene usually is to finding a cure for a disease: a very modest first step.
But last week, when researchers reported the detection of the gene behind Lou Gehrig's disease, a fatal disorder of the nervous system, the achievement was more akin to an offer of matrimony.
Not only do scientists already understand what the gene does in the body, they also have some notion now of how they might go about seeking the right therapy.
"It's very exciting to have a finding that offers an immediate and brand-new idea for experimental treatments," said Dr.
Robert Horvitz of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, an author of the report, which appeared in last week's issue of the British journal Nature.
But he warned that the possibility remains "a prospect of exploration."


Social Juggling in Washington
NAME: Ann Stock.
IDENTITY: The White House social secretary (at right with the White House pastry chef Roland Mesnier).


Alydeed Outsprints Fly So Free
It was booked simply as an allowance race with a purse of $31,000 "for 4-year-olds and upward," the eighth race on the program today at Gulfstream Park two races before the feature.
But it turned into a show-stopper as the Canadian star Alydeed outsprinted the onetime juvenile champion Fly So Free and tied the 36-year-old track record for six and a half furlongs.
This was a race created only two days ago to provide workouts for horses aiming at the sprints of spring, and it escalated quickly into a match between major winners making their 1993 debuts after layoffs of five months or more.


Scientists Try to Save Plane Pentagon Wants to Destroy
Scientists say a high-flying robot airplane developed for the military could revolutionize research into ozone depletion and other atmospheric problems, but they fear that it might be cut up and scrapped before it can ever be used.
The atmospheric researchers are urging Government science agencies to speed their efforts to evaluate and possibly acquire the large pilotless drone, called the Condor.
It was built by the Boeing Corporation for the Pentagon as a prototype spy aircraft.


A Sojourn On Cape Fear
WHAT surprised my two sons about the Cape Fear Museum in Wilmington, N.C., was that it was not, as they had fervently hoped, entirely (or even partly) devoted to the recent film "Cape Fear," a movie that has acquired for them a seductive fascination because it is rated R and they have not been allowed to see it.
But what surprised their parents about the 10 days we recently spent in Wilmington was that there was so much to do and see in this small coastal city to which we had come for reasons more connected with business than with pleasure.
We were unprepared for, and delighted by, Wilmington's variety and charm.
Situated near the point at which the Cape Fear River flows into the Atlantic Ocean, about 70 miles north of Myrtle Beach, S.C., Wilmington offers a wide enough range of activities to make it an ideal vacation spot for the sort of family in which each member has wildly incompatible ideas of what constitutes a good time.
Those who love the sun and the ocean will want to head straight to Wrightsville Beach, a few miles east of Wilmington on a scenic and (in spots) uncrowded spit of land that can be reached by causeway.
At the beach one can rent bicycles or go wind-surfing.
Deep-sea fishing expeditions and riverboat cruises depart regularly from the area.


'Daily Snapshot'
To the Editor:
As rewarding as both experiences can be, listening to music on the radio is fundamentally different from listening in the concert hall.
No music director I know of has yet devised a way to get the radio listener who catches an overture on the way to the grocery store to stay in the car for the concerto and symphony that follow.


BENEFITS
For the Wooster Group
TONIGHT -- A benefit concert for the Wooster Group, an ensemble that has developed and produced theater, film and video works for almost 20 years, will be held at 8 P.M. at Washington Irving High School, on Irving Place between 16th and 17th streets.
The Roches, Deborah Harry and Joey Arias will be among the performers.
Willem Dafoe, the actor, will be the master of ceremonies.
A reception will follow the concert at Grand NYC, 76 East 13th Street.
Tickets, $25, at the door.
Information: (212) 966-3651.
Work for the Disabled
MONDAY -- The Collegiate Chorale and Orchestra will perform Mozart's Requiem and Vaughan Williams's Magnificat and Five Mystical Songs, at Avery Fisher Hall.
The 8 P.M. concert, followed by a reception, will benefit the Dole Foundation for Employment of People With Disabilities.
Founded in 1984 by Senator Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, the foundation has awarded $4.5 million to more than 200 organizations in 40 states for work with the disabled.
Tickets, $100 for the concert and reception, from (202) 457-0318, or $22, $28, $35 and $45 for the concert alone, from (212) 875-5030.
Making Wishes Come True
MONDAY -- The Starlight Foundation, which seeks to grant the wishes of seriously ill children and provides entertainment in pediatric wards, will hold its annual black-tie fund-raiser at the Marriott Marquis.
Cocktails at 6 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing and entertainment.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 354-2878.
Music andArt's Anniversary
MONDAY -- The La Guardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts will celebrate its 50th anniversary with a benefit concert at the school, 65th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, behind Lincoln Center.
Ben Vereen, Eartha Kitt, Melissa Manchester and Peter Yarrow, all alumni, and the Alvin Ailey Dance Company and the Dance Theater of Harlem will be among the performers.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception will precede the 8 P.M. performance.
Dessert and champagne will be served afterward.
Tickets, $150 for the reception, concert and dessert; $100 for the reception and concert, and $65 for the concert alone, from (212) 529-8648 or (212) 714-7198.
Support for Summer Theater
MONDAY -- The annual benefit in New York for the Williamstown (Mass.) Theater Festival will be held at the Hudson Theater in the Hotel Macklowe.
The benefit, for the theater's summer season, will also celebrate the 200th anniversary of Williams College, the festival's home, and will be run by three Williams alumni: Elia Kazan, Stephen Sondheim and Fay Vincent.
Cocktails, at 6:30 P.M., will be followed by dinner, at 7:30, and entertainment, at 9.
Black tie.
Tickets for the reception, dinner and entertainment, $250, or for the entertainment alone, $25 and $50, from (212) 228-2286.
Analytical Evening
TUESDAY -- The Karen Horney Clinic, the psychoanalytic treatment, training and research center on East 62d Street, will benefit from a 5:30-to-7:30 P.M. cocktail buffet at the Dorset Hotel, followed at 8 by a performance of Wendy Wasserstein's "The Sisters Rosensweig" at the Ethel Barrymore Theater.
Tickets, $150 for the buffet and performance or $125 for the performance alone, from (212) 838-4333.
American Heritage Award
TUESDAY -- William H. Donaldson, the chairman and chief executive of the New York Stock Exchange, will receive the American Heritage Award from the Anti-Defamation League for "distinguished service to his country and state as well as his leadership in the world of finance." Cocktails at 6 P.M. at the Grand Hyatt will be followed by dinner and the presentation.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 490-2525.
For Forward Face
TUESDAY -- Michael Bolton will be the headliner at a benefit at the Ritz for Forward Face, a group affiliated with the Institute of Reconstructive Surgery at the New York University Medical Center thatraises money for reconstructive surgery for disfiguring birth defects.
Cocktails, at 6:30 P.M., will be followed by dinner and the show.
Tickets, $350 for a reception with Mr.
Bolton, dinner and the show; $250 or $175 for the general reception, dinner and show; $75 for the show alone and $50 for standing room, from Ticketmaster, (212) 302-7171.
Neighborhood Benefit
TUESDAY -- Civitas, an 11-year-old group concerned with zoning and planning issues relating to afforable housing on the Upper East Side and in East Harlem, will hold a benefit at Christie's from 6 to 8 P.M.
The cocktail party will include a preview of an auction of 19th- and 20th-century American paintings.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 996-0745, or at the door.
An International Evening
THURSDAY -- Founded in 1924 by John D. Rockefeller Jr., International House, on Riverside Drive at 123d Street, provides programs and housing for 700 graduate students from 85 countries each year.
Champagne and an auction of items, ranging from dinner at Manhattan restaurants to a stay in a hacienda in Ecuador to Caribbean sailings to construction services and art objects, start at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner at 8.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 316-8470.
A Passover Sampler
THURSDAY -- The associates' group of Dorot, which serves elderly homebound and homeless people, will hold a benefit featuring unusual Passover wines and foods at 6:30 P.M. at the Parsons Exhibition Center, 560 Seventh Avenue (40th Street).
The associates range in age from 25 to 45.
Tickets, $65, from (212) 769-2850.
Theater Club Anniversary
THURSDAY -- The Manhattan Theater Club will mark the 20th anniversary of its artistic director, Lynne Meadow, with a benefit performance of Stephen Sondheim's "Putting It Together," with Julie Andrews.
Champagne, at 6:15 P.M., will be followed by the 6:45 performance at City Center.
The evening will conclude with a tribute and dinner at 9:30 at Laura Belle, 120 West 43d Street.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 645-5590.
Dancing at the Library
THURSDAY -- The Young Friends of the New York Public Library will hold a black-tie dance from 9 P.M. to 1 A.M. at the main library.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 930-0730.
Party and Floral Preview
FRIDAY -- A cocktail buffet and dance amid the displays of the New York Flower Show at Pier 92, 55th Street and the Hudson River, will benefit the Horticultural Society of New York.
The benefit and preview will be held from 6 to 8:30 P.M.
The flower show will be open to the public March 13 through March 21.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 410-5008.
Children's Theater Inaugural
FRIDAY -- The Night Kitchen, a new children's theater founded by Maurice Sendak and Arthur Yorinks, will present a benefit performance of a new play, "So, Sue Me," by Mr.
Yorinks at the Performing Arts Center at the State University of New York at Purchase.
The theater's name comes from Mr.
Sendak's book "In the Night Kitchen." The play will last for about an hour and is appropriate for children.
Sigourney Weaver and Mr.
Sendak will be the hosts at a cocktail reception following the 8 P.M. performance.
Tickets, $125 for performance and reception, from (212) 207-7340, or for the performance alone, $17, from (914) 251-6200.
St.
Patrick's Celebration
SATURDAY -- The 1993 St.
Patrick's Charity Ball, which will benefit several groups in New York and in Ireland including the pediatric AIDS unit at Harlem Hospital and the Rehabilitation Institute in Dublin, will be held at the New York Hilton, starting with cocktails at 7:30 P.M.
Dinner, dancing and entertainment will follow.
Medieval Ireland is the theme, and the dress is black tie or costume.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 518-3042.
African-American Adoptions
SATURDAY -- Since the 1940's, Spence-Chapin Services to Families and Children has been a leading adoption service for black and interracial babies, placing 243 in permanent homes over the last five years.
A benefit reception for the organization will be held at 7 P.M. at the new Museum for African Art, 593 Broadway (Houston Street).
Mayor David N. Dinkins will present an award to H. Carl McCall, the president of the New York City Board of Education, for his leadership on issues affecting children.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 369-0300.
Choral Society at Arts Club
SATURDAY -- The St.
George's Chapel Choral will present "Strauss to Sondheim: An Evening of Arias and Ballads," a fund-raising concert at the National Arts Club, 15 Gramercy Park South.
A 6:30 P.M. buffet dinner will precede the 8:30 P.M. concert.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 460-0940.
Seeking Hospital Volunteers
MARCH 14 -- The New Leadership Group of the United Hospital Fund will hold a reception at the Drawing Center, 35 Wooster Street (Broome Street), to raise money for a campaign to recruit volunteers for hospitals and nursing homes.
Starting at 6 P.M., there will be wine, hors d'oeuvres, a raffle and jazz.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 645-2500, ext. 400.
Larry King Live in Brooklyn
MARCH 14 -- Larry King will return to his Brooklyn roots -- he grew up in East New York and Bensonhurst -- for a tribute to Jews who have emigrated from the former Soviet Union.
Mr.
King's parents came from Russia.
A black-tie dinner and dance, starting with cocktails at 5 P.M., will be held at the Manhattan Beach Jewish Center, 60 West End Avenue near Shore Boulevard.
The evening will benefit UJA-Federation programs to resettle Jews from the former Soviet Union.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 836-1101.
AIDS Benefit Concert
MARCH 14 -- Kathleen Battle, Midori, Jessye Norman and Pinchas Zukerman will be among the performers at a 7 P.M. concert at Carnegie Hall to benefit the Gay Men's Health Crisis.
A cocktail reception will be held at 5:30 P.M. at Carnegie Hall, and a dinner at Tavern on the Green will follow the concert at 9:45 P.M.
Tickets, $500 for the reception and concert, $1,000 for the reception, concert and dinner, from (212) 337-1913.


Addicts Use a Change in Law To Buy Needles at Pharmacies
Dozens of intravenous drug addicts in Connecticut said they bought syringe needles from pharmacies after the state made such purchases legal to help reduce the spread of H.I.V. caused by needle sharing, the Federal Centers of Disease Control and Prevention reported last week.
In the current issue of the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, the centers said that 51 drug addicts reported buying needles at pharmacies from August to October after the state changed laws to allow the purchase of up to 10 needles at a time without a prescription.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE OVERWORKED AMERICAN: The Unexpected Decline of Leisure, by Juliet B. Schor. (Basic Books, $12.) If your job seems to take up too much time, it's probably not your imagination.
The author, an economist, asserts that declines in both living standards and the power of unions have led to increased work hours, as has capitalism itself.
"Her book is systematic enough to satisfy the scholar, yet it is witty and engaging for the lay reader," Robert Kuttner said in The Book Review last year.
AT WEDDINGS AND WAKES, by Alice McDermott. (Dell, $5.99.) Three children observe the mysteries and rituals of the adult world while their mother, in the company of her three sisters and her stepmother, learns to cope with marital disappointment and middle age.
Last year our reviewer, Verlyn Klinkenborg, praised Alice McDermott as a writer who "has taught us to expect something extraordinary." In this, her third novel, "her sentences have been lengthened and elaborated, without becoming unduly sinuous, without losing their immediacy," he said.
"They have a harmony all their own -- grave, decorous, moving."


No Headline


Ever Hear Of San Francisco?
To the Editor:
Allan Kozinn's article "Who Pulled the Big Five's Plug?"  [ Feb. 7 ]  once more perpetuated the myth that there is something unique and superior about the Big Five orchestras, as opposed to what Mr.
Kozinn calls "small orchestras," including the San Francisco Symphony and the Pittsburgh Symphony.
These are, as he put it, only "solid, polished ensembles," not on the "level of the so-called Big Five."


Why We Need to Restructure the School Year
To the Editor:
The juxtaposition of two articles Feb. 20, one on last year's reading test scores in New York City elementary schools, and the other on Kids' Week, the February break begun last year, begs a comment.
I believe the break contributed to the decline.
I predict the scores will decline further next year, at least not recover.


Profile/Josephine Chaus; A Survivor for Seventh Ave.
After Bernard Chaus died a year and a half ago, garment industry watchers set about writing an obituary for his company, Bernard Chaus Inc.
Sales at the women's clothing business that bears his name were in a free fall.
Angry shareholders were suing, accusing the company of misrepresenting its stature and prospects in its 1986 initial public offering.
And with Mr.
Chaus's death, his company had lost its best salesman and biggest promoter.


Guarding the Wild From Underground Markets
An important book has come to my attention.
It is one to share with gardeners because the subject is vital.
The book is "The Gardener's Guide to Plant Conservation" by Nina T. Marshall.
It was published by the World Wildlife Fund with The Garden Club of America.


A Bombay Official Is Ousted After Failure to Curb Unrest
Two months after Bombay's worst anti-Muslim riots in decades, Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao today ousted the state official who had failed to control the unrest and sent his Defense Minister to take control of the city.
The official, Sudhakarrao Naik, was replaced by Sharad Pawar as the Chief Minister of Maharashtra State, of which Bombay is the capital.
Mr.
Pawar pledged to restore public confidence, which was severely shaken after the killing of more than 600 people.


Short Pieces At Monmouth College
DanceCompass will perform on March 27 at 8 P.M. at Monmouth College in West Long Branch in a program crammed with short pieces.
Among them will be the newly revived first section from "Three Chairs for Bach," a dance of musical chairs that makes manifest the playful qualities in the music.
Tickets are $9 through $18.
Reservations: (908) 571-3483.


Miss Cadwallader, John E. Shull
Leah Cadwallader, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Cadwallader of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to John Edward Shull, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry A. Shull of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Richard Mayberry performed the ceremony at St.
Francis Episcopal Church in Stamford, Conn.
Mrs.
Shull, 28, graduated from Southern Methodist University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and her husband make archeological appraisals for land-development projects; she is also a freelance landscape and garden designer in West Cornwall, Conn.
Her father is a furniture, fabric and lighting consultant in Greenwich.


Guarding the Wild From Underground Markets
An important book has come to my attention.
It is one to share with gardeners because the subject is vital.
The book is "The Gardener's Guide to Plant Conservation" by Nina T. Marshall.
It was published by the World Wildlife Fund with The Garden Club of America.


FEB. 28 - MARCH 6: Haitian Refugees; Clinton Defends Bush Policy To the Supreme Court And the Public
Last week the Clinton Administration defended its policy toward Haiti before two crucial audiences.
One was the Supreme Court.
Maureen E. Mahoney, a deputy solicitor general, argued that intercepting Haitians at sea and returning them without asylum screening, begun by the Bush Administration, was a legitimate exercise of the President's power to avoid a "humanitarian tragedy at sea."
The other audience was the public, which had heard candidate Clinton denounce the Bush Administration policy as cruel.
Speaking to reporters after the Court argument, President Clinton elaborated for the first time on his change of heart, saying that he now understood the need to deter thousands of Haitians from setting sail in leaky boats.
He even said "maybe I was too harsh in my criticism" of President Bush.


Six Convicted in Mob Case Despite Fear of Tampering
One juror's car windows were riddled with bullets.
Another juror was offered $500 to vote for acquittal.
And defendants made statements in open court aimed at influencing and intimidating the jury hearing the case against Robert Bisaccia and six other members of the Gambino crime family, the Attorney General's office says.
"I've never seen anything like it," said Robert T. Winter, director of the state's Division of Criminal Justice, whose office has begun a formal investigation into jury tampering in the racketeering trial of seven members of the Gambino crime family.
"It's a tribute to the jury that they were able to overcome it.


President Asserts His Opponents 'Lack the Vision' on the Economy
President Clinton, seeking to counter accusations that his Administration is more interested in spending money than in cutting the deficit, said today that his critics "lack the vision" to improve the economy.
In his weekly radio address, Mr.
Clinton followed through on an offensive he began on Friday, laying out the features of a spending plan that he says will put Americans to work and insisting that these programs are still needed despite signs that jobless rates are dropping and consumer confidence is up.


Repotted
His dreadlocks balled into a cap, Ben Roth dipped into a canvas sack and pulled out a T-shirt with a familiar, if antiquated, symbol of seven green blades.
He barked a sales pitch that rose above the French Quarter and a crowd staggeringly heavy with beer and beads.
"Happy Mardi Grass!" he yelled, making sure no one missed the hiss of the extra S. "Roll a fat one for Tuesday!"


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on page 3 of the Travel section today, describing security measures at airports and tourist sites after the bombing on Feb. 26 at the World Trade Center, includes outdated information on prospects for the reopening of the Vista Hotel and the trade center's towers, including the Windows on the World restaurant.
Hotel and Port Authority officials now say the buildings are expected to remain closed for at least a month.


Taxing Loss Gives Rangers a Deduction
O.K., maybe they were tired from playing back-to-back games with a plane ride in between.
Maybe they were emotionally drained by the drama of Friday night's victory.
Maybe they simply missed Mark Messier.
The Rangers arrived in Quebec with ready-made excuses.
And they needed those excuses, and then some, to explain a dreadful 10-2 loss to the Nordiques.
Quebec simply made a mockery of the New York team that, a mere 24 hours earlier, had put together perhaps its biggest victory of the season thus far -- a 3-1 triumph over the Pittsburgh Penguins.


Flooded Park In Kenya Reopens
Amboseli National Park, Kenya's most popular game reserve, reopened some sections late last month after heavy rains and floods forced it to close in January.
The three park lodges, some of which had been damaged by water or were inaccessible, also reopened.
But large parts of Amboseli are still impassable and officials cautioned that about one-third of the park roads were still under water, and that the park airstrip had not yet reopened.
Visitors driving through the 151-square-mile park should closely follow road diversion signs, said Anthony Ngugi, personal assistant to the deputy director for Kenyan Wildlife Services.
The best routes into the park at this writing are either through the Kilimanjaro Buffalo airstrip or by car through Namanga on the Tanzania border.
Mr.
Ngugi said the entrance road through Emali, on the Mombasa highway, was too muddy and treacherous even for four-wheel-drive vehicles.
Visitors have been getting stuck in the mud regularly.


Editorial Notebook; 'Cults,' Deconstructed
An old-time Chicago columnist, Sydney Harris, used to tease his readers with a word game that went like this: My religion is a denomination, yours is a sect and theirs a cult.
Americans who are repelled by the bloody shootout in Waco, Tex., would do well to keep that useful declension in mind.
Doubtless the Branch Davidians are a noxious "cult," and their leader, David Koresh (born Vernon Howell), a travesty of the Messiah he claims to be.
Even so, the group is part of a tradition that is thoroughly American and (perversions like the Branch Davidians aside) generally honorable.
An example is the Seventh-day Adventist Church, from which the Davidians split 30 years ago.


Pointing the Military In Positive Directions
Perhaps the idea of using the military for social purposes, advanced by Thomas Whitehead (Letter to the Editor, "Install Discipline, Install the Military," Feb. 21), can be extended in another, more positive direction.
Why not set up a crash program to train 50,000 of the 2 million men and women now in the armed services to become physicians?


Disguised


Mattingly's Boss, Not Steinbrenner
To the Sports Editor:
Claire Smith's column on Don Mattingly (Sports of The Times, Feb. 25) was a very good one.
There has been too much talk about the second coming of George Steinbrenner and the possible effect on the Yankees.
Mattingly is the team, and people better recognize this because if he is not recognized, the Yankees may lose him when his contract is up.


Sarah Ruth Lane, Jeffrey Sproha
Richard and Susan Lane of Wyckoff, N.J., have announced June 1994 wedding plans for their daughter Sarah Ruth Lane and Jeffrey Allen Sproha, a son of Andrew and Claire Sproha, also of Wyckoff.
Miss Lane, 21, is a student at Colgate University.
Her father is the president of the Diraje Corporation in Franklin Lakes, N.J., a home builder.


They're All Connected
When it comes to clothes, everybody knows who rules the roost.
Whatever big sister or big brother wants, their younger siblings do, too.
Right now, it's big, floppy bell-bottoms with polka-dot flares (the flouncier the better); down-on-the-farm smocks in old-fashioned gingham; pierrot blouses with floaty collars; denim overalls and nautical chinos; stripes for him and stripes for her.
In children's wear, everything's a look, from the most demure to the grunge-inspired.
In fact, what children want today, Mom and Dad do, too.
Call it a family affair.


Corrections
Weather listings in the Travel Watch column on Feb. 14 and 21 misstated averages for Vancouver.
They are a high of 44 degrees, a low of 34 degrees, P.M. humidity of 78 percent and 17 days of rain.


Thomas E. Weber, Tracey A. Drake
Tracey Ann Drake, the daughter of Karen Kendall Drake and Charles J. Drake, both of Farmington Hills, Mich., was married yesterday to Thomas Edmund Weber, the son of Sally A. and James A. Weber of Warren, Mich.
The Rev.
Philip Gentile performed the United Methodist ceremony at the Henry Ford Estate-Fair Lane in Dearborn, Mich.
Mrs.
Weber, 25, is a senior associate at Ernst &amp; Young in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is the president and chairman of Medar Inc., developers and manufacturers of factory inspection equipment in Farmington Hills.
Her mother is a program coordinator for the YWCA of Metropolitan Detroit.


Under the Spell Of Borneo's Majestic Rivers
IN THE DARKNESS BEfore dawn, it was hard for me to find the low-slung motor launch moored behind crates of provisions at Sibu, a sleazy port town on the Rajang River in Sarawak.
Once aboard, making the milk run to Kanowit and Kapit under a tar-black sky, it was even harder to see where we were going.
The boat had turned into a powerful current and was headed upstream toward Dyak long-house country, dodging stray logs and noiseless canoes.
But with the coming of the sun, the majesty of one of Borneo's longest rivers struck home, and the lure of this extraordinary island had captured another intruder.
The Rajang ran swift and chocolate brown, a wide, rough highway of churning water with banks sometimes muddy and scarred by loggers, sometimes deep green in jungle growth untouched by human life.
Intermittently, an oddly isolated missionary chapel loomed above the brush, or a rough-cut hamlet appeared, with one gas pump and a rickety dock where a Chinese merchant waited to collect his shipment of soap or lettuce or lawn chairs.
There were a few long houses, outposts of a forest culture of shared resources, each generation of Dyaks increasingly vulnerable to industrial exploitation.


EDDIE HASKELL WINS AGAIN
As an ardent David Letterman fan, I have a partisanship that clearly lies with the new CBS venture (Endpaper/Public Stages: "Eddie Haskell Wins Again," by Frank Rich, Feb. 7).
Letterman doesn't patronize and "schmooze" as other talk- show hosts do.
In an age of increased political and social balderdash, he is sober entertainment value.
LUISA V. GOLDSCHMIDT
Ossining, N.Y.


Repeat After Gooden: It's Only an Exhibition
The mood of electricity near the owner's box, nonstop all afternoon, suddenly took on an air of urgency in the third inning.
George Steinbrenner had moved to the edge of his seat, and it was hard to fight the sense that he was heading for the bat rack.
The Yankees had been strafing Dwight Gooden for what seemed like an hour, throwing a fat five on the scoreboard in the first inning and sending a steady flow of traffic to the bases in the third.
Steinbrenner with a bat?
It might have resulted in more than publicity.
It seemed possible that it could result in a hit.


Dog's Breakfast
Grown dogs don't eat breakfast.
Oh, I give my Bernese Mountain dogs, James and Heidi, a hard cookie apiece to shut up their racket in the morning, but they know that one session a day wolfing down their kibble is their lot, which is called their "meal."
That is why I wondered at this figure of speech in a report by Michael Wines in The New York Times during last fall's campaign: "Aides repackaged a
dog's breakfast
of White House trade and fiscal policies into an 'agenda for American renewal.' "


Sports of The Times; Heretical Baseball Confession
THE Truth Squad dragged me into the back room and starting roughing me up.
They turned up the volume on "This Week in Baseball," as they do in the stadiums before games.
Mel Allen at full volume.
I remember a Colonel Vincent and a Captain White and a Captain Brown pointing a flashlight in my pupils and warning me: "Don't ever call them playoffs again. They are League Championship Series. Got that?"
I staggered out into the street and vowed I would never again make that mistake.
Baseball was too pure, too sacred to hold something as cheesy as playoffs.
Playoffs are for seedy, second-rate sports like football, basketball and hockey.


Rita L. Wecker, David Brickman
Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin R. Wecker of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Rita Lynn Wecker, and David Meyer Brickman, a son of Dr.
Anthony Brickman of Lawrenceville, N.J., and Ravelle Brickman of New York.
Ms.
Wecker, 27, is a law student at Boston University.
She and her fiance graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, he cum laude.
Her father is the senior vice president for human resources at Morse Diesel International, a construction-management company in New York.
Her mother, Harriet Wecker, is an assistant vice president at the Financial Institutions Retirement Fund in White Plains.


Choral and Chamber Groups Offer Premiere Day for Westport Composers
TWO Westport composers are having premieres today: Edward Thompson will hear "I Am That I Am a Sailor" sung by the Fairfield County Chorale, and Roland Tec will attend the first performance of "Ever After" by the Chamber Music Society of Westport.
The music director of the Fairfield group, Johannes Somary, said that the group's 30th anniversary program will span five centuries and represent the breadth of styles of the Fairfield Chorale.
Also performing will be the Fairfield High School Choir under the direction of James Papp, vocal soloists Ellen Zimmer, Liz Norman, Grayson Hurst and Richard Holmes, and David Korevaar, pianist.
In addition to the work by Edward Thompson, written especially for the 4 P.M. program at the Norwalk Concert Hall, singers and orchestra will perform Beethoven's Choral Fantasy, which is where Mr.
Korevaar's keyboard participation comes in, along with works of Haydn, Purcell and Elgar.
The group's associate conductor, Rudolph Palmer, will also lead the Chorale in his own setting of Psalm 117, "Laudate Dominum." For reservations, call 222-8668.


Staten Island Puts Feelings On Parade
Casting aside the political furor that has enveloped the St.
Patrick's Day Parade in Manhattan, thousands of people on Staten Island embraced tradition with horns, kazoos and flowing kegs of beer yesterday during New York City's second largest such parade.
With the march in Manhattan facing the threat of protests from a gay group excluded from the celebration, people on Staten Island said they refused to allow politics to spoil what many there saw as a simple celebration of Irish ethnicity.


Douglas Marland, 58, a Recipient Of 3 Emmies for TV Writing, Dies
Douglas Marland, a head writer on major television soap operas who won three Emmy Awards, died on Saturday at the age of 58 at a hospital in Norwalk, Conn.
He resided in Fairfield County, Conn.
His death was caused by complications from abdominal surgery, his family said.


Henry Giniger, 71, Correspondent Who Chronicled Postwar Europe
Henry Giniger, a longtime correspondent for The New York Times who spent two decades chronicling the rise of postwar France before moving on to report from dozens of other countries, died yesterday at a hospital in Paris.
He was 71 and lived in Boulogne, a suburb of Paris.
He had lung cancer, said his daughter, Marianne Moncrief of Westfield, N.J.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a list of dividend meetings this week: TUESDAY
CRI Ins Mtg Assn Inc
CRI Liquidating REIT Inc
Fleetwood Enterprises Inc
Fluor Corp
Household Intl Inc
Oklahoma Gas &amp; Elec Co
Tri-Contl Corp WEDNESDAY
CBI Inds Inc
Green Mountain Power
Handelman Co
Heinz H J Co
Penney J C Inc
Southern New England Telcom
United Indl Corp
Wallace Computer Svcs Inc THURSDAY
Atlantic Energy Inc NJ
Idaho Power Co
Integon Corp Del
Lincoln Natl Corp
RLI Corp
Trinity Inds Inc
Vestaur Secs Inc
Wal-Mart Stores Inc FRIDAY
Aluminum Co Amer
Energy Corp
General Cinema Corp


From a St. Patrick's Parade Loyalist, Support for Gay Marchers
WHETHER a parade memorializing Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. can be ordered to include marchers from the Ku Klux Klan is just so much contrived supposition, Paul O'Dwyer suggested the other day.
"I can't conceive of the Klan wanting to march side by side with American blacks," the former City Council President said.


Why Conservatives Will Keep Carping
To the Editor:
"Mr. Clinton's Captious Critics" (editorial, Feb. 23) argues that Republicans should not waste their time taking "abstract potshots at government's legitimate role in American society." But it is the difference in how Republicans and Democrats -- or more precisely conservatives and liberals -- define the legitimate role of the Federal Government that explains much of the Republican Party's opposition to President Clinton's tax and fiscal policies.


Stanley's on Standby With a Shoo-In Look
No matter how many spring-training home runs Mike Stanley hits, how many pitchers privately wish he catches their games or how many strange statements Matt Nokes makes about possibly being traded to a West Coast team, Nokes is almost assured of being the Yankees' starting catcher when the season begins.
Unless the Yankees somehow trade for Mike LaValliere of the Pittsburgh Pirates, or Manager Buck Showalter gallantly pushes Stanley ahead of Nokes, the club will open with their same alignment from last season.


Japan Must Shoulder More of the World Burden; For Larger U.N. Role
To the Editor:
"Let Japan Choose Peace" (editorial, Feb. 21) regrettably mischaracterizes Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali's message during his February visit to Tokyo.


Great White Shark Has His Bite Back
Greg Norman didn't produce any final-round pyrotechnics today at the Doral Ryder Open, but in its own way his carefully shepherded four-stroke victory was as impressive as any of the all-or-nothing charges with which he has built his image.
Playing well within himself, Norman shot a two-under-par 70 to close out a remarkable 72-hole performance of 23-under-par 265, shattering the tournament record by five strokes over a perfectly conditioned and defanged Blue Monster course.


Association Pushes Outdoor Ads
The Outdoor Advertising Association of America is introducing its first trade campaign, hoping to stir interest in out-of-home advertising.


GAY SAILOR TELLS OF A 'LIVING HELL'
A shipmate of the gay sailor who was beaten to death last October said today that some of the homosexuals assigned to the U.S.S.
Belleau Wood faced regular, sometimes daily harassment.
The shipmate, Richard Eastman, 21, of Kalamazoo, Mich., identified himself as a homosexual.
Speaking at a news conference organized by gay and veterans groups, he described life aboard the ship as a "living hell" for homosexuals.
Mr.
Eastman said that the day after his shipmate, Allen R. Schindler, was beaten to death, he was taken off the Belleau Wood for his own safety and reassigned to the ship's base in Sasebo, Japan.
He was discharged from the Navy on Jan. 22.


New Anderson X-Ray Picture Key to Nets' Playoff Picture
Life without Kenny.
It's a possibility the Nets are beginning to accept.
And today, they'll know if life without Kenny means for the rest of the season.
Today is when Nets guard Kenny Anderson will have new X-rays taken on his broken left wrist.
Coach Chuck Daly, advised by his medical staff, said that the first set of X-rays, taken soon after the Feb. 28 collision with Knicks guard John Starks, weren't "real good."


Riddick Bowe On Underwear
Three months ago, when Riddick Bowe kept mentioning Fruit of the Loom, it was predicted that the apparel marketer would sign the heavyweight boxing champion as an endorser.
Sure enough, Mr.
Bowe and his son are starring in a television commercial that begins running tomorrow for the brand by Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago.


Florida Officials Scramble to Save Air Base Damaged by Hurricane
Once a driving force in South Florida, Homestead Air Force Base has been closed since Hurricane Andrew damaged or destroyed most of its buildings last August.
Now it is on a list of military bases facing closings, and Florida lawmakers are making one last major effort to bring it back to life.
Senator Bob Graham met on Friday with Pentagon officials to discuss the plan to close the base and ways to include Florida's Congressional delegation and members of the public in the military's discussions, an aide to the Senator, Samuel R. Shorstein, said today.
Mr.
Shorstein said that Mr.
Graham hoped that the base would be rebuilt.


He'd Rather Quit Than Appeal
While maintaining his innocence, BEN JOHNSON chose yesterday to quit track rather than appeal the lifetime ban imposed on him by the International Amateur Athletic Federation for failing a drug test a second time.
His lawyers presented the outline of what they contended was a winnable case at a news conference in Toronto, then read a statement signed by the absent 31-year-old Johnson.


Eleanor Sanger Dies; TV Producer Was 63
Eleanor Sanger, a television producer who won several Emmy awards for her work on Olympics broadcasts for ABC Sports, died yesterday at her home in West Tisbury, Mass.
She was 63 and also lived in Vail, Colo.
The cause of death was cancer of the uterus, said her son, Robert P. Riger of Manhattan.


Talks With Leader of Sect Have Stalled
A week after the bloody shootout at the Branch Davidian compound near here, negotiations are stalled, tempers are fraying and the authorities said they appeared to be going backward, not forward, in efforts to resolve their standoff with besieged cult members.
"I call them disappointing at this time," Bob A. Ricks, the spokesman here for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said of negotiations with the cult's leader, David Koresh.
"We are going through a very frustrating and disappointing period in the negotiation process."


Abroad at Home; Elements of the Cure
Redesigning American health care, as Hillary Rodham Clinton and her colleagues are now trying to do, is a task daunting in its complexity.
Those of us outside the debate find it hard even to grasp the terms: managed competition, global budgeting and the rest.
But there are some elements, easily understood, that I think must be part of any reform plan if it is to have a chance of success.
I mean success in both the political sense of being enacted by Congress and the ultimate sense of working well.


INSIDE
U.N. Force in Bosnia Weighed
If there is a truce in Bosnia, the United Nations Secretary General says he expects the Security Council to send a large new force empowered to use military might.
Page A8.
A Top Economist for Clinton
Joseph A. Stiglitz, a Stanford University professor, has been selected for the remaining seat on the Council of Economic Advisers.
Page D1.
New Outlook for Kennedy
For Senator Edward M. Kennedy, this is a hopeful era, with a new wife, a new President and new interest in his pet issue, health care.
Page B9.


Music Retailers Endorse Anti-Theft System
An endorsement by a group of music retailers has settled an occasionally nasty contest between two makers of electronic anti-shoplifting systems.
The National Association of Recording Merchandisers recommended on Friday that its members -- 850 retailers and suppliers -- use a system made by the Sensormatic Electronics Corporation of Deerfield Beach, Fla.


Miami Officer's Trial Delayed In Shooting That Set Off Riots
A State District Court of Appeals today delayed the racially charged retrial of a Miami police officer on manslaughter charges so it could rule on whether the case should have been moved here in the first place.
The trial, which was scheduled to begin Monday with jury selection, had been moved here by the trial judge, W. Thomas Spencer of Dade County Circuit Court, because Tallahassee had a large black population from which to select a jury.
The trial had first been moved from Miami to Orlando, and then here.
Retrial Moved Twice
John Hogan, a Dade County assistant state attorney who is leading the prosecution of the case, said he feared that Judge Spencer, in deciding to move the case from Orlando to Tallahassee on the basis of racial demographics, had flawed the case enough to result in a conviction being overturned on appeal.


A Kmart's Full Aisles Don't Please Everyone
"They're coming from all over," marveled Randy Weiden, owner of a furniture store at the shopping complex in Fresh Meadows, Queens.
"They're coming from Astoria. They're coming from Rosedale. They're coming from Whitestone. They're coming from Brooklyn. They're coming for the Kmart."
It has been more than four months since the Kmart moved into what used to be a Bloomingdale's, since it ushered into Queens the style of one-stop discount shopping found almost everywhere else in America.


After 3 Decades Working in Senate, Kennedy Gets a Turn for His Agenda
After three turbulent, sometimes triumphant and often troubled decades, Senator Edward M. Kennedy is entering a singularly calm, optimistic time in his life.
For the first time since he accumulated real power in the Senate, he has a President as an ally.
He has been a committee chairman during four Administrations, but he often fought Presidents Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan and George Bush over domestic policy.
Today, his enthusiasm for President Clinton's vision seems unbounded.
In a recent interview, he compared the new President to his own brother, John F. Kennedy.


Bo Doesn't Know First Base
The White Sox's experiment with BO JACKSON at first base will continue despite his three errors on two consecutive plays on Saturday.
"It's not a one-day shot," Manager GENE LAMONT said.
"I think Bo knew it's not as easy as it looks. It's just somewhere he can play some. The one thing I liked was he went right after it out there quick."


Small Farmers, Global Reach
You don't have to be French to get mistyeyed over farmers.
Large numbers of Japanese and even Americans are susceptible too.
Around the world, in a variety of cultures, farmers, especially family farmers, are prized as the ultimate custodians of national identity, of tradition and of the soil.
Yet trade theorists, consumers and exporters often see farmers as a powerful, entrenched special-interest group.
They are blamed for artificially raising food prices at home and for obstructing trade.
For decades, trade negotiators did their best to avoid agricultural issues whenever they could.


Books of The Times; Did a German Scientist Prevent Catastrophe in World War II?
Heisenberg's War The Secret History of the German Bomb By Thomas Powers Illustrated. 608 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf.
Thomas Powers's important new book, "Heisenberg's War: The Secret History of the German Bomb," is a detailed account of the race to develop an atom bomb during World War II as seen from both the German and Allied sides.
It is full of fascinating characters, deeds of heroic daring and graphic accounts of important developments in modern physics.


Suburban Superstores Come To New York City Shoppers
Some of the nation's largest discount retailers -- the cavernous department stores, warehouse clubs and super supermarkets that for decades have shaped the shopping landscape of America's suburbs and small towns -- are coming to New York City.
With the price of the city's real estate falling and the appetite for variety and value growing, these discounters are now discovering that New York, like other big cities, represents the last untapped frontier for their low-margin, high-volume wares: more than seven million consumers and such a dearth of these stores that many New Yorkers drive to the suburbs to find them.


Dance in Review
Wendy Perron Dance Company Gould Hall
A 10th-anniversary program by the Wendy Perron Dance Company on Thursday night had some fine ingredients.
Ms.
Perron's dancers were uniformly fluid, articulate movers with welcoming presences.
The production elements were all top-notch.
Carol Mullins's lighting was dramatic yet sensitive, and Katrin Schnabl, Deborah Brothers and Lisa Powers contributed imaginatively handsome costumes.
But until the last of the program's four pieces, there was the sense of something missing.


Critic's Notebook; A Lively and Long Friendship Is Over
Two weeks ago, Salsa Meets Jazz, the long-running series at the Village Gate that for more that 20 years brought together some of the biggest names in Latin music and jazz, shut its doors.
The closing wasn't greeted with much public commentary or hordes of television cameras.
Salsa Meets Jazz no longer had a fancy profile; after so many years, it had become low key.
Pairing the finest salsa orchestras with the finest jazz musicians, it let them find common ground.
The common ground often shook, and the shows worked, week after week.
Like all things that are consistent, Salsa Meets Jazz had been taken for granted.
It shouldn't have been, and the program's death, from rising costs and a dwindling audience, makes the city just a little more musically impoverished.
Under the guidance of Symphony Sid Torin, a disk jockey, and Jack Hooke, a music-business entrepreneur, the series began as a straight Latin music show and then evolved into something special.
Over the years -- it took a decade off, between 1970 and 1980 -- it had provided an extraordinary meeting of cultures and some of the best music the city could offer.
All the great Latin bands came through, from Oscar D'Leon, the James Brown of Latin music, to Eddie Palmieri, the music's crazy, brilliant uncle; Mario Bauza, Tito Puente, Celia Cruz, El Gran Combo and Mongo Santamaria all showed up.


Fourth Arab-American Is Arrested by Israelis
The Israeli security authorities have arrested a fourth Arab-American on suspicion of links with the militant Islamic group Hamas, officials said today.
The suspect was detained several days ago, a few weeks after arriving from the United States, and is being questioned about involvement in anti-Israeli attacks, a defense official said.


Starks Is Seldom Quiet Before Storm
His face was bloody, his nose was broken and his head was pounding like a bass drum.
But anyone who knows John Starks was not surprised when he returned to the Knicks' game with the Utah Jazz last Thursday wearing a mask -- and shooting 3-pointers instead of silver bullets.
Starks made his first six shots wearing the mask, electrified the Madison Square Garden crowd and finished with 22 points to help the Knicks win.


Compaq to Show New PC's And Cut Prices Even Further
The Compaq Computer Corporation intends to announce several new desktop and notebook-size computers on Monday, each with more features and in some cases at prices lower than those on previous models of its machines.
Analysts said the aggressive moves by Compaq were likely to touch off another round of price cuts by the International Business Machines Corporation, Dell Computer and other companies in the intense battle for market share that Compaq started in the personal computer industry last June.
The pricing war, along with a race to package more software, services and other features with their machines, has forced companies to cut costs as rapidly as possible as their profitability eroded or, in some cases, evaporated.


Review/Fashion; In Sober London, Plenty of Spirit
The recession that has clobbered the British economy has, of course, left its mark on the fashion industry, but it hasn't squelched its spirit.
It has reduced the number of costly fashion shows as well as the size of the individual collections, most of which exude a strong feeling of reality.
The collections here kicked off the March round of fall shows that moves next to Milan, Italy, then on to Paris and finally to New York.


Accounts
*
Orion Pictures Corp., Century City, Calif., to J. Walter Thompson/West, Los Angeles, to handle the motion picture company's theatrical division account.
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Los Angeles, had handled the account before Orion filed for bankruptcy.
Thompson/West, which was selected after Orion emerged from bankruptcy, will be responsible for placing all network and spot commercials.
Billings were not disclosed. *
New Amsterdam Co., New York, to Grybauskas Beatrice, New York, to handle the brewer's account, previously at Frankfurt Gips Balkind, New York.
Billings were estimated at more than $1.5 million.


Testimonials of satisfied customers provide two agencies with a way to reach a skeptical audience.
PSST. Want to star in an advertising campaign?
No problem.
Just dash off a fawning letter to a company you have patronized recently.
Keep the writing style informal, maybe mention a bad experience you had with a competitor and enclose some colorful personal details.


Israeli Army Says U.N. Official Failed to Aid Jew
Israeli officials said today that they were considering a complaint to the United Nations about one of its officials, who was accused by the army of having failed to alert soldiers after seeing a crowd stone and shoot an Israeli motorist to death in the Gaza Strip.
The accusation has further soured an already uneasy relationship between the army and United Nations relief workers who provide social services, clinics and other programs for Palestinian refugees in Israeli-occupied territories.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Structure; Aided by Computers, Repairs Are Charted
It looks like an organizational chart for a multinational conglomerate, laid on its side.
It is the map to steer the small army of engineers, electricians, carpenters, plumbers and laborers that is pressing to put the World Trade Center back together, so the complex can be reoccupied, the Port Authority hopes, in three and a half weeks.
The chart is part of an intricate management technique that is guiding the enormous repair job, a process called the "critical path method." Several times a day, a personal computer spawns a fresh map, which Port Authority managers and their contractors use not only to figure out where they stand, but also to determine what to do next, where to expect roadblocks and where to concentrate their efforts.


THE TWIN TOWERS: Reporter's Notebook; Delaying Search for Missing Man
With massive slabs of concrete dangling, as one engineer put it, like the blades of guillotines, workers will probably not be able to dig for several days where a missing man may be entombed in the rubble that was the World Trade Center's garage, Port Authority officials said yesterday.
The instability of the garage is also hampering investigators.
They must satisfy themselves with brief, nerve-wracking forays into the bomb crater and with examining bits of debris brought out by workers lowered into the hole on a scaffold.


Retired Federal Judge To Join Times Co. Board
A.
Leon Higginbotham Jr., a recently retired senior judge of the United States Court of Appeals in Philadelphia, has been nominated for a position on the board of The New York Times Company by Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, the chairman and chief executive.
Judge Higginbotham's nomination, if approved for a one-year term by board members later this month and by shareholders at the company's annual meeting on April 13, will increase the number of directors to 14.
A board vacancy was created in December by the retirement of William R. Cross Jr., president of the Jacob and Valeria Langeloth Foundation.


Bubble Could Blow Up on Big East
Seton Hall had a game, and a day, worth slipping into a videotape machine sometime in the 21st century, when the current Pirates reach middle age.
At the same time, and in the same place, St.
John's had a game to include in this morning's trash.
Providence can ride to Madison Square Garden on a cloud.
Boston College has three more days to rebuild its shattered confidence.


Fallon McElligott Loses Creative Star
Pat Burnham, the award-winning creative director at Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis, has left the agency to explore becoming a commercial director.
During his 11 years at Fallon, Mr.
Burnham worked on accounts like Porsche, Lee Jeans, and Timex.


Japan Must Shoulder More of the World Burden; Noble Experiment
To the Editor:
"Let Japan Choose Peace" (editorial, Feb. 21), does not go far enough.
Not only the United States, but also the world has an interest in leaving Japan's "peace Constitution" intact.


Ranger Remedy for Rout: Laugh a Bit and Forget It
It was laughable and goaltender Mike Richter knew it.
That's why he could chuckle afterward.
That's why he could walk away from a disastrous game that obviously didn't help his recently restored confidence.
Ron Smith, the Rangers' coach, left Richter in goal for all three excruciating periods Saturday night at Le Colisee in Quebec.


CLINTON MAY USE DIVERSITY PLEDGE TO REMAKE COURTS
With a near-record number of vacancies on the Federal bench and the likelihood that Congress will pass a measure to create dozens more, President Clinton is expected to name hundreds of judges over the next four years and dramatically alter the judicial landscape after 12 years of Republican appointments.
Between them, Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush appointed 584 judges to the Federal courts -- the Supreme Court, the Federal district and appellate courts and special panels like the Court of International Trade.
But of the 828 Federal judgeships, 115 are now vacant.
Because an average of 10 judges are retiring each month, experts say Mr.
Clinton is likely to have the chance to fill at least half the Federal judgeships before his term is out.


Why Conservatives Will Keep Carping; No G.O.P. Majority
To the Editor:
In "Grand Old Hypocrisy" (letter, Feb. 22), Elaine Hendrie makes an error in her criticism of the Republicans in Congress.
After criticizing the G.O.P. response to President Clinton's Feb. 17 economic policy message, she asks, "Why didn't they think about these things when they were the majority in Congress?"


A Spotless Courier Dispatches Ferreira
They met in the desert at high noon, but it was no showdown.
With solid groundstrokes under a searing sun more invasive than his opponent's arsenal, Jim Courier turned his final-round duel with South Africa's Wayne Ferreira into a simple three-set rout at the Newsweek Champions Cup.
Courier's brisk 6-3, 6-3, 6-1 mastery of the 21-year-old Ferreira not only rendered the three-of-five-set format gratuitous, but further tightened his grasp on the No. 1 ranking in the world.
The 14th-ranked Ferreira lamented his inability to exert any leverage in the final: a strain to his serving shoulder, an ailment he inflicted on himself during the pre-match warm up, stopped him from getting a good grip on his service games.
And Courier, converting 10 of the 11 break points he gained against Ferreira, took over from there.


BRAZIL IS EVICTING MINERS IN AMAZON
Determined to reverse a gold rush of 11,000 miners into the Amazon lands of the Yanomami Indians, the Brazilian police and military have evacuated 3,000 miners by air in the last 10 days, many of them forcibly.
The operation, which continued today with helicopters and transport planes, is the second drive since 1990 to protect Brazil's Yanomami, often called the largest Stone Age tribe in the Americas.
Long isolated from the outside world, the 20,000 Yanomami of Brazil and Venezuela are threatened by imported diseases and pollution that cripples their hunting and fishing.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
None  Tuesday
None  Wednesday
None  Thursday
Weekly Jobless Claims Retail Sales Feb.  Friday
Business Inventories Jan.  Producer Prices Feb.


THE TWIN TOWERS: Displaced Tenants; Landlords Offer Short-Term Space for Low Rental Rates
To the dismay of landlords who had hoped to turn a profit from renting temporary space to companies displaced from the World Trade Center, many of those tenants are finding space for rates as low as $15 a square foot a year, or roughly direct operating costs for many office buildings.
And the chances for profits are growing dimmer.
Last Wednesday, the Real Estate Board of New York set up a clearinghouse to help place displaced tenants into some 3 million square feet of space that various landlords have said they would make available at cost.
Olympia &amp; York has already licensed space ready for occupancy at cost at four buildings to tenants like Aetna Insurance, Sumitomo Bank, and the law firm Thacher, Proffitt &amp; Wood.


Children's TV Debate Is Revived
Starring a manic scientist with spiky hair and a laboratory that looks like a set for making music videos, "Beakman's World" is in many respects the kind of television show that advocates of children's educational programming have been clamoring for.
Produced for commercial stations, it tries to answer questions like "What are dreams?" and "Why is the sky blue?" by blending scientific demonstrations with fast-paced visual effects.
The program is shown on 225 stations, but its commercial progress has been slowed because many stations relegate it to times like 6:30 on Saturday morning.


METRO DIGEST
BOMB SUSPECT'S PATH TO THE PRESENT
The suspect in the World Trade Center bombing had a childhood common among Palestinians: rudely interrupted by war.
At two months old, Mohammed A. Salameh became a refugee.
A1.
Relatives who still live in the town where the suspect was born say they are shocked by the charges against him.
B4.


Violently, Drug Trafficking in Mexico Rebounds
Without knowing of its reputation, without hearing it called "Little Medellin," it might be difficult to recognize this bustling provincial capital as the historic center of Mexico's drug trade.
The young men in dark glasses riding in chromed pickup trucks are harder to pick out these days in the traffic of businessmen's sedans and farmers in from the countryside.
Where the city's three rivers intersect, construction has started on a $300 million project to reclaim the floodlands for a glitzy sprawl of shopping centers, residential developments and business parks.


Russian Subs, or Cold-War 'Ghosts'?
The cold war is over, but one of its mysteries endures off Sweden's coast, where the navy detected foreign submarines prowling in its waters at least three times last year.
The incursions fit into a decade-long pattern, and officials here said they had no reason to believe that the incursions had stopped.
The navy is now equipping its anti-submarine fleet with more advanced torpedoes and has given it additional freedom to fire on intruders without warning.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Jose Melendez, pitcher.
National League


South-Central L.A.: Friendly Place for a Run
Los Angeles was host to a sanguine marathon today.
On some of the same streets where last spring there was looting, arson and beatings, officials today played Randy Newman's "I Love L.A." at least 20 times, and none of the 19,000-plus runners or the gallery in the riot-torn areas could dispute it.


Islanders Knock a Peg From Under Capitals
Travis Green, hardly a bully, was already in the locker room, ejected for instigating a fight.
The game was tied, the hour was late, and Al Arbour, the Islanders' coach, needed a replacement for Green, the rookie center of the Kid Line.
So he sent out Benoit Hogue, who's not a kid anymore, merely in his prime at the age of 26.
Hogue scooped up a loose puck in the slot and whipped a wrist shot past Don Beaupre with 4 minutes 14 seconds left in the game to give the Islanders a 3-2 victory over the Washington Capitals.


Review/Television; For Young Audiences, Reality in the Afternoon
In the Reagan-Bush era of deregulation, one of the more memorable, and notorious, sociopolitical observations came out of the Federal Communications Commission, from a commissioner who insisted that television was just another household appliance, much like a toaster.
Why then burden poor broadcasters with perhaps inhibiting notions of responsibility?
A definitive sign that things are changing under the Clinton Administration was last week's F.C.C. announcement that broadcasters could no longer count programs like "The Flintstones" and "The Jetsons" as "educational and informational" programming.
That sound emanating from television executive suites across the country is one communal "Gulp!"


Looking for Alliance, Clinton Courts the Congress Nonstop
Senator James M. Jeffords, a Republican from Vermont, was sitting in a hotel room in Damascus, Syria, one evening last month when President Clinton called to thank him for voting for the family leave bill.
"It was unbelievable," Mr.
Jeffords said.
"No one would believe that the President would call me in Damascus. No matter how long we've been around the Hill, there's nothing more exciting than a call from the President."


Clash Over Congressional Cash
Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, was in there pitching for the status quo last week.
That's an allowable position for a conservative pol, if only the status quo in question were not a corrupt, outdated and harmful one.
As the G.O.P.'s designated hitter on all issues pertaining to campaign finance reform, Mr.
McConnell told the Senate Rules Committee not to bother about the talk that senators spend too much time raising campaign money.
It's a point many senators would probably dispute if they weren't so busy scrounging for funds.
As the chart at right suggests, the senators have to churn out a lot of cash.
Mr.
McConnell calls the Democrats' proposal to clean up campaign financing in part by using taxpayer funds an "entitlement program for politicians." It's a mystery why a Republican would want to prolong the system under which his party lost control of the Senate.
In truth, as Senator David Boren of Oklahoma, the chief sponsor of the Democratic reform plan, strongly notes, it's the present system that's the real entitlement program -- but for incumbents only.


Market Place; Insurers of municipal bonds are riding high on their popularity.
INVESTORS looking to capitalize on bullish conditions in the tax-exempt municipal bond market might consider four publicly traded companies that insure and reinsure bonds for states and municipalities.
Two of the companies, Ambac Inc. and MBIA Inc., insure municipal bonds.
Capital Re and Enhance Financial Services Group Inc. are in the reinsurance business, which assumes part of the insurer's risk in return for some of the premium paid by the insured.


Jets' Eatman Signs With Rams
Offensive tackle IRV EATMAN, who started all 16 games with the Jets last season, signed a three-year contract with the Los Angeles Rams as a free agent Saturday.
Terms were not disclosed. (AP)


Comatose Woman, Focus of Court Battles, Dies
Christine Busalacchi, whose father had to battle the State of Missouri for the right to have her feeding tube removed, died early this morning at Barnes Hospital here.
She was 23.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest due to dehydration, a hospital spokesman said.
The feeding tube was removed in late February shortly after a team of neurologists at Barnes confirmed that Miss Busalacchi was in a persistent vegetative state.


Plunging Interest Rates Sow Hope and Caution
Plunging interest rates are putting money into the pockets of millions of Americans and many corporations.
And so far they have been using this new-found cash mostly to reduce their debts, behaving with much more wariness than in the past.
The interest rate phenomenon -- rates have fallen to their lowest levels in years -- is still too new to have changed economic patterns.
But the beginnings are there.
Not only are mortgage applications to buy homes rising, but the Federal Government's huge annual interest payment on the national debt is likely to be the same amount this year as last, the Congressional Budget Office says.
Not since the 1960's has this outlay for debt service failed to rise.


Essay; The Last New Nixon
"My partisan days are over."
Coming from Richard Nixon, who has raised more partisan ire than any American public figure in the past half-century, that's a stunning statement.


A Map for Rebuilding
Rebuilding the underground nerve center of the World Trade Center will require a small army of engineers, electricians, carpenters, plumbers and laborers.
Guiding them in the battle is a complex set of computerized projections that determines what to do next, where to expect problems and where to concentrate their efforts.
Article and diagram, page B5.


Patents
IN-LINE roller skates came into vogue in the early 1980's among hockey players who wanted to stay in shape in the off-season.
They have since gained many fans.
In contrast to traditional roller skates, with front and rear wheels, an in-line skate has three or four wheels in a row.
A leading maker of the skates, Rollerblade Inc., of Minnetonka, Minn., has been assigned a patent granted last week to one of its designers, Andrzej M. Malewicz.
The new patent, an improvement on the skate's wheel-fastening system, is less remarkable for what it does than for the fact that it is Rollerblade's 16th in the United States -- among more than 100 issued and pending worldwide.
The company has recently begun an aggressive campaign to enforce its patents.


Dance in Review
Bavarian National Ballet New York State Theater
The Bavarian National Ballet's production of "Don Quixote" took on distinctive coloring when three dancers stepped into new roles on Friday night.
The ballet, choreographed by Ray Barra to the familiar Minkus score, makes its point with dispatch, and it was performed with clarity, refreshing directness and an infectious sense of fun.


White House Completes Its Team of Economists
President Clinton has chosen Joseph E. Stiglitz, a highly regarded Stanford University economics professor, to be the third and final member of the Council of Economic Advisers, Administration officials said this weekend.
Several economists said it was quite a coup for Laura D'Andrea Tyson, the council's chairwoman, to land Mr.
Stiglitz, who in the view of many experts is an odds-on favorite to win a Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics at some point in his career for his research into the effect of imperfect or incomplete information on the functioning of markets and economies. 'A Restless Researcher'
"We call him Jumping Joe," said Rudiger Dornbusch, an economics professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
"He's a restless researcher and teacher. In terms of professional reputation, I think he's the most distinguished young economist out there."


Review/Television; Imported from Britain: A Certain Type of Humor
The dread days of PBS money-raising (known delicately as a pledge period) are upon us, that periodic assault of ostensible crowd-pleasers punctuated by public-station employees telling us over and over how important they are to our happiness.
Last weekend Channel 13 brought forth Kathleen Battle, Jessye Norman, Bob Dylan and elephants.
Coming up are shows by or about Itzhak Perlman; Paul Simon; Elton John; Peter, Paul and Mary; Liza Minnelli, and dolphins.
Tonight at 8 you can attend "A Birthday Tribute to Julia Child."


Once Again, Jaspers Are on Brink of a Bid
Manhattan won its second tournament game in less than 24 hours tonight, edging Siena, 71-70, in a Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference semifinal matchup at Knickerbocker Arena.
The Jaspers moved on to the championship meeting Monday night against Niagara, which got past Canisius, 64-59, in the other semifinal.
The winner gets a berth in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.


Random House's Evans: Big Spender, Big Sales
Changing careers at a senior level is a tricky business in any industry, let alone the fiercely competitive book industry.
But in the two years since he took over the Random House Trade Publishing Group, Harold Evans, a man who built his career as the editor of The Sunday Times of London, has, by many measures, made a successful transition.
Over tea at Oscar's, the Waldorf- Astoria coffee shop, the slender 64-year-old executive said book publishing, like the newspaper business, offers "the same excitement when you come across a great story." But, he added, in book publishing, "One is more conscious of finance."


And Then, The Flyer Floodgates Opened
For a long time today it appeared that an unrelenting bombardment by the Devils would go for naught against Philadelphia's fine rookie goaltender, Tommy Soderstrom.
Soderstrom had blanked Washington last Friday for his third shutout since being called up from Hershey last Dec. 10.
And a fourth shutout seemed possible as the young Finn repulsed the first 25 shots by the Devils, many of them during five power-play situations, by late in the second period.


The Twin Towers: The Suspect; Bomb Suspect's Path to Piety and Elusive Dreams
In cramped, unheated rooms on the outskirts of Amman, the relatives of Mohammed A. Salameh, the man charged in the bombing of the World Trade Center, gathered today and pondered the magnitude of the crime and the infamy that has befallen their name.
"He went to the United States to get a job and make money," said Aysha Salameh, his mother, as she keened to and fro in a red vinyl chair and clutched a damp tissue.
"He went to make something of himself, to speak English, to study, to have a future. And now they say that he did all this, that he did this bomb. No, no, no . . . "


Rebuffing Premier, China Eases Growth Curbs
The Communist Party leadership today approved a revision of China's five-year plan, setting more ambitious growth targets and thereby snubbing Prime Minister Li Peng.
It also endorsed a reshuffle of Government leaders.
The Central Committee released a communique this evening, after the close of its three-day plenary session, but did not say who would be promoted or dismissed.
Nor did it give any details of the plan that it also approved for "reforming the party and Government organs."


Let's Remember the Loveless Once a Year
To the Editor:
"After Valentine" (editorial, Feb. 16), extolling the virtues of Valentine's Day, is typical of our cultural obsession with love and our cultural blindness to its failure.
Every February we are bombarded with images of heart-shaped balloons, rose vendors, ads for champagne, lingerie and chocolates.
Every conceivable gift object is molded to the shape of a heart.
This is all well and good, but the picture is incomplete.


Revival House Revives: The Thalia to Reopen
Will the Thalia live again?
The 292-seat Upper West Side revival house, venerated by generations of classic-movie buffs, has been closed for nearly six years.
But it is now being renovated and its landlord plans to reopen it by early April.


Judge Makes Translations an Issue of Trial Rights
Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in Brooklyn made a courtroom confession last week: He avoided traveling to the Soviet Union for years, until its police-state features began melting away, because he feared he would fall into the clutches of the K.G.B. and not have a document in English telling him his alleged crime.
In fact, he asked a prosecutor, doesn't
she
have nightmares that she might be arrested while traveling in a place like Afghanistan and not know the charges against her because she couldn't read them?


Topics of The Times; The U.N. Eight
Madeleine K. Albright, the new United States representative to the United Nations, held a luncheon the other day for all other women heading delegations to the world organization.
The anemic turnout -- only seven other top women in an organization with 180 delegations -- proved a devastating comment on male hegemony at the U.N.
Seated around Ms.
Albright were the permanent representatives or charges d'affaires of Canada, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, the Principality of Liechtenstein, the Philippines, Samoa, and Trinidad and Tobago.
Undismayed by this evidence of imbalance, Ms.
Albright said she intended to make the luncheon a monthly institution.


Red Tape Thwarts Efforts to House Mentally Ill
According to his landlord, Jerome Smith owes nearly $40,000 in back rent for his room in a squalid old hotel on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
The hotel's sole resident, he has refused to leave even as his neighbors moved out, as the paint peeled away in strips, as the curtains turned from yellow to brown to black and the rats took over.
New York State, which provided $1.5 million so a not-for-profit group could buy the hotel, has been trying for the last year to turn it into a group home for 38 mentally ill people.
But Mr.
Smith has single-handedly stopped the project from going forward.
And he has been backed by New York City, which has so far refused to issue a necessary permit while he remains in the building.


Executive Brief: THE COMMERCE DEPARTMENT; Reason to Smile Again: Clinton Industrial Policy
During the Bush years, Commerce Department officials liked to quip that they were working for an industrial-policy agency in an Administration that did not believe in industrial policy.
The Clinton Administration, which does believe in industrial policy, is beginning to flex the department's atrophied muscles.
While plans to spend more on commercial research and promoting exports have alarmed opponents of government intervention in the marketplace, they have sent morale at the agency soaring.


Cuomo Is Dropping Assets Change for Medicaid
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he was rescinding a budget proposal that would have forced New Yorkers to spend more of their assets before a spouse could qualify for Medicaid reimbursement for nursing home costs.
Mr.
Cuomo had proposed in his budget in January that the maximum asset level be lowered to $35,000 from its current level of $70,740.
That is the amount of life savings that a person can keep if the spouse is to qualify for Medicaid.
It does not include the value of a family house and a small amount of monthly income.


Review/Dance; Pittsburgh Ballet's New Direction
As one of George Balanchine's most popular ballerinas in the New York City Ballet from 1950 to the mid-1960's, Patricia Wilde could have been expected to direct any other ballet troupe along strictly Balanchinian lines.
But when Miss Wilde became artistic director of the Pittsburgh Ballet Theater in 1982, she obviously agreed to continue the kind of eclectic repertory best suited to an up-and-coming regional company that seeks to serve a broad audience.
She was also able to draw upon her experience in several international troupes, having danced as well in the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo and the Marquis de Cuevas Ballet.


Bomb Trial Testimony Impugned
An F.B.I. agent vehemently denied yesterday that he was testifying falsely about the major fingerprint evidence said to show that a Palestine Liberation Organization official attempted to bomb three Israeli sites in New York City 20 years ago.
The defendant, Khaled Mohammed el-Jassem, a Palestinian resident of Cyprus, is on trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, where sessions were held over the weekend.
Mr.
Jassem, 45, is charged with planting powerful time bombs in March 1973 in rented cars parked outside two Israeli banks in Manhattan and an Israeli air terminal at Kennedy International Airport.
The bombs failed to go off.
Arrested in 1991
Mr.
Jassem, who was described by his lawyers as a "high-ranking administrative official" of the P.L.O., was arrested by Italian authorities in Rome in 1991 at the American Government's request.
Officials said that new "intelligence information" pointed to him as a suspect in the long-unsolved case and that subsequent fingerprint analysis proves he planted the bomb.
Mr.
Jassem says he is being "framed" by the American Government.


Traders Say Rally Can Continue
The surprisingly strong employment report released on Friday knocked out one of the four legs supporting a spectacular rally in the long end of the bond market: signs of continuing economic weakness.
But it does not mean that the rally has to falter, traders and analysts say.
For the rally to continue, however, two of the other three legs will have to bear more weight.
This means that news on inflation, the most important factor, will have to remain positive.
And it means that President Clinton will have to continue making progress on his plan to reduce the Federal budget deficit.
Funds Pour into Bonds
The market's third source of support has been the large flow of capital into bonds.
This money has come from investment funds putting in new cash and from managers who missed the rally and are trying to catch up.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Plunging interest rates are putting money into the pockets of millions of Americans and many corporations.
And so far they have been using this new-found cash mostly to reduce their debts, behaving with much more wariness than in the past.  [ Page D1. ]
President Clinton has chosen Joseph E. Stiglitz to be the third member of the Council of Economic Advisers, Administration officials say.
Many economists view the highly regarded Stanford University professor as an odds-on favorite to win a Nobel Memorial Prize at some point in his career.  [ D1. ]


CHRONICLE
Germany's most prominent chef, ECKART WITZIGMANN of Munich's Aubergine, went on trial Friday on charges of possession of cocaine but he still has the support of his fans.
Ninety of his admirers in Munich placed a $15,000, half-page advertisement in the newspaper Suddeutsche Zeitung on Friday supporting the chef of Germany's top-rated restaurant, with three Michelin stars.
"Thank you, Eckart Witzigmann!" read the advertisement.
"We are happy to have you here with us."


3 Hurt in Queens Shooting
Three people were shot at an ethnic festival in Richmond Hill, Queens, yesterday after a man pulled out a gun during an argument and started shooting, the police said.
One victim, Jawaharlal Ranrott, 24, was in critical condition last night in Jamaica Hospital, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
He said a 15-year-old boy was in stable condition at the same hospital, and a 14-year-old girl was treated at Mary Immaculate Hospital in Jamaica for a wound to the left arm and then released.
The names of the injured teen-agers were not released.
The police said Shiwkumab Devanand, 18, of 159 Hemlock Street, Brooklyn, and Ransagar Harichard, 19, of 97-15 105th Street in Richmond Hill, were arrested after the episode, which occurred about 4:45 P.M. near 125th Street and 97th Avenue.


BBDO Promotes 3 on Apple Account
BBDO Worldwide has promoted three top executives to new positions, reflecting steps by its client Apple Computer Inc. to consolidate marketing worldwide.
Chris Wall, 37, vice president and creative director on Apple's American account at BBDO's Los Angeles office, has been promoted to senior vice president and worldwide creative director, working from BBDO/ CLM Paris.
Susan Westre, 38, vice president and creative director on the American account, has been promoted to senior vice president and senior creative director in Los Angeles.
Jim Ward, 33, vice president and management supervisor on the American account, has been promoted to senior vice president and Apple worldwide account director in Los Angeles.


Bridge
The dean of active bridge writers on this side of the Atlantic is Alfred Sheinwold, who celebrated his 80th birthday last year.
He began working for Ely Culbertson, as a ghostwriter, almost 60 years ago, and continues to write his own syndicated column.
His counterpart in Europe appears to be Pat Cotter in England.
At the age of 88 he writes on bridge once a month for Country Life and once a week for The Financial Times, for which he also composes crossword puzzles.


Brewers Are Off, but Will They Be Running?
Brewers baserunners joked last year that they were always stealing second base to get away from the incessant chatter of Tim Foli, Milwaukee's first-base coach.
Actually, they stole because that was the team's best means of generating runs.
"I don't know if we'll do it again," Manager Phil Garner said last week.
"Last year, we didn't have a lot of home-run power, so we thought we'd stir things up that way. But we also wanted the other clubs to do things they didn't normally do so they were out of their comfort zones.


For Adirondack Park, Chief Stress Comes From Development
To the Editor:
"A Park in Peril" (editorial, Feb. 16) notes that "the Adirondacks are nowhere near as stressed as the national parks, which absorbed an astounding 250 million visitors last year." This is true as far as use of public land (the state-owned forest preserve) goes.
But the Adirondacks are mostly in private ownership.


How Do You Say Tough Guy in Lithuanian?
Darius Kasparaitis drove his new, black BMW from Long Island to Manhattan a few weeks ago and parked it, illegally, at a curb.
When he returned, the car was gone.
A police officer told Kasparaitis, a defenseman for the Islanders, that the car might have been towed.
When the 20-year-old rookie from Lithuania arrived at the car pound, he found his vehicle, and a long line of fellow motorists waiting to pay their fines.


Japan Must Shoulder More of the World Burden
To the Editor:
"Let Japan Choose Peace" (editorial, Feb. 21) describes the constitutional and military policy issues challenging Japan.
Your figures about Japan's contributions of foreign aid and United Nations dues are correct, but leave a misleading impression.


Ireland's National Theater Faces Its Popular Rival
The wet, gray Dublin winter has been warmed somewhat by the spirited onstage performances of the capital's two most prestigious theaters, the Abbey and the Gate.
The Abbey, the official national theater, is also providing some heat with a flickering controversy about its artistic director, Garry Hynes.
Since Ms.
Hynes, who is 39, arrived in Dublin from provincial Galway County, to take over the Abbey two years ago, she has been the constant target of the Dublin theatrical establishment, led by newspaper and magazine critics.
They slashed her 1991 production of "The Plough and the Stars," largely because she had audaciously presented Sean O'Casey's gloomy characters with shaven heads, recalling Sinead O'Connor, to the dismay of many Dubliners who detest that singer.
Since then, she has been under attack for putting on the wrong plays, for putting them on with imported actors (like Brian Dennehy, who filled the house with his portrayal of Hickey in Eugene O'Neill's "Iceman Cometh") and for ignoring the players of the Abbey's own permanent company.


In Region of Its Birth, Town Meeting Cedes Tradition to the Television Age
This may be the year of the town meeting -- at least, the televised, prime-time, Presidential version of the town meeting.
But here in Shrewsbury and in much of New England, the real thing, dating back more than three centuries, is in decline.
Oh, this Green Mountain town of 1,100 people had its annual meeting this week -- its 212th -- just as small towns did across New England.
But only 127 of 725 registered voters showed up at the 19th-century white frame meeting hall, downstairs from the Congregationalist Church.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Scroll through an electronic list, and pick the program you want to watch at this very moment.
NEVER mind 500 channels.
If John Hendricks has his way, you'll be able to pick exactly the television
program
you want to see, whenever you want to see it.
Mr.
Hendricks, who created the Discovery Channel on cable television, calls his idea Your Choice TV, and it can be summed up as video on demand -- a way for a viewer to press a few buttons on a remote-control device, scroll through an electronic menu of hundreds of programs, and pick the one he wants for just a small additional fee, perhaps a dollar, on the monthly cable bill.


Cape Town Journal; In a Wary Land, the Judge Is Trusted (to a Point)
To judge by the headlines he generates almost daily in South Africa, Justice Richard J. Goldstone is a cross between King Solomon and the Ghostbusters, arbiter of irreconcilable grievances and stalker of the national goblins.
As chairman of the Commission Concerning the Prevention of Public Violence and Intimidation, Mr.
Goldstone, a 54-year-old appeals judge, has built a powerful conglomerate of lawyers and investigators looking into everything from taxi wars and township massacres to arms smuggling and, most recently, the dirty secrets of South Africa's military intelligence.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Action Performance Cos., Tempe, Ariz., an initial public offering of 1 million units (each consisting of one common share and one warrant).
Paulson Investment Co.


British Say I.R.A. Bombing Effort Is Set Back by Arrest of 5 Suspects
Scotland Yard detectives say they have dealt a setback to the Irish Republican Army's bombing campaign in mainland Britain after seizing five suspects and a large number of explosives in a series of raids across London last week.
On Friday, police officers wearing heavy armor sealed off streets in east London and stationed marksmen on rooftops overlooking a courthouse where two of the suspects were being arraigned on charges of setting off a bomb on Jan. 28 outside Harrod's department store in London.
Three people were injured in that blast.


In Shadow of Texas Siege, Uncertainty for Innocents
Brian is a 3-year-old towhead who throws so many tantrums that his playmates, who like him anyway, call him Cryin' Brian.
Heather has blond hair down to her waist and a purposeful expression.
She is 8 years old, but older children gravitate toward her as something of a leader.


Sports of The Times; The Electric Mood And Hair at Garden
MADISON Square Garden finally came alive for boxing on Saturday.
Buddy McGirt, from Brentwood, L.I., was the hometown delight; Pernell Whitaker, from Norfolk, Va., had star appeal.


Review/Theater; Correspondence as Conversation
The postman is busy in "The Best of Friends," an epistolary play that Hugh Whitemore pieced together from the lengthy correspondence that passed between George Bernard Shaw, Sir Sydney Cockerell and Dame Laurentia McLachlan, a Benedictine nun.
Their letters shot back and forth with such apparent rapidity as to put a fax to shame.
This was a time when letters were a way of life and of friendship.
Breaking the seal on the envelopes, Mr.
Whitemore has his characters meet in mid-missive, a bit difficult when dealing with the cloistered world of Dame Laurentia, the Abbess of Stanbrook.
Talking to her, the men sometimes look as if they are in a confessional.
Another problem is the simple fact of the threesome.
Most epistolary plays have had only two people onstage, which leads to focus as well as give-and-take.
With "The Best of Friends," letters and excerpts from other writings are broken up into a semblance of conversation.
For all of its pretense, this is less a play than an elaborate platform reading.


Japan Debates Broader Power for Consumers
Japanese consumers now have a test case of just how committed the Government is to protecting their rights.
Amid recent reports that playing video games can cause seizures in children with a particular type of epilepsy, the Japanese learned that they have not been receiving the warnings that Nintendo, the Japanese video game giant, has been including in games it sells in the United States and Europe.


Russian Priest, and His Church, Resurrected
When it became possible, Sergei Vishnevsky's grandfather sent him to Moscow to study for the priesthood so he could come back and take over his country parish.
It took him 45 years, but Father Sergei came back.
Two years ago, he quit his large, rich parish in Moscow, made his way by train, bus and foot to his grandfather's church deep in the forests and bogs of the upper Volga valley, picked up a broom and started sweeping out the decades of debris and neglect.


Hey Kids, What's Behind Door No. 3? Economics
IF Peter Bell and the New York State Council on Economic Education have their say, sixth graders like Imhotep Newsome and Cresentia Villarin will know that there is a lot more to economics than understanding math.
Along with other students at the Albert Leonard Middle School here, they will learn that while math has fixed and impersonal answers, economics calls for flexible thinking, a set of individual values and a new vocabulary for everyday experiences.


Topics of The Times; Revitalizing Times Square?
Just when the cleansing of the Times Square area has begun to show progress, along comes Arnold Schwarzenegger.
The muscled superstar has been filming a movie in the neighborhood, much to the delight of city officials.
Local movie-making came to a halt two years ago in a prolonged stand-off between New York City unions and Hollywood producers.
Now, at last, business is looking up -- or is it down?
Apparently Times Square is too cleaned up for the Schwarzenegger image.
So the sleazy old 42d Street movie houses, boarded up for renovation, were suddenly made to blaze with sex and violence again.
The Amsterdam's marquee beckoned with "HOT BLOOD." At the Liberty, a double feature: "CAMP ON BLOOD ISLAND" and "SCREAMING MIMI." And so on down the once tawdry block between Seventh and Eighth Avenues, now tawdry again a la Hollywood.


Reviews Due On Benefits For Disability
About 300,000 residents of New York State will get notices from the Federal Government this week offering to re-examine claims for disability benefits that have been denied by the Social Security Administration since 1981.
The notices, giving people a fresh opportunity to show that they were entitled to benefits, are part of the settlement of a lawsuit.
The plaintiffs contended that the Reagan Administration often flouted court rulings when it denied or terminated payments to disabled people.


Hull Contract Tops $20 Million
BRETT HULL will reportedly receive more than $20 million in a five-year deal he signed Saturday night with the St.
Louis Blues.
The contract calls for $19 million in salary and $1.6 million in deferred money, according to The St.
Louis Post-Dispatch.


Music Notes; Muti Cancellation Irks Philadelphians
A skirmish seems to be brewing between Riccardo Muti and the Philadelphia Orchestra.
Mr.
Muti, who became the orchestra's Laureate Conductor after relinquishing the music director's post to spend more time in Europe (he is music director of La Scala, in Milan), had agreed to spend four weeks with the Philadelphia in the 1993-94 season.
It will be the first full one under the direction of his successor, Wolfgang Sawallisch, who conducted the orchestra last week in Avery Fisher Hall.


Dance in Review
Feld Ballets/NY Joyce Theater
Eliot Feld's "Aurora I" and "Circa," two works of the 1980's, returned to the repertory of Feld Ballets/NY on Saturday night.
The vocabulary of steps in both is deliberately restricted.
Yet each is an effective example of a totally different style.
"Aurora I," choreographed in 1985 to a recorded score by Steve Reich, is one of several ballets by Mr.
Feld to Minimalist music.
Just as many examples of such music prove sonically rich even though they are based upon only a few motifs, so Mr.
Feld has also succeeded in devising imaginative variations upon a limited number of movements.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  A RUSSIAN VILLAGE PRIEST'S HEAVEN
It took Sergei Vishnevsky 45 years to return to his village in Russia's upper Volga valley to serve as parish priest.
He picked up a broom and started sweeping out the decades of debris and neglect, and now he is shamefully happy.
A1 JAPANESE CONSUMER RIGHTS
A rare public debate over product liability has arisen in Japan, where a long tradition of favoring companies over citizens may be changing.
A1 DRUG WAR FLARES IN MEXICO
In Sinaloa State, 80 people have been killed in the two months since a new governor took office.
Most of the deaths were drug related, a sign that here and elsewhere in Mexico, drug wars are flaring up.
A3 THE JUDGE SOUTH AFRICANS TRUST
The judge who heads South Africa's commission on public violence is treated as a cross between King Solomon and the Ghostbusters, arbiter of irreconcilable grievances and stalker of national goblins.
A4 CHINA EASES CURBS ON GROWTH
China's Communist leadership approved a revised five-year plan, setting more ambitious growth targets and thereby snubbing Prime Minister Li Peng.
It also endorsed a reshuffle of Government leaders.
A5 BRAZIL EVICTING AMAZON MINERS
Determined to reverse a gold rush of 11,000 miners into the Amazon lands of the Yanomami Indians, the Brazilian police and military have evacuated 3,000 miners by air in the last 10 days, many forcibly.
A7 DISPUTE OVER KILLING IN GAZA
Israeli officials are considering a complaint to the United Nations about one of its officials, who was accused by the Army of having failed to alert soldiers after seeing a crowd stone and shoot an Israeli motorist to death in the Gaza Strip.
A6 BOSNIAN EVACUATION DELAYED
Denouncing Serbian commanders who reneged on an offer of safe passage, United Nations relief officials said it now might be weeks before thousands of sick and wounded Muslims could be evacuated from enclaves besieged by Serbs in eastern Bosnia.
A8 U.N.
WEIGHS USE OF FORCE IN BOSNIA
If an agreement is reached to end the war in Bosnia, the Secretary General and other senior United Nations officials expect the Security Council to send a very large new force there, empowered to use military might.
A8 Afghan Government and rebel leaders sign a peace pact.
A3 A post-cold-war mystery: foreign submarines off Sweden.
A10 Far-rightists made strong gains in elections in a German state.
A11 National A12-15, B8-9 RESHAPING THE JUDICIARY
With a high number of vacancies on the Federal bench, President Clinton has the opportunity to name hundreds of judges over the next four years and drastically alter the judicial landscape after 12 years of Republican appointments.
A1 THE PRESIDENT IS CALLING
President Clinton is pursuing an energetic strategy of winning over lawmakers through personal contacts, with the most immediate goal of gaining support for his economic program.
His frequent meetings with Congressmen and excursions to Capitol Hill suggest almost a parliamentary-style Government, where the President works in tandem with legislators.
A1 Commerce gets a chance to flex its muscles on industrial policy.
B9 CHILDREN OF THE CULT
Their parents are barricaded in the Texas compound that was the scene of a deadly gun battle with Federal agents.
But the children of the Branch Davidian cult appear well cared for and eager to see their parents again.
A1 A week after the shootout, negotiations are stalled.
A14 TOWN MEETING LOSES APPEAL
Even after a campaign of Presidential "town meetings," in much of New England, the real thing, dating back more than three centuries, is in decline.
A12 COMATOSE WOMAN DIES
Nearly six years after an automobile accident left her in a coma, and 26 months after her father asked the courts to allow him to remove her feeding tube, Christine Busalacchi died in St.
Louis.
She was 23.
A12 LIFE ON THE BELLEAU WOOD
A shipmate of a gay sailor who was beaten to death in Japan said homosexuals on his ship were frequently harassed.
A15 OPTIMISM FOR KENNEDY
After three turbulent, sometimes triumphant and often troubled decades, Senator Edward M. Kennedy is entering a singularly calm, optimistic time in his life, with a new marriage, a President from his party, and new interest in his pet issue, universal health care.
B8 The racially charged retrial of a Miami policeman is delayed.
A12 Metro Digest B1 FAMILY OF BOMBING SUSPECT
The relatives of the man charged in the bombing of the World Trade Center gathered in Jordan and said they could not believe the "gentle man" who went to the United States "to make something of himself" could have committed the crime.
A1 BRIGHT LIGHTS, BIG DISCOUNTS
Some of the nation's largest discount retailers -- the cavernous department stores, warehouse clubs and super supermarkets that for decades have shaped the shopping landscape of America's suburbs and small towns -- are coming to New York City.
A1 Sports C1-8 Baseball: Torborg settles on heart of order.
C7 Yanks' Stanley still No. 2.
C7 Will Brewers again be running?
C7 Basketball: Knicks' Starks both tough and valuable.
C1 76ers fire Moe.
C4 North Carolina batters Duke.
C3 Big East struggling for N.C.A.A. spots.
C3 St.
Joseph's overcomes Rutgers.
C2 Nets await new X-rays on Anderson.
C4 Manhattan beats Siena.
C2 Boxing: Bowe-Holyfield three fights away.
C1 Columns: Rhoden on the fight at the Garden.
C5 Golf: Norman wins Doral.
C2 Hockey: Islanders beat Capitals, 3-2.
C1 Kasparaitis fractures language and opposition.
C6 Richter reacts to blowout.
C6 Sports People C4 Tennis: Courier routs Ferreira.
C2 Track: Peaceful marathon in South-Central Los Angeles.
C2 Fashion Page C18 Business Digest D1 Obituaries B10 Henry Giniger, a longtime correspondent for The New York Times.
Douglas Marland, Emmy-winning writer.
Arts/Entertainment C9-18 Rival theaters in Dublin.
C9 Thalia movie house to reopen.
C9 Directors honor Eastwood.
C16 Theater: "Best of Friends." C14 Music: Muti cancels.
C9 End of a series that spanned two cultures.
C9 Dance: The Pittsburgh Ballet.
C9 In review.
C12 Word and Image: "Heisenberg's War." C13 "Big Boys Don't Cry." C16 Hefty serving of a British sitcom.
C16 Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17 Editorials Congressional clash over cash.
Small farmers, global reach.
Topics: Revitalizing 42d Street?
Letters Anthony Lewis: Elements of the cure.
William Safire: The last new Nixon.
Steven Weinberg: The answer to (almost) everything.
George R. Packard: Chrysanthemum and sword.


RIGHT WING GAINS IN GERMAN VOTING
Far-right candidates made strong gains today in local elections in the prosperous western state of Hesse, with the nationalist Republican party taking 9.3 percent of the vote in Frankfurt, the financial capital.
The right-wing gains in municipal and district elections came mainly at the expense of the national opposition party, the left-leaning Social Democrats, but Chancellor Helmut Kohl's conservative Christian Democrats also suffered.


No Headline
To have the Ayatollah Khomeini and the Rev.
Jerry Falwell described with the same concept inevitably offends the followers of both. -- DR.
R.
SCOTT APPLEBY, who is directing a study of fundamentalism for the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.  [ B4:1. ]


Mitchel Maidman and Arlene Esses
Arlene S. Esses, a daughter of Deanne Esses of Sands Point, L.I., and the late Harry Esses, was married yesterday to Mitchel Aron Maidman, a son of Richard Maidman of New York and Lynne Manning of Stamford, Conn.
Rabbi Abraham Hecht performed the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Maidman, 23, graduated from Tufts University.
She is an administrator at Everyones Stores Inc. in Manhattan, a chain of health and beauty-aid stores owned by her mother, who is also the president of the company.
The bride's father founded the company.


Village Gate Struggling To Avoid Its Last Chorus
Art D'Lugoff, impresario extraordinaire, has seen it all and then some in a lifetime of show business.
But now the owner of the legendary Village Gate faces something new: the strong possibility that he will have to close the nightclub after 36 years.
"I'm just hanging on," he said. "It's desperate."


U.N. Aides Now Pessimistic About Evacuating Bosnians
Denouncing Serbian commanders who reneged on an offer of safe passage, United Nations relief officials said today that it now might be weeks before workers could evacuate thousands of sick and wounded Muslims from enclaves besieged by Serbs in eastern Bosnia.
On Saturday, military leaders of the Bosnian Serbs told the commander of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in Bosnia, Gen.
Philippe Morillon, that they would not permit relief workers to evacuate even the wounded and sick from the trapped Muslim enclaves of Cerska and Srebrenica until Serbs were allowed to organize an exodus of Serbs from Tuzla and other nearby towns under Bosnian Government control, United Nations officials here said.


Dance in Review
Geulah Abrahams Danceworks Dia Art Center SoHo
Geulah Abrahams Danceworks contrasted order and disorder in its offerings on Friday night.
Ms.
Abrahams's choreography for "Chaos Variations" was especially ingenious.


Transit Fare Is Outshining Repair Plans
On the eve of public hearings about a proposed 25-cent increase in subway and bus fares, the threat of a fare increase is getting all the attention but transportation advocates say a far more serious issue may pass almost unnoticed.
The hearings begin tomorrow in Brooklyn, continue Thursday in Manhattan, and are expected to draw a crowd of subway and bus riders angry that a second fare increase in two years is even being considered by the Transit Authority, which needs to plug a $250 million shortfall in operating funds.


Bowe vs. Holyfield: But First, Patience
The morning after boxing crowned a new welterweight champion, it emerged from behind closed doors with some very big -- and in some cases uninspiring -- fights that will unfold over the next six months.
It will all likely end with a Riddick Bowe-Evander Holyfield rematch on Sept. 10 at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev.
But as a prelude, fight fans will have to live with the prospect that a real pretender will challenge Bowe for his heavyweight title.


Treasury to Auction Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three-month and six-month bills.
Traders said that by late in the day on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.99 percent, with the rate on a six-month bill at 3.08 percent.


THE TWIN TOWERS: The Overview; Clues and Tempers Grow In Widened Bomb Search
Seeking new evidence to explain the role that Mohammed A. Salameh may have played in the crippling explosion of the World Trade Center, investigators said yesterday that they were mounting searches of several new places and analyzing fingerprints lifted from a warehouse and two residences in Jersey City.
Officials also said they were reinforcing the investigative unit at the site of the explosion under the World Trade Center by adding 12 more agents from the Treasury Department's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms to a previous force of about 70.
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which owns the center, announced it was doubling its security force around the damaged towers to about 75 officers.


U.N. Force May Compel Bosnia Pact Compliance
If an agreement is reached to end the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, senior United Nations officials, including the Secretary General, say they expect the Security Council to send a very large new force there empowered to use military might if necessary to compel compliance with the peace agreement now gradually taking shape.
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, appearing today on the ABC News program "This Week With David Brinkley," said the peacekeepers would use force against Serbian soldiers who failed to withdraw from territory that they would be required to surrender under the peace plan.


Yanks Veto Clark for Youth
After deliberating for days, the Yankees officially decided today that they would not pursue the free agent Jack Clark in order to keep opportunities open for younger players.


Rarefied Billboard Air Of the Sunset Strip
The tally for the film "Scent of a Woman," less than a month before the Academy Awards broadcast on March 29, stands at four Golden Globe awards, four Oscar nominations and two snipes.
In outdoor-advertising lingo, a snipe is any piece that is added to an existing billboard, covering part of it.
Universal Pictures rents a billboard by the year on Sunset Boulevard in West Hollywood -- a.k.a. the Sunset Strip -- and "Scent of a Woman" took up residence there just before its opening on Dec. 23.
When the film won Golden Globes, the studio ordered a victory snipe.
Now a second snipe has been added, as the film is an Oscar contender.


THE TWIN TOWERS: Religion and Politics; Many Varieties of Fundamentalism
When law-enforcement officials and the news media described Mohammed A. Salameh, the suspect arrested Thursday in the World Trade Center bombing, as an Islamic fundamentalist, they reopened questions about whether such language illuminates or obscures the complex realities of militant religious movements.
"Not all Islamic revivalists are Islamic fundamentalists, and not all Islamic fundamentalists are political activists, and not all Islamic political activists are radical and prone to violence," said Mumtaz Ahmad, professor of political science at Hampton University in Virginia.


CHRONICLE
She is about to turn 94 years old, and she has not taken pictures since 1959, but tonight ILSE BING will receive the first Gold Medal for photography to be awarded by the National Arts Club at a dinner and reception in her honor.
Though the 95-year-old club at 15 Gramercy Park South has honored music, dance, film, design and literature in the past, it has all but ignored photography since a 1902 exhibit of the works of Alfred Stieglitz.


Results Plus
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL Same Fate for No. 2 It must be catching.
One day after Georgia upset the top-ranked women's team, Tennessee, the No. 2-ranked team went down to defeat, too.
But this one wasn't as much of an upset, because the team that downed Iowa was No. 4-ranked Ohio State.
Led by 25 points from Katie Smith, Ohio State led throughout yesterday's game at St.
John Arena in Columbus, Ohio, and emerged with a 72-60 victory.
Audrey Burcy and Nikki Keyton added 15 points each for Ohio State (22-3 over all, 14-2 in the Big Ten).
Iowa is now 23-3, 15-2. (AP) SKIING Aamodt Likes Aspen Flashing the form that made him a double winner in the recent world Alpine championships, Kjetil Andre Aamodt of Norway won a World Cup super giant slalom by a half-second over Stefan Eberharter yesterday in Aspen, Colo.
Aamodt, who won gold medals in the slalom and giant slalom in the world championships at Shizukuishi, Japan, in February, covered 1.35 miles of the Ruthie's Run course in 1 minute 17.48 seconds, as the second racer down the mountain.
The race was free of controversy, a marked change from Saturday, when the men's downhill was canceled after 16 racers, with the American A.J.
Kitt in the lead and virtually assured of victory.
Race organizers had said the downhill would be rerun yesterday, but it turned out that this was contractually impossible, so an extra downhill will be added at another race site later this month.
Kitt couldn't duplicate his great run of Saturday, finishing 1.73 seconds behind Aamodt in a tie for 35th place. (AP) Compagnoni Finds Her Form: Capping a yearlong comeback, Deborah Compagnoni of Italy returned to the top of the medal podium for the first time since the 1992 Winter Olympics.
She did so by winning a World Cup super-giant slalom race in Morzine, France.
Compagnoni's super-G gold-medal celebration in Albertville, France, ended suddenly two days later when she tore left-knee ligaments in the giant slalom.
She has struggled to regain her winning form.
With the help and support of her occasional training partner, Alberto Tomba, Compagnoni made consistent progress early this season.
Yesterday, Compagnoni charged down the 1,700-meter course in 1:12.66, edging the super-G world champion, Katja Seizinger of Germany.
Seizinger, who secured the World Cup downhill title with a victory Saturday, was second in 1:12.80. (AP) GOLF Geiberger Feels Better Despite feeling weak, Al Geiberger closed with a four-under-par 66 yesterday to capture the $500,000 Senior GTE Classic in Ojai, Calif., by two shots.
Geiberger's three-day total of 198 left him $75,000 richer.
Isao Aoki carded a five-under 65 to tie the second-round leader, George Archer, at 10-under 200.
Chi Chi Rodriguez was fourth at 201, and a new senior, Tom Weiskopf, was fifth at 202.
Weiskopf won last week's Chrysler Cup in his Senior Tour debut. (AP) SOCCER U.S.
Routs Turkey Chris Faklaris scored three goals last night as the United States upset the European champion, Turkey, 6-0, in Melbourne, Australia, in its opening match of the World Youth championship.
The Americans scored three goals in each half as they surprised the Turkish team with a succession of whirlwind attacks.
Miles Joseph scored two goals and Imad Baba had the other for the Americans.
The next match for the Americans is against England. (AP) TENNIS Olhovsky Wins Twice Andrei Olhovsky of Russia won his first two ATP Tour tournament titles yesterday by winning in the singles and the doubles finals at the $175,000 Copenhagen Open.
Olhovsky, ranked 87th in the world, upset No. 5-seeded Nicklas Kulti of Sweden, 7-5, 3-6, 6-2, to take the singles crown in 1 hour 50 minutes.
In doubles, the 26-year-old from Moscow teamed with David Adams of Australia to down the Czech Republic's Martin Damm and Daniel Vacek, 6-3, 3-6, 6-3. (AP) AUTO RACING That Roar Is Allison Davey Allison finally got into high gear after a disappointing start to the 1993 Nascar Winston Cup season, overpowering the field yesterday en route to a record-setting victory in the Pontiac Excitement 400 in Richmond.
Allison, who previously won at Richmond International Raceway in September 1988, the first race on the current three-quarter mile oval, came from 14th place to dominate the second half of the 400-lap, 300-mile event.
His average speed of 107.709 miles an hour broke the track record of 105.397 set in February 1991 by Dale Earnhardt.
Allison's Ford Thunderbird led three times for 155 laps, including the final 42 laps, and crossed the finish line 4.38 seconds ahead of the Pontiac Grand Prix of runner-up Rusty Wallace.
It was the 19th career victory for the 32-year-old, second-generation stock car star. (AP)


A St. Patrick's Day Parade Without the Furor
Casting aside the political furor that has enveloped the St.
Patrick's Day Parade in Manhattan, thousands yesterday on Staten Island held the city's second largest such parade.
Patrick Fair, 10, checked his flag as the parade got under way.
Page B3. (Andrea Mohin/The New York Times)


For Adirondack Park, Chief Stress Comes From Development; Forever Wild
To the Editor:
"A Park in Peril" (editorial, Feb. 16), like the New York State Legislature, ignores the state Constitution.
Of the Adirondack State Park, Article 14, conservation, dictates to the state and the Legislature:
"The forest preserve as now fixed by law, shall be forever kept as wild forest lands."
"Forest and wildlife conservation are hereby declared to be policies of the state."
Further, residents of the Adirondack Preserve must have all arrived after 1939, when the Constitution was adopted.
CHESTER P. SOLING  Williamstown, Mass., Feb. 19, 1993


Mets Wish Picking a Lineup Were as Easy as 3, 4, 5
The debate has taken place in Jeff Torborg's mind for months and in his office for weeks.
Numbers have been crunched, theories have been studied, opinions have been invited and aired.
A decision has been reached, and its details have been divulged in private meetings with the players involved.
The heart of the matter has been the heart of the Mets' order, and the game plan looks like this: Bobby Bonilla will bat third, Eddie Murray will hit cleanup and Howard Johnson will be in the fifth spot.
The forecast, based on the manager's wishes and the players' politely offered demands, is for the order not to be disturbed during the season.
It might not be set in stone exactly, but it's set in some very hard clay.


Specter of Chavez Is Stalking Whitaker
Pernell Whitaker was still congratulating himself yesterday morning, still admiring his own work because he believed no one else would.
On Saturday night, Whitaker won the World Boxing Council welterweight title from James (Buddy) McGirt, and it turned out he was fighting with the promise of a September bout with Julio Cesar Chavez, win or lose.
He gained a claim to the sport's mythical pound-for-pound moniker, but said he wasn't interested in titles, just in big fights.


World Economies


The Growing Burden of Germany's Unification
Extraordinary in scale, ominous in implication, the collapse of the industrial tissue of what was East Germany now seems certain to weigh on the entire German economy, and all of Europe, for much of this decade.
In place of the blooming garden promised by Chancellor Helmut Kohl before unification in 1990, a bleak landscape stretches.
It is dotted with the rusted shells of ailing steel, textile and chemical plants; crisscrossed by potholed roads, and smeared with competing graffiti exhorting people to combat or to join the neo-Nazi movements spawned by economic resentment.


One German Couple Long for the Old Days
On the face of it, Dietmar and Birgit Stengel have done all right under German unification.
They have acquired a new Czech-made Skoda automobile, and their small apartment in the eastern part of this city boasts a new freezer and videocassette recorder.
Although hardly living in luxury, they are a very long way from the bread line.
Yet the Stengels say their experience since East Germany was absorbed by West Germany two years ago can be summed up in one word: "hell."


Rap Performer Arrested
A performer with the rap group House of Pain was arrested yesterday at Kennedy International Airport after an unloaded handgun was found in his suitcase, the Port Authority police said.
Erik Schrodi, 23, who performs under the name Everlast, was arrested at 6:45 P.M. after a routine X-ray showed a .380-caliber semiautomatic pistol in his suitcase, said Sgt.
Robert McCrudden, a Port Authority police spokesman.
He said the pistol was unloaded, but that a clip of ammunition was found in the suitcase.
Mr.
Schrodi will be charged with third-degree possession of a weapon, a felony punishable upon conviction by up to seven years in jail, the police said.


Politics' Old-Girl-Network State
On the wall opposite Representative Barbara B. Kennelly's desk in her Capitol Hill office, there are three photographs that say much about the remarkable story of Connecticut women in politics.
John M. Bailey, the legendary Democratic Party boss from Connecticut -- and Mrs.
Kennelly's father -- is on the right, and President John F. Kennedy is on the left, shown playing with Mrs.
Kennelly's daughter during a White House visit in 1962.
But there in the middle, far larger than either, is Ella T. Grasso, the first woman ever elected governor of a state in her own right.


At Suspect's Birthplace, Shock
Although Mohammed A. Salameh and his immediate family left this muddy village of stone and stucco houses shortly after Israeli troops occupied the town in 1967, many relatives remain here and say they are shocked by the charges against him.
"This is unbelievable," said his grandmother, Amneh Odeh, 80, as she lay beneath several blankets in her sparsely furnished bedroom, where she is recovering from a recent heart attack.


Marriott-Bondholder Accord Seen as Near
The Marriott Corporation said yesterday that it expects to reach an agreement with bondholders, perhaps as early as this week, that would allay their objections to Marriott's plan to split the company in two.
But some bondholders said they would pursue their lawsuits against the hotel company, which they have accused of securities fraud.
Robert Souers, vice president of corporation information for Marriott, said any agreement "would be one that makes the bondholders more comfortable with our plan of action, but at the same time doesn't effectively change what we plan to do."


Leetch Plays 'Bully' Role In Effort to Rejoin Lineup
Brian Leetch put in a complete practice with his Rangers teammates today at Rye Playland and he even attempted to do a little pushing and shoving with the weak left arm that has plagued him since mid-December.
Leetch, the star defenseman who has missed 24 games in a row because of nerve damage sustained in a game in St.
Louis on Dec. 17, appears to be moving closer and closer to returning to the Rangers' lineup, although that is not likely to happen as quickly as Leetch himself had hoped.


L.H. Coleman, 96; Lawyer Specialized In Banking Industry
Leighton Hammond Coleman, a leading practitioner of corporate and banking law in New York for 45 years, died on Sunday at St.
John's Episcopal Hospital in Smithtown, L.I.
He was 96 and lived in Stony Brook, L.I.
The cause of death was a stroke, his family reported.


Test of Ways to End Welfare Dependence
IN one of the largest experiments yet in using a control group to test the efficacy of a public policy, the Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation (M.D.R.C.) is evaluating a California program designed to help welfare recipients get off welfare.
While earlier Federal laws encouraged states to funnel recipients into work, the Family Support Act of 1988 demands more ambitious efforts to wean the chronically dependent from welfare.
California's version, the Greater Avenues to Independence Program, is being evaluated with experiments in six counties, using randomly selected individual controls for comparison.
And the research organization has already published voluminous information about what happened to 33,000 individuals in the first year of testing.


Pricing PC's
Usually, nothing hurts personal computer stocks more than a price war, or the threat of one.
But yesterday, Compaq Computer, which has announced price cuts, rose more than 8 percent; Dell and Apple also outpaced the broader market.
Analysts say the latest cuts may help the strongest companies to gain market share.


Classical Music in Review
Brooklyn Philharmonic
Brooklyn Academy of Music
Witold Lutoslawski's 80th birthday was Jan. 25, and although the Los Angeles Philharmonic and the San Francisco Symphony presented tributes to the Polish composer, the celebrations on the East Coast have been surprisingly sparse.
On Saturday evening, the Brooklyn Philharmonic made amends with a performance of the composer's Third Symphony.
Jan Krenz, a Polish conductor and composer, led the performance.


DDB Needham plans to unbundle its services, a move others may follow.
ENDING widespread speculation, DDB Needham Worldwide said it plans to acquire at least one large independent media services company as part of a restructuring that would create a separate media unit by summer's end.
The acquisition plan and timetable were disclosed yesterday by Page Thompson, executive vice president and media director for DDB Needham.
The move signals that the agency has leaped completely off a fence where many other agencies remain as they contemplate the risks and rewards of "unbundling," or spinning off specialized units previously operated in-house.


Classical Music in Review
Pavel Nersessian
Pianist  Alice Tully Hall
Pavel Nersessian, winner of the recently established G.P.A.
Dublin piano competition, made his American debut on Thursday night in a recital of Russian music.
The program's range was rather narrow, with all the works more or less episodic in nature, but Mr.
Nersessian displayed a gift for softly colored expressiveness (in Medtner's "Canzona Serenata") and also for hammering virtuosity (in Shostakovich's Piano Sonata No. 1 and the up-tempo sections of Rachmaninoff's Variations on a Theme of Corelli).
Tchaikovsky's "Seasons," all 12 pieces, made a rather daring climax to the evening; Mr.
Nersessian managed to sustain interest throughout, and gave lyrical breadth to the familiar strains of "June" and "November." This seemed an impressive debut, although none of the music presented a major intellectual challenge (Shostakovich's youthful iconoclasm included).
One minor reservation: Mr.
Nersessian's command of the rhythmic pulse in the Rachmaninoff was occasionally unsteady.


Accounts
*
Foster Farms, Livingston, Calif., to Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, San Francisco, to handle the poultry marketer's account, previously at Chiat/ Day, Venice, Calif.
Goodby, Berlin was awarded the $5 million account following a review whose finalists were Hoffman/Lewis, Oakland, Calif.; Ketchum Advertising San Francisco, and McCann-Erickson San Francisco. *
Zenith Electronics Corp., Glenview, Ill., to Arian, Lowe, Travis &amp; Gusick, Chicago, for regional advertising to introduce a line of consumer electronics.
Billings were not disclosed.


Police-Killers Offer Insights Into Victims' Fatal Mistakes
The cop killer was deep in an eerie narrative, not bragging, not regretting, just lost in the vivid detail as he recalled casually ambushing a highway patrolman too busy with a clipboard and driver's license to see the end approaching.
"Not watching me at the time, I stuck my wallet back into my pocket and pulled out my pistol and shot him," the killer recollected into the video camera.


Gag Rule in Romania
Old habits die hard in Romania, whose Communist regime was the most autocratic in Eastern Europe until its violent demise in 1989.
Under Nicolae Ceaucescu, Romanians were forbidden to own typewriters without a police permit.
That rule has gone, but not the mentality it mirrored.
Though present-day Romania is supposedly more "democratic," members of the Chamber of Deputies still vote in secret.
And any journalist whose reports are deemed "incorrect" may lose the right to attend Parliament and may also be required to publish a retraction written by the chamber's president.


Billy Eckstine, 78, Band Leader And Velvet-Voiced Singer, Dies
Billy Eckstine, an influential band leader and a suave bass-baritone whose full-throated, sugary approach to popular songs inspired singers like Joe Williams, Arthur Prysock and Lou Rawls, died yesterday at Montefiore Hospital in Pittsburgh.
He was 78.
Dawn Bridges, a spokeswoman for Mercury Records, said that he had a stroke last year.


Oil Aims at Symptoms
To the Editor:
"No One Said Lorenzo's Oil Could Prevent Nerve Disease," your headline on my March 2 letter, is misleading.
In a metabolic disorder like adrenoleukodystrophy, it is the
symptoms
that everyone is trying to prevent, pending eventual cloning of the gene and availability of genetic therapy that will fix the genetic defect and be a cure.
MICHAELA ODONE Fairfax, Va., March 4, 1993


CLINTON MAY SEEK LID ON DOCTOR FEES AND LIABILITY SUITS
As part of their effort to control health costs, Clinton Administration officials are considering asking Congress to impose restrictions on medical malpractice lawsuits and limits on doctors' fees.
No decisions have been made.
The proposals, under study by health policy experts at the White House, have not been endorsed by Mr.
Clinton or reviewed for their political acceptability.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Eleanor Sanger, a television producer who won Emmy awards for sports broadcasts, misidentified one of her residences.
It was Vail, Ariz., not Colorado.


Tory Rebels Deal a Setback To Major on European Unity
Right-wing Conservative Party rebels joined members of the opposition Labor and Liberal Democratic parties today to deal Prime Minister John Major a setback in the House of Commons over the proposed treaty on European union.
In a vote of 314 to 292, the rebels and opposition politicians combined to tack a minor amendment to the treaty bill requiring that only elected local officials, rather than government appointees, be allowed to serve on a European Community advisory committee.


Substitute Teacher Held on Sex Charge
A recently hired substitute teacher was arrested yesterday and charged with sexual abuse of an 11-year-old girl at their elementary school in Harlem last Friday.
The teacher had threatened the girl with punishment if she told anyone, the police said.
Sgt.
Edelle James, a police spokeswoman, said the teacher, Burroughs York, 34, was arrested when he arrived at 8 A.M. at the school, Public School 46, at 2987 Frederick Douglass Boulevard near the Harlem River.
Mr.
York was charged with first-degree sexual abuse.


CHRONICLE
Health watch for two great women of the screen:
CLAUDETTE COLBERT, 89, has been hospitalized in Bay View Hospital, near Bridgetown, Barbados, after suffering a stroke, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
"She is seriously ill and is expected to make improvement over a six-week period," a hospital statement said.
Miss Colbert divides her time between New York City and her beachfront home in Barbados.


Yugoslav Banker Says He Will Fight Belgrade
The head of one of the largest private banks in Yugoslavia has fled with his wife and child, announcing plans to finance a movement against the Serbian nationalist leadership in Belgrade, including assassinations of political leaders.
"If it is necessary, and the movement will not work, then I may do that, escalate it," said the banker, Jezdimir Vasiljevic, in an interview tonight in Budapest, where he has stopped on his way to Israel.


Islam Doesn't Sanction Rushdie Decree
To the Editor:
In "Will Mullahs Rescind Rushdie Death Edict?" (letter, Feb. 19), Sepehr Zabih grants legitimacy to the tyrants ruling Iran, who distort and abuse Islam to justify wholesale crimes against humanity.
His letter is an example of the mythmaking in which "experts" on Islam indulge.


Review/Fashion; In Milan, Sexy Knits Stand Out
Designers were straining at the starting gate as the fall and winter fashion shows got under way here on Sunday morning.
Domenico Dolce and Stefano Gabbana were the first to go, issuing a clarion call for a return to fashion's costume party.
Moving on from the Beatles look they proposed six months ago, the team has devised more exotic styles.
They started with the striped frock coats English dandies once wore, moved on to swashbuckling military coats and then whipped up Victorian dresses with full draped skirts and corset tops in faded colors.


Martinez Is Keeping a Map of the Bronx in His Pocket
Suddenly, Dennis Martinez is a George Steinbrenner fan, a big Steinbrenner fan.
Martinez, the Expos' right-handed ace, sent a resounding message to Steinbrenner today by saying the Yankees would be the team he would like to play for if Montreal does not sign him to a two-year, $9 million contract extension before opening day.
Part of his decision is seemingly based on a fascination with Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, who last week returned to the team after a two-and-one-half-year ban from baseball.


Reviews/ Television; 'Homefront' Is Given New Chance to Flourish
Languishing on the dreaded "hiatus" list since the middle of December, ABC's "Homefront" returns, tonight at 10, for a run of seven consecutive Tuesdays.
The ratings will determine whether the series lives or dies beyond that point.
"Homefront" would seem to have two strikes against it in today's television market.
It has an hourlong format, now considered risky except for the occasional crime drama.
And like the similarly threatened "I'll Fly Away" on NBC, it is a period piece.
The past is not especially welcome in today's prime time.


Abbott Proves a Hit at Bat
Would you rather see Jim Abbott hit or pitch?
The fan reaction today during the Yankees' 2-0 victory over the Expos at Municipal Stadium indicated that Abbott's swings were more appealing to them than his fastballs.
Abbott, who was born without a right hand, faced Chris Nabholz from the left side in the top of the third inning using a bat borrowed from Dave Silvestri.
After taking a called strike on a fastball, he fouled off two pitches, took a ball and then waved at a curve for strike three.
Abbott, who almost hit one out in batting practice, turned into Jay Leno after the game.


Knicks Pull Off Big Escape In Overtime
This game had exactly what the fans wanted: an intense battle between Shaquille O'Neal and Patrick Ewing, roller-coaster turns in momentum and a pressure-packed ending that went into overtime.
When it ended, it was a game the Knicks were fortunate to win.


CHRONICLE
It was on March 16, 1968, that Robert F. Kennedy announced his candidacy for the Democratic Presidential nomination, and tonight memories of that campaign will be evoked at a dinner for 260 people, numerous friends and associates of the Kennedy family among them, at the Pierre Hotel.
Billed as a reunion, the dinner will raise the curtain on a series of 13 one-day conferences around the country entitled "A Vision for America." They start tomorrow at Columbia University, where his daughter KERRY KENNEDY CUOMO along with THOMAS F. McLARTY 3D, the White House chief of staff; former Senator HOWARD H. BAKER JR. and the historican ARTHUR M. SCHLESINGER JR. will be among the speakers.


Sensing a Loss of Control, More Doctors Call It Quits
Dr.
Stanley J. Tyler is no longer practicing medicine.
He is not exactly certain what the final straw was, but it may have been the day he learned that the simplest of laboratory tests -- as basic as the pregnancy tests sold in any pharmacy -- would now be subject to several layers of new government forms and fees if he were to perform them in his office.
"If it weren't for the paperwork, I would never have retired," said Dr.
Tyler, 59, who last year closed his internal medicine practice in Commack, L.I.
"The handwriting was on the wall, and the encroaching government was more than I could take." Loss of Control Seen
Dr.
Tyler is not alone.
Throughout the New York region and across the country, senior, seasoned doctors are choosing to retire early, cut back their hours or switch to jobs that do not involve patient care because of what they see as a loss of control to insurance companies and government agencies.


A Guide for Pentagon Budget Cuts
President Clinton has challenged his Republican critics to come up with specific proposals for budget cuts if they don't like his.
The place for both parties to look for deeper cuts is the Pentagon.
There is an excellent road map.
The Congressional Budget Office has prepared a compendium of potential cuts that goes far beyond closing military bases.
It would save tens of billions of dollars from the current five-year budget at little or no risk to American security.


Trade Center Bombing Suspect Not a Patsy, Officials Conclude
Federal and local investigators say they now believe that Mohammed A. Salameh, the 25-year-old Palestinian arrested last week in the bombing of the World Trade Center, played a significant role, if not a central one, in what they say is a conspiracy.
For the first time, criminal-justice officials also established a direct personal link between Mr.
Salameh and El Sayyid A. Nosair, the man tried for the assassination of Rabbi Meir Kahane.
They said Mr.
Salameh visited Mr.
Nosair on Rikers Island and at least one time in Attica state prison, including once within a month before the bombing.
The officials said they had seized records from his prison cell and were examining whether the two men had talked by telephone and whether prison authorities had taped the calls.


We Need to Stay With Supercollider Project; Cold Fusion Slips Away
To the Editor:
"An Idealist's New Task: To Revamp Health Care," your otherwise excellent Feb. 26 profile of Ira C. Magaziner, President Clinton's senior adviser for policy development, does a great disservice to him in belittling his prophetic testimony to Congress on cold fusion in 1989.


Who Needs Height?
During this indoor track season, FLIRTISHA HARRIS of Seton Hall ran the second-fastest time for collegiate women in the 400-meter dash (53.50 seconds) and the fifth fastest in the 200 (23.68 seconds).
The 20-year-old junior from St.
Leonard, Md., will run both events Friday and Saturday in the national collegiate indoor championships in Indianapolis.


White House Again Defends Bush's Policy on Haitians
The Clinton Administration went to court yesterday for the second time in two weeks to defend the Bush Administration's restrictive policy on Haitian refugees, a policy that President Clinton criticized during the fall campaign.
In Federal District Court in Brooklyn yesterday, a trial began on the fate of 264 Haitians who have been detained at the United States Naval Base in Guantanamo, Cuba, for about 16 months.


Low Mexico Jobless Rate Is Deceptive
Mexicans are coming across the border by the millions, seeking work in the United States.
And sidewalk vendors abound in every large Mexican city.
Yet despite this evidence of people without jobs, the Government reports that the country's unemployment rate is only 2.9 percent.
What's more, it is falling.
Not since 1953, when the Korean War brought boom times to the United States, have Americans had a rate so low.
The Mexican economy is hardly enjoying similar prosperity.
Rather than measuring national well-being, a 2.9 percent unemployment rate in a nation marked more by poverty than prosperity suggests to some Mexicans that the Western world's method of measuring unemployment is wildly unrealistic for developing countries.


New Life for Extinct Animals


METRO DIGEST
MORE DOCTORS ARE CALLING IT QUITS
Seasoned doctors are choosing to retire early or cut back their hours because of what they see as a loss of control to insurance companies and government agencies.
A1.
SUSPECT IN BOMBING SEEN AS PART OF PLOT
Federal and local investigators now believe that Mohammed A. Salameh, the man arrested last week in the bombing of the World Trade Center, played a significant role in what they say is a conspiracy.
A1.


People
*
Michael R. Boyer, executive vice president and chief operating officer at Kallir, Philips, Ross Inc., New York, was promoted to president, succeeding Norman Cooper, who continues as chairman and chief executive.


Steisel's Standing Rises In Dinkins's Inner Circle; First Deputy Mayor's Power Arena Widens
Minute by minute, day to day, Norman Steisel, New York City's First Deputy Mayor, is at the helm in City Hall.
He can often be spotted standing behind his secretaries' desks in front of his office at the far end of the main corridor.
Phone planted firmly on his ear, Mr.
Steisel barks out commands to commissioners and agency heads while his eyes survey the physical center of his domain, the long first-floor hallway through which most of the city government's movers and shakers pass each day.
It is not possible to reach Mayor David N. Dinkins's corner office without turning right at Mr.
Steisel's hectic headquarters.
These days, to reach Mr.
Dinkins himself it is usually necessary to go first to Mr.
Steisel.


The Talk of Hollywood; Warning: This Movie Is Harmful to Directors
Directors and screenwriters complain a lot.
Many of them are eager to earn piles of money, and do so.
But their professional lives are torn between wheeling and dealing on the one hand, and viewing themselves, on the other, as serious artists surviving in a sea of sharks.
If there's a single issue that underlines this balancing act faced by film makers, it's the way movies are cut up and altered for airline viewing and television.
The alterations, which include coloring, symbolize, in many ways, the powerlessness and frustrations of film makers who earn a great deal of money (and don't complain about that) but have little control over their product. (Boy, do they complain about
that.)


Ex-Officials Accused of Armory Rental Fraud
The state's Inspector General charged today that former officials in the agency that oversees the New York National Guard had defrauded and extorted cash, furs and other items from groups that rented or leased space in the Park Avenue Armory in Manhattan and that senior officials in the agency had ignored evidence of the wrongdoing.
The allegations, included in a report by Inspector General Joseph A. Spinelli, culiminated a series of investigations into corruption in the agency, the Division of Military and Naval Affairs, that has so far led to the conviction of one official and implicated at least a dozen others.


Chicago Student Wins Top Science Prize
A Chicago student won the top prize in the Westinghouse Science Talent Search tonight, while a suburban Maryland high school that had 3 students among the 40 finalists saw all 3 place in the top 10.
And for the second year in a row, neither of two New York City high schools that have dominated the contest, Stuyvesant in Manhattan and Bronx High School of Science, placed a student in the top 10.


Senate Leader Concedes On Assault Weapons Law
Saying he was not afraid to defy the National Rifle Association, Senate President Donald T. DiFrancesco announced today that he would not vote to weaken the state's assault weapons law, the toughest in the nation.
"My intended no vote will effectively kill an override effort," which would repeal the ban, Mr.
DiFrancesco said today.


Sports of The Times; Steinberg Opens Fire On Giants
UP at the microphone, Ronnie Lott, the Jets' new free safety and free-agent salesman, was asked if it had crossed his mind that with a regular-season Jets-Giants game on the 1993 schedule, he would be opposing Phil Simms in a rematch of their 1990 scuffle during a Giants-49ers game in San Francisco.
"No, it didn't," Lott said.
"But I know it's a big rivalry and I'm looking forward to it."


P.L.O. Official Convicted in 20-Year-Old Bombing Case
After swift deliberations, a man described as an official of the Palestine Liberation Organization was convicted yesterday of charges that he attempted to bomb three Israeli sites in New York City 20 years ago.
In a case that had involved one of the oldest unresolved indictments in the nation, a jury in Federal District Court in Brooklyn announced its verdict against Khaled Mohammed el-Jassem after deliberating barely three hours following a three-and-a-half day trial.


CHRONICLE
Six years ago, ENID A. HAUPT, the philanthropist and patron saint of gardens, gave $3 million to establish the Enid A. Haupt Garden, adjacent to the Smithsonian Institution building in Washington known as the Castle.
Now she has donated another $3 million to maintain it through the Enid A. Haupt Garden Endowment Fund and the Enid A. Haupt Fellowship in Horticulture.


In Muslim Town, Serbs Pay the Price
The search for the two Jevdevic men did not take long.
Somebody said that they had lived on the embankment of the Drina River, and somebody else pointed to 4 Ksenije Tasanovic Street.
The house was destroyed, its two chimneys jutting skyward out of the moldering ruins like sentinels above a tomb.
Many houses in Gorazde have been blasted by artillery shells, or machine-gunned at close range, or set afire.
But the Jevdevic house -- and its occupants, judging from human remains found inside -- had been blown to bits with what appeared to have been a special determination.


Jury Could Hear Rodney King Today
Still appearing frightened and reclusive, clearly burdened by his role as a symbol, Rodney G. King has had only a few stumbling words to say in public since he was beaten by the police two years ago.
And in private, talking about the beating to investigators, he has sometimes contradicted himself.
Now, in the prosecution's biggest gamble, he is expected as early as Tuesday to testify for the first time against the four officers accused of violating his civil rights.


IRELAND'S PREMIER HOPEFUL ON ULSTER
Prime Minister Albert Reynolds said today that when he meets President Clinton at the White House on St.
Patrick's Day he will discuss the President's ideas for American policy on Northern Ireland.
Mr.
Clinton's Presidential campaign statements on Northern Ireland caused some consternation in Britain and the north, and surprise in the Irish Republic, which Mr.
Reynolds has headed for 14 months.


Reviving the Education Department
President Clinton has wisely indicated that broad investment in education, like expansion of Head Start, retraining of workers and national service to help pay for college, is a vital part of his economic recovery program.
But beyond these lofty proposals there are two key reforms his Administration needs to make: revitalize the moribund Department of Education, and revamp the Chapter 1 program, the main vehicle for Federal aid to improve the academic skills of poor children.
Mr.
Clinton's choice of a trusted mentor, Richard Riley, as Secretary of Education was well received.
Mr.
Riley led a comprehensive effort to improve schools during two terms as Governor of South Carolina.
His new deputy, former Gov.
Madeleine Kunin of Vermont, also had a strong interest in education.


Michel Riquet, 94, French Jesuit Priest Active in Resistance
The Rev.
Michel Riquet, a Jesuit priest and former Resistance fighter who became the most popular preacher of postwar Paris as well as a widely read author, died there on Friday.
He was 94.
A native of Paris and a doctor of theology, Father Riquet defied the Vichy regime, which ruled France after the German occupation in World War II.
He helped more than 500 Allied pilots to escape from France, leading to his arrest by the Gestapo in January 1944.


COMPANY NEWS
BRITE VOICE SYSTEMS INC., Wichita, Kan., said it would issue 3.35 million shares to purchase Perception Technology Corp. of Canton, Mass., in a transaction valued at $15.9 million.
MCDONNELL DOUGLAS CORP., St.
Louis, said the Spanish Government had authorized the purchase, for the Spanish Navy, of eight radar-equipped AV-8B Harrier II Plus aircraft for $257 million.


Serbs Again Agree to Allow Evacuation of Muslims
The Bosnian Serbs' military commander today agreed to allow aid workers to evacuate thousands of Muslims from isolated areas of eastern Bosnia on Tuesday, United Nations and Serbian officials said.
"It looks like there are grounds for optimism," said a United Nations military officer stationed in this industrial city controlled by the Bosnian Government.
The sports hall, schools and hospital have been standing by for days in expectation of the arrival of thousands of refugees.


A Realignment At DDB Needham
DDB Needham Worldwide said yesterday that it would realign creative responsibilities for its Clairol and Frito-Lay accounts between its Chicago and New York offices, confirming a report this week in Adweek.
Clairol's Nice'n Easy assignment, previously handled solely by DDB Needham's New York office, will now be shared with its Chicago office.
And Frito-Lay's Cheetos, Tostitos and Rold Gold pretzels, previously handled by the Chicago office, will now be shared with its New York office.
Combined billings were estimated at $25 million.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9 MEXICAN CAMPAIGN QUARREL
After promising repeatedly to make political competition in Mexico fairer, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has provoked criticism by soliciting wealthy businessmen for hundreds of millions of dollars in contributions to his party.
A1 CLINTON, NIXON AND YELTSIN
As political odd couples go, Bill Clinton and Richard Nixon surely rank with the oddest.
But there they were, the Vietnam dove and the Vietnam hawk, sitting around the White House living room bound together by their shared support of of increased aid to Russia.
A1 ZAIRE'S BATTLING LEADERS
The President and the Prime Minister of Zaire both say they have the authority to rule the large, impoverished African nation.
Their battle for control has paralyzed the Government and cast doubt about its future stability.
A3 EVACUATION OF BOSNIAN MUSLIMS
The Bosnian Serbs' military commander agreed to allow a limited evacuation of Muslims from isolated areas of eastern Bosnia, United Nations and Serbian officials said.
A6 VIOLENCE AGAINST SERBS
Some of the Serbs who remained in Gorazde after Serbian "ethnic cleansing" got under way in eastern Bosnia have been put to death as suspected snipers.
A6 News analysis: The obstacles to finding peace in Bosnia.
A7 DEBATE OVER MIDEAST AID MONEY
The Clinton Administration was forced by an influential Democrat in Congress to confront the delicate subject of whether the United States can afford to pour billions of dollars into Israel and Egypt.
A9 ISRAELI SETTLER SLAIN IN GAZA
Palestinian laborers stabbed an Israeli to death in a Jewish settlement, hours after the army opened the Gaza Strip after six days, the Israeli military said.
A9 IRISH LEADER TO MEET CLINTON
When Prime Minister Albert Reynolds meets Mr.
Clinton on St.
Patrick's Day, he plans to discuss the President's ideas for a U.S. policy on Northern Ireland.
A8 ENGLISH TRADITION: FISH AND CHIPS
Birmingham Journal: Fish and chips endures as England's original hot fast food, a quintessential institution.
More than 9,000 outlets, mostly mom-and-pop storefronts, dispense the vinegary fare.
A4 National A12-16 WEIGHING LIMITS ON MEDICAL FEES
As part of their effort to control health costs, Clinton Administration officials are considering asking Congress to impose restrictions on medical malpractice lawsuits and limits on doctors' fees.
A1 STOCKS REACH A NEW PEAK
Stocks soared to new highs as investors braved the market's risks in search of returns no longer available from bank accounts and bonds.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 64.84 points, or 1.9 percent, to close at 3,469.42.
A1 LESSONS FROM POLICE-KILLERS
Two F.B.I. agents interviewed 50 killers of police officers in an effort to discover what the victims could have done differently.
The result is a chilling collection of murderous narratives that could change officers' behavior.
A1 KING EXPECTED ON WITNESS STAND
Rodney King is expected to testify for the first time in the case of Los Angeles four police officers accused of violating his civil rights.
A12 HOLY WAR FOR CULT?
Law-enforcement officials brought in the Army's heaviest tanks and the leader of the Texas cult involved in a bloody shootout and subsequent siege said he might welcome an apocalyptic fire fight rather than a gentle surrender.
A12 LABOR PACT UPHELD
In a victory for organized labor, the Supreme Court validated a union-only labor agreement in the cleanup of Boston Harbor, ruling that states were free to negotiate such pacts.
The Justices also let stand a lower court ruling that declared Louisiana's strict abortion law unconstitutional.
A13 RENO'S RECORD IS DEBATED
President Clinton praised Janet Reno, his choice for Attorney General, as a "front-line crime fighter." But her office has lagged behind other Florida prosecutors in several measures, including the rate at which they take cases to trial, win guilty verdicts and obtain prison sentences.
A14 CLINTON'S POWERFUL COUNSEL
Other White House counsels have wielded great power.
But because of the vacancies at the Justice Department, Clinton's counsel, Bernard Nussbaum, is in the unusual position of making some of the department's most important decisions.
A14 THINKING OF CUTS
Clinton and Congressional budget writers agreed to make deeper cuts in Federal programs than the President had originally sought.
It was a grudging bow to political as well as fiscal imperatives.
A15 The Administration defended U.S. policy on Haitian refugees.
A16 Metro Digest B1 DOCTORS WHO'VE HAD ENOUGH
Throughout the New York region and across the country, senior, seasoned doctors are choosing to retire early because of what they see as a loss of control to insurance companies and government agencies.
A1 SUSPECT'S ROLE IN BOMBING
Federal and local investigators believe that Mohammed A. Salameh, the 25-year-old suspect arrested in the bombing of the World Trade Center, played a significant role in what they say is a conspiracy.
For the first time, criminal justice officials also established a link between Mr.
Salameh and El Sayyid A. Nosair, the man tried for the assassination of Rabbi Meir Kahane.
A1 Science Times C1-11 The abyss yields its secrets to new robot devices.
C1 Social research: experiments with real people.
C1 You're right, this year's weather was really odd.
C1 Arts/Entertainment C13-18 Theater: "Aven' U Boys." C13 Music: Pollini's Schubert.
C13 Business Digest D1 Fashion Page B8 Sports B9-15 Basketball: Knicks beat Magic in overtime.
B9 Football: Jets sign Ronnie Lott.
B9 Obituaries B6-7 Billy Eckstine, singer and band leader.
B7 Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19 Editorials A guide for Pentagon budget cuts.
Needed: a few brave Republicans.
Gag rule in Romania.
Reviving the Education Dept.
Letters Russell Baker: The uncobbod code.
Enzo Biagi: Don't blame fate.
Blame the Italians.
Al Meyerhoff: No more pesticides for dinner.


Chess
Deep Blue, I.B.M.'s successor to its world leader in chess computers, Deep Thought II, won one match and lost another in Copenhagen, Feb. 24 to 28.
Deep Blue defeated the Danish national team by a 3-1 score, but lost to the top Dane, grandmaster Bent Larsen, by 1 1/2-2 1/2 in a second, individual contest.
Deep Blue's programmers had hoped for a better result, but explained that they had made several errors that handicapped their machine.
Dr.
Murray Campbell said: "We were afraid that since we had upped it to 14 processors from the original Deep Thought's 2, it might use too much time. So we limited its search depth in complex positions." It went wrong in the first game against Larsen and in practice games with the other Danes.


Officer Accused of 'Greed' in Killing of Store Owner in a Brooklyn Robbery
A Brooklyn prosecutor told jurors yesterday that a police officer accused of killing a liquor store owner acted dishonorably when he robbed the store by using his police shield to persuade the owner to let him in.
His remarks came during opening statements in a case that has raised questions about the New York City's Police Department's ability to investigate and punish its own.


Tavern Serves Drinks and Old-Time Ambience
BEFORE there was "Duffy's Tavern," or "Cheers" or the play that created America's most endearing barfly, Elwood P. Dowd, there was McGovern's, a real Irish pub in the heart of Newark when Newark was home to a large Irish population.
"Duffy's Tavern" is long gone from radio, "Cheers" is about to leave prime time forever and the Irish immigrants who came here generations ago have moved to the suburbs.


Classical Music in Review
"The Truth About Windmills" and "Savitri"
American Chamber Opera  Company Marymount Manhattan Theater
For nearly 10 years, the American Chamber Opera Company has been presenting new, recent and forgotten operas on an intimate scale.
The group's discovery this season was Gustav Holst's "Savitri," an exquisitely constructed opera on a Hindu theme from 1908.
The story is very simple; Satyavan, a young woodcutter, is about to be taken away by the figure of Death when Savitri, Satyavan's wife, tricks Death into giving him back.
Holst blends Hindu elements into a pared-down late Romantic texture, indebted at times to Schoenberg's "Verklaerte Nacht" but shot through with his own visionary intensity.


A Year of Weather: Some of It Was Strange
FOR the last year, it seems, the Northeastern United States has lurched from one abnormal weather event to another.
First came the coolest summer in decades.
Then one of the worst northeasters on record lashed the Atlantic Seaboard in late fall.
December and January were unusually mild.
Successive snowfalls surprised the region in February, and hard on their heels last week came yet another damaging northeaster.
And while all this was going on, the Far West was enduring monumental snows and drenching winter rains that reversed a 10-year pattern of drought.


Cost-Cutter's G.M. Exit Is Reported
The signs are growing stronger each day that Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the General Motors Corporation's energetic purchasing chief, will jump ship next week and join Volkswagen A.G.
Ward's Automotive Reports, citing unidentified sources in Wolfsburg, Germany, where VW is based, reported today that Mr.
Lopez would join the German auto maker on Tuesday, when several management changes are scheduled to be announced.


A Cool, Calm Norman Earns the Right to Strut
Greg Norman's heavily marketed macho image has long carried a substantial amount of backlash, particularly when he has gone long periods without a victory.
But when Norman wins, as he did Sunday in a romp at the Doral Ryder Open, his talent speaks for him much louder than anything Madison Avenue can come up with.


Summer Bottleneck Looms For Trade Pact in Congress
The Clinton Administration is increasingly concerned that it could face a political bottleneck in late summer, when the implementing legislation for the North American Free Trade Agreement reaches the same Congressional committees dealing with the President's budget proposals, Administration officials said today.
The free trade pact and the tax portions of the budget proposal must both go through the House Ways and Means Committee and the Senate Finance Committee, both of which could be further swamped if the President also submits a health-care plan this year.


Cult's Leader Raises Specter Of Fight to Finish, U.S. Says
Law-enforcement officers brought in the Army's heaviest tanks today, and David Koresh, the leader of the cult under siege near here for the past nine days, said he might welcome an apocalyptic fire fight rather than a gentle surrender as negotiations appeared to deteriorate.
In a briefing today, Bob A. Ricks, the chief spokesman on the scene for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said for the first time that Mr.
Koresh had openly spoken of provoking a bloody confrontation that would fit in with prophecies he had made about himself as a misunderstood messiah.


Japanese Stocks in Sharp Rise
Despite a steady flow of bad news about the economy and corporate health, the stock market continued its rally here this morning, buoying the long-depressed spirits of investors.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues jumped 161.83 points, or slightly less than 1 percent, to end the trading day at 17,848.30.
The Nikkei had closed the morning trading session even higher, at 18,043.95, following Wall Street's strong rally on Monday.


Examining Mob Specimens
So you've been dying to meet Dominick (Big Dom) Lofaro, Joseph (Joe Dogs) Ianuzzi, Giacomo (Fat Jackie) Dinorscio, Thomas (Tommy Del) Delgiorno and Brother Frank Minucci.
O.K., tonight's your night.
"Mob Stories" is their stories.
You may get the feeling that this cast, made up of self-described made men or hit men for the Mafia in happier times, studied the character actors in movies like "The Godfather," "Goodfellas" and "The Untouchables." All but one -- loyal Mr.
Dinorscio, who is interviewed in jail, where he is shown in a jogging outfit practicing the Chinese martial art of tai chi chuan -- have broken with the mob.
Like him, however, the others are running to fat and live in the glory of having got close enough to their former bosses to betray them.


Executive Changes
AIWA AMERICA INC., Mahwah, N.J., a maker of audio entertainment systems, named Donald La Dieu senior vice president of sales.
CROWN PUBLISHING GROUP, New York, a division of Random House, named Steve Magnuson group associate publisher and division vice president.
He had been publisher of Harper Perennial, a unit of HarperCollins.


Now You See Scott Skiles, And Now You Still See Him
After 52 minutes 59.7 seconds of close, physical play, after a long night of being harassed by the best defense in the National Basketball Association, Scott Skiles was not even breathing hard.
"I could go right out there and play another 53," said Skiles after the Knicks finally got rid of Skiles, Shaquille O'Neal and the rest of the Orlando Magic last night, surviving Tom Tolbert's open-but-wide 3-pointer at the final buzzer of overtime to win by 109-107 at Madison Square Garden.


Two Officers Of Sunbeam File Lawsuit
Two executives of the Sunbeam-Oster Company took legal action yesterday in an effort to dissolve a partnership that gives the company's former chairman and chief executive, Paul B. Kazarian, some control over Sunbeam affairs.
The suit, filed in Superior Court in Rhode Island, represents the latest chapter in a murky tale that began in mid-January with the surprising ouster of Mr.
Kazarian, who was widely credited with engineering a rapid turnaround of the once-bankrupt consumer-products company.


Insurance Group Prods New York State Agency
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners suspended the accreditation of the New York State Insurance Department yesterday as part of its effort to encourage states to adopt uniform and tougher guidelines in their regulation of the insurance industry.
The suspension of the New York department would have no immediate practical impact.
But if the New York Legislature does not enact a number of model laws proposed by the association by the end of the year, New York's examinations of insurers next year would no longer be automatically accepted by insurance departments in other states.


Weprin Urges a Clinton-Style Tax Increase
Echoing President Clinton's call for higher Federal taxes on the richest Americans, Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin today proposed raising $449 million in new state income taxes on New Yorkers with annual incomes of more than $100,000.
Although Mr.
Weprin tried to make it politically attractive by vowing that most of the proceeds would be spent on education, the plan was promptly rejected by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Senate Majority Leader Ralph J. Marino, all but scuttling its future.
But in proposing the tax increase, Mr.
Weprin, a Queens Democrat, seemed to be showing his independence from the Governor and appealing to liberal Democrats in his chamber.


Juror's Remarks Bring a Caution in Glen Ridge
Deliberations in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial were interrupted for about two and a half hours today after one juror complained to the judge about a fellow juror.
The delay began about 11:45 A.M. after one of the seven women on the panel sent the judge, R. Benjamin Cohen, a typewritten note in an envelope, apparently expressing concern that one of five male jurors had said during deliberations last week that retarded people need love and affection, officials close to the case said.


FEDERATED DEPARTMENT STORES INC. (N)
Federated Department Stores Inc., which operates Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus, Burdines and five other regional department store chains, yesterday reported fourth-quarter earnings before an extraordinary item that exceeded analysts' expectations.
The $105.1 million figure did not reflect a $6.1 million charge related to refinancing Federated's credit card business.
The company has been reaping the benefits of the two years it spent under the protection of the Federal bankruptcy court, when it streamlined its operations.
Federated, based in Cincinnati, emerged from bankruptcy last year with an initial public offering that enabled it to prepay $950 million of long-term, high-yield debt.


Oriole Sale Reported
A group of investors led by WILLIAM O. DeWITT Jr., a Cincinnati businessman, has agreed to buy the Baltimore Orioles for $135 million in cash from ELI JACOBS, according to a radio report.
But a source close the negotiations, which have been going on for months, told The Associated Press yesterday that the team was still up for sale.


Clinton and House Democrats Agree On Spending Cuts, but Ante Is Raised
In a bow to political realities and fiscal imperatives, President Clinton and budget-writers in both houses of Congress agreed today to make deeper cuts in Federal programs over the next five years than the $470 billion Mr.
Clinton had asked for.
By the end of a day in which the Democrats' spending-cut fervor took on the tone of a bidding war, the House Democrats were floating two different figures -- $55 billion and $63 billion -- for two different plans to add more cuts to Mr.
Clinton's.
But since very few spending cuts were identified for achieving any of those figures, it was difficult to tell what, if anything, the plans had in common.
Deficit Bidding War
The White House said Mr.
Clinton had agreed in an afternoon meeting with the House Budget Committee's Democrats to shave an extra $55 billion off Federal spending from 1994 through 1998, mostly by trimming relatively minor amounts from each of an array of Government programs.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Say States May Make Union-Only Pacts in Public-Works Projects
The Supreme Court today validated a union-only master labor agreement for the $6 billion cleanup of Boston Harbor in a unanimous decision that cleared the way for states to use an increasingly popular tool for insuring labor peace on major public-works projects.
The decision in the closely watched case was a victory for organized labor.
Justice Harry A. Blackmun's opinion for the Court overturned a decision by the Federal appeals court in Boston, which ruled in 1991 that the agreement violated Federal labor law.


U.S. Wanted Veto Too
To the Editor:
Jetson E. Lincoln correctly states that the Soviet Union insisted on the veto privilege for permanent members of the United Nations Security Council (letter, Feb. 12).
But he is less than correct to suggest that without the Soviet insistence there would have been no veto power.
American participants at the San Francisco conference, which drew up the United Nations Charter in 1945, agreed off the record that if the Soviet Union had not demanded the veto provision, the United States would have.


Look Who's Making a Trip to the Big Top
Thirty-five years and 40 theatrical minutes later, Manhattan is going back to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
The Jaspers fell behind Niagara with 16 minutes 30 seconds left in the first half tonight, then regained the lead with just 2.6 seconds remaining on a free throw by Chris Williams that gave them a 68-67 victory and the championship of the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference tournament.


Duane Carter; Race Car Driver, 79
Duane Carter, a founder of the United States Auto Club and a former race car driver whose career included 11 starts in the Indianapolis 500, died Sunday.
He was 79 and had been suffering from cancer.
His best performance as a starter at Indianapolis was in 1952, when he drove the Belanger Motors Special to a fourth-place finish.
He was third in 1953 as a relief driver for Sam Hanks.
He drove in the race for the last time in 1963 at the age of 50.


Debate Arises on Record Of Justice Dept. Nominee
When President Clinton nominated Janet Reno to be his Attorney General last month, he praised her as a "front-line crime fighter." But during Ms.
Reno's 15 years as Dade County State Attorney her office has lagged behind other prosecutors in the state in several measures, including the rate at which they take cases to trial, win guilty verdicts and obtain prison sentences.
The Senate Judiciary Committee plans to begin confirmation hearings on Tuesday, and criminal-justice issues are expected to be among the topics discussed.
Senators and their aides said today that they were preparing for the hearings in a unusually placid atmosphere for a committee that in recent years has presided over several searing confirmation battles.


Needed: A Few Brave Republicans
The Senate minority leader, Bob Dole, must be proud of his legislative skills, if nothing else.
Last week he rallied enough Republicans to block a vital political reform designed to make it easier for Americans to register to vote.
The Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, is scheduled to try again today to break Mr.
Dole's crippling filibuster.
The vote will be a particular test of principle for four Republican Senators: James Jeffords of Vermont, Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, Dave Durenberger of Minnesota and Bob Packwood of Oregon.
Last year all four broke with their party to support reform.
They can tip the balance if they do so again.


Barnes Foundation Show To Open as Scheduled
A spokeswoman for the National Gallery of Art in Washington said yesterday that an exhibition of French paintings from the Barnes Collection in Merion, Pa., scheduled to be presented at the National Gallery in early May, will open as planned.
The show, "Great French Paintings From the Barnes Foundation: Impressionist, Post-Impressionist and Early Modern," became the focus of attention last week when David Fisher, a lawyer for the Federal Council on the Arts and the Humanities, notified council members that that their approval in private of $300 million of insurance for the show had violated the Sunshine Act, which requires Federal agencies to conduct their business in public.


Judge Tells Redskins' Marshall To Sit Tight
A Federal judge overseeing the settlement of the National Football League's free-agency cases has denied Washington Redskins linebacker Wilber Marshall's request to be heard quickly on his objection to being named his team's "franchise player."
Marshall had argued that the designation restricts his free-agency rights by keeping him from pursuing deals with other teams besides the Redskins.
A franchise player is reserved by his team and must be granted a 20-percent raise or be paid the average salary of the top five players at his position, whichever is greater.


Let's Not Call Cocaine-Exposed Children 'Crack Babies'
To the Editor:
"For Children of Cocaine, Fresh Reasons for Hope" (front page, Feb. 16), reporting on findings in children exposed to cocaine during gestation, gives a mixed prognosis for their later development.
"The President Can Do It," A. M. Rosenthal's Feb. 12 column, paints a gloomier picture in stating that "crack babies" are "doomed to a misty, stumbling life."


By Design; Enter Chinoiserie
They talk about grunge but they take out Chinese.
This spring an inexplicable passion for Chinese fashion is sweeping the New York scene.
Young Upper East Side women, as well as denizens of downtown, are descending on Canal Street in search of real cheongsams (pronounced jong-SAMS).
This is the hot new long look for evening.
These tight-fitting sateen dresses with short sleeves, mandarin collars, frog-fastenings and a thigh-high slit up the side are at the Pearl River Mart, 277 Canal Street, for $45.
Several designers have taken inspiration from Chinese style for spring.
Agnes B.'s French interpretation is in ankle-length sheer white cotton T-shirt dresses, with or without sleeves, which have waist-high slits on both side seams and are printed with black Chinese characters down the front.
They cost $185 and would look great over leggings.
They will be at Agnes B., 116-118 Prince Street, in about two weeks.


Into the Abyss: New Robots Probe the Deep
UNDERSEA robots, which over the decades have opened new realms of activity for the world's navies, oil companies and wreck salvors, are now advancing on their greatest challenge yet.
Highly computerized and sometimes free of human control, they are starting to scrutinize the ocean depths on behalf of basic science, promising to deliver a treasure trove of data from the planet's last, largest and most mysterious frontier.
Dozens of deep-diving robots are being built or run today by the world's top centers of oceanographic research.
Robots cost far less than manned submersibles, are safer, and can stay down far longer amid the crushing pressures and inky darkness miles beneath the ocean's surface.


Child-Protection Unit Draws Fire for Failing to Do Its Job
The Suffolk County agency charged with protecting children like Katie Beers from abusive or neglectful parents came under attack here today for not doing its job.
But as harrowing accounts of the agency's failures were brought before a committee of the County Legislature, the agency's top official said the law prohibited her from discussing any of the cases.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed Augustine Leger, outfielder.
Basketball National Basketball Association  NBA -- Fined Derek Harper, Dallas Mavericks guard, $5,000 for a flagrant foul against Houston's Winston Garland on Friday night.
DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Signed Morlon Wiley, guard, for the remainder of the season.
WASHINGTON BULLETS -- Signed Larry Robinson, guard, to a 10-day contract.
Football National Football League  DENVER BRONCOS -- Signed John Elway, quarterback, to a four-year contract and Brian Habib, offensive lineman, to a series of one-year contracts.
Named Alvin Reynolds defensive assistant-quality control coach.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Signed Derrick Ned, running back, and Kevin Verdugo, quarterback, to one-year contracts and Marcus Dowdell, wide receiver, and Ronnie Williams, tight end, to two-year contracts.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Ronnie Lott, safety, to a two-year contract.
Agreed to terms with Leonard Marshall, defensive lineman, on a three-year contract.
Canadian Football League  SACRAMENTO GOLD MINERS -- Signed Basil Proctor, linebacker; Vance Hammond, defensive tackle; Chris Dyko, offensive tackle; and Eric Bergeson, safety.
Hockey National Hockey League  LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Sent Brent Thompson, defenseman, to Phoenix of the International Hockey League for injury rehabilitation.
SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Recalled Dean Kolstad, defenseman, from Kansas City of the International Hockey League.


Officials Say Another Major Suspect Emerges
Ibraham A. Elgabrowny, the man who law-enforcement officials say is emerging as a central suspect in the investigation of the World Trade Center bombing, was the chief fund-raiser and organizer of the defense of El Sayyid A. Nosair, who was imprisoned in connection with the murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane.
William Kunstler, the lawyer who represented Mr.
Nosair, said that throughout the trial Mr.
Elgabrowny provided Islamic supporters, transportation and even bodyguards for the defense team, who became targets of protests by Jewish groups.


New York State Police Alter Evidence Procedures
Seeking to prevent a repeat of the first evidence-tampering scandal in its history, the New York State Police today announced sweeping changes in the way it handles evidence and verifies fingerprints.
The new rules require at least two investigators at each crime scene and provide for extensive supervision of investigations by senior officers.


A Financier's Elusive Paper Trail
Last summer, the South Bay Care Center, a 192-bed nursing home in Long Beach, Calif., was in desperate shape.
The nonprofit group that owned it was behind on its bills and its mortgage payments, and was frantically trying to sell the business.
At last, in September, a buyer was found -- Steven Hoffenberg, who later stepped into the spotlight as an 11th-hour bidder for The New York Post.
But curiously, when the paperwork was being prepared for the nursing home purchase, Mr.
Hoffenberg's name was nowhere to be found.


Philip Roth Sees Double. And Maybe Triple, Too.
Philip Roth swears that his latest book, "Operation Shylock," is true, that it all happened, that he was driven to despair by the sleeping pill Halcion, that he worked in Athens as an Israeli spy and that he met in Jerusalem his lunatic double: a missing-persons detective and anti-Zionist using the name Philip Roth.
"Operation Shylock," Mr.
Roth insists with a post-modern straight face, is a "confession," not a novel, and he means for us to take this every bit as seriously as the contents labels demanded by the strictures of the Food and Drug Administration.


Wyoming Resignation
Wyoming Coach BENNY DEES, who in six years took the Cowboys to one National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament and a National Invitation Tournament appearance, resigned yesterday to take over the Western Carolina program. (AP)


Maryland Agency Top Yield 5.50%
A preliminary pricing yesterday of a $73.6 million bond issue by the Maryland Health and Higher Education Facilities Authority through underwriters led by First Chicago Capital Markets Inc. produced a maximum yield of 5.50 percent for an issue due in 2023.
Serial bonds were priced to yield from 3 percent in 1995 to 5.30 percent in 2008, with the bond due in 2013 priced to yield 5.40 percent.
For investors in the 31 percent tax bracket, the bond equivalent yields are 7.97 percent for a bond due in 2023 and 7.83 percent for a bond due in 2013.
The yields on serial bonds would range from 4.35 percent in 1995 to 7.68 percent in 2008.


Cahners President Takes a Leave
Terrence M. McDermott, president at the Cahners Publishing Company in Newton, Mass., has unexpectedly taken a leave of absence "while he considers his future plans," a spokeswoman for the company said yesterday in response to an inquiry about a report that he had resigned.
In the absence of Mr.
McDermott, 50, Robert L. Krakoff, 57, chairman and chief executive at Cahners, as well as at its parent, Reed Publishing U.S.A., will also serve as president.


In Jersey City, Police Shine In Spotlight
The police department here has become a key resource in the investigation of the bombing of the World Trade Center, putting it in the spotlight even as it is undergoing an extensive reorganization.
Repeatedly, the department's 821 officers and superiors have been called on to perform a variety of duties, from sealing off streets to assisting teams of investigators in executing search warrants.


Market Place; Stocks may not reflect cleanup liabilities that may come soon.
THE earnings of Smokestack America seem likely to face new setbacks because of future liabilities for cleaning up the environment, according to a Price Waterhouse survey.
The survey, which covered manufacturing companies, public utilities and extractive industries, found that 62 percent have known environmental liabilities that are both material and undisclosed.


INSIDE
Questions for Nominee
Critics question the performance of President Clinton's choice for Attorney General, Janet Reno, in punishing criminals in Miami.
Page A14.
Awaiting Rodney King
Rodney G. King, who has said little publicly since he was beaten by Los Angeles police officers, may testify in their Federal trial today.
Page A12.
Violence Against Serbs, Too
Some of the Serbs who remained in a Bosnian town after Serbian "ethnic cleansing" began have been killed as suspected snipers.
Page A6.


We Need to Stay With Supercollider Project
To the Editor:
Re "Big Science, Big Budget Cuts" (editorial, Feb. 15):


New Role for White House Counsel: De Facto Attorney General
His job, Bernard W. Nussbaum likes to say, is to make sure that any legal issues confronting the White House do not turn into political problems.
It was that job description, which Mr.
Nussbaum gave to Bill Clinton in Little Rock, Ark., in January, days before the Presidential inauguration, that persuaded Mr.
Clinton to appoint him as White House counsel.
It followed Mr.
Nussbaum's observation that, from Watergate to the Iran-contra scandal, four of the last five Presidents have been politically wounded as a result of decisions by their legal counsel's office.


We Need to Stay With Supercollider Project; A Question of Timing
To the Editor:
Big science, especially the superconducting supercollider project, deserves special scrutiny as we assess our Federal budget.
New technology may eliminate the very need for the massive accelerator being built in Texas.
A group of scientists at the University of California reported in the Jan. 4 issue of Physical Review Letters that in gas heated by lasers, electric fields of sufficient intensity were created to accelerate electrons to speeds envisioned by the supercollider.
This method, if confirmed, would cost a small fraction of that project and may represent an important alternative technology.
But there are deeper reasons for concern.


A Defensive Rush: Jets Land Marshall and Lott
The Jets plucked Ronnie Lott, one of the game's great defensive backs, and Leonard Marshall, a stalwart at defensive end for the Giants, from the ranks of the newly minted National Football League free agents today as part of a major rebuilding effort.
Lott, who signed a two-year deal, has four Super Bowl rings from his 10 seasons with the San Francisco 49ers.
Last season, at the age of 33, Lott played his second season with the Los Angeles Raiders and led his team in tackles.
He turns 34 in May.
The free safety is first in interceptions among active players with 60.
He has played in the Pro Bowl 10 times.


Aids Kit for Powerbook
APPLE COMPUTER INC. is selling Powerbook portable Macintosh computers at a rate of more than a million a year, which is a remarkable pace for a computer that is mostly incompatible with 90 percent of the other PC's in the world.
As might be expected from those who march to the beat of a different drummer, or at least to the code of a different operating system, people who tote Powerbooks seem to take a particular pride in fine-tuning their machines.
One way to jazz up the Powerbook is to load it with the Norton Essentials for Powerbook, a $129 package produced by the Symantec Corporation of Cupertino, Calif.


Fracture Puts Anderson Out For the Season
The Nets' worst fears were realized today when they learned they would be without Kenny Anderson, their star point guard, for the remainder of the season because of a fractured bone in his left wrist.
Anderson, who suffered the fracture two Sundays ago, was examined this morning by several doctors.
The Nets then issued a terse statement that said Anderson's left arm would be placed in a full cast, that his condition would be reevaluated at a later date and that he was finished for the 1992-93 campaign.


Q&amp;A
Stop the Clock
Q.
Can some people actually stop their own watches or run down the batteries through magnetic, electrical or chemical means?


White House Memo; One Topic, Several Agendas As Clinton and Nixon Meet
As political odd couples go, Bill Clinton and Richard Nixon surely rank with the oddest.
But there they were today, the Vietnam dove and the Vietnam hawk,sitting around the White House living room, bonded together by their shared feelings about Russia.
Never mind that Mr.
Nixon rose to the Presidency riding the issue of opposition to Communist Russia, while Mr.
Clinton's only noteworthy experience with the place was a youthful tourist visit, for which he was attacked during the Presidential campaign.
Today, the two men find themselves sharing a political trench in the renewed debate over how much aid to give Russia, at a time when its first democratically elected President is at risk of being toppled.


Corrections
An article Feb. 24 about the General Motors plant in North Tarrytown, N.Y., misstated an agreement about the company's obligations.
According to a G.M. spokeswoman, Margaret G. Holmes, the company promised to make certain payments in lieu of taxes from 1985 to 1995.
It was not required to stay in North Tarrytown until 1995.


No Headline
This used to be a profession where people never really retired.
Now we're finding a fair number of physicians leaving in their late 50's or early 60's. -- DR.
NANCY W. DICKEY, American Medical Association trustee.  [ A1:5. ]


Seeking Peace in Bosnia: Skepticism Is Eroding Hope
The Bosnian peace talks have again broken off with no agreement, but the mediators are still talking as if they can achieve an end to the civil war.
There are numerous skeptics, however, who doubt the Serbs and Muslims will ever accept the admittedly imperfect plan charted by Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a proposed 25-cent increase in New York City subway and bus fares misstated addresses in some copies for the sites of the first two public hearings on the proposal.
The first hearing, at 6 P.M. today, is at New York City Technical College, 300 Jay Street, in Brooklyn.
The second, at 4 P.M.
Thursday, is in the Roosevelt Hotel on Madison Avenue at 45th Street in Manhattan.


Izaak Kolthoff, Chemist, 99, Dies; Helped Improve Synthetic Rubber
Izaak Maurits Kolthoff, a pioneer in analytical chemistry whose research led to the improvement of synthetic rubber during World War II, died last Thursday at Bethesda Lutheran Hospital and Rehabilitation Center in St.
Paul.
He was 99 and lived in St.
Paul.
The cause of death was kidney failure, said his trustee, Sidney Barrows.


Chrysler Narrows Review on Account
The Chrysler Corporation said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its consolidated media-buying account to two of the auto maker's agencies: BBDO Detroit and Bozell Detroit in Southfield, Mich.


More Spending Cuts Accepted by Clinton
In a grudging bow to political and fiscal demands, President Clinton agreed to $55 billion more in cuts in a five-year spending plan being drafted in Congress.
But the House Budget Committee chairman later said Democrats had agreed on $63 billion in cuts, and the Senate panel's chairman said he would propose almost $90 billion in deficit reductions.
Article, page A15.


Man-Made Fossils
Scientists have for the first time produced fossils of soft animal tissues in a laboratory.
In the process they discovered that most of the phosphate required for the fossilization of small animal carcasses comes from within the animal itself.
The new information will not only help scientists understand the mechanisms of how fossils formed in the past but will enable them to predict more accurately which of today's organisms are most likely to become soft-tissue fossils in the future, said Dr.
Derek Briggs, the lead author of the study and a professor of geology at the University of Bristol in England.


Zaire: Two Leaders, Many Problems, Few Hopes
Two men now say they have the authority to rule this sprawling, impoverished nation, and their battle for control has paralyzed the Government and cast doubt about its future stability.
On one side, President Mobutu Sese Seko has denounced Prime Minister Etienne Tshisekedi as a bully and a megalomaniac, and suggested that Mr.
Tshisekedi, 61, is mentally incompetent.
The Prime Minister has countered by calling the President a "Zairian Caligula" who has kept his grip on this country for 28 years "without law, morals or principles."


Paul Back, 64, Artist Who Remade Newsday
Paul Back, an artist and designer who gave Newsday its present look, died on Friday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 64 and lived in Northport, L.I.
Complications from asthma and pneumonia caused his death, the paper reported.


Jordan Back at Practice, But Isn't Ready to Play
Chicago Bulls star MICHAEL JORDAN practiced yesterday, three days after leaving the hospital for a foot infection.
But he said he might miss his third consecutive game.
Jordan was confined to informal shooting during the Bulls' practice in Deerfield, Ill.
His status for tonight's home game against Seattle won't be determined until game time.


Bridge
One of the strongest Swiss Team events ever held in the New York metropolitan area was played during the weekend, partly in Hempstead, L.I., and partly in Manhattan.
It was the first stage of the Grand National Team Championship, with four squads to qualify for knockout play.
Following are the final standings:


Sex Activity by Children Brings Suit Against Home
The mother of an 8-year-old girl charged yesterday that social workers at a temporary home for emotionally troubled children in Brooklyn failed to prevent five young boys from repeatedly having sex with her daughter.
The woman, Shirley Greenaway, is suing to have the girl, who is mentally retarded, returned to her custody because of what she described as a lack of oversight of her daughter's case by the city and state.
On the steps of City Hall yesterday, Ms.
Greenaway and her lawyer accused state officials of bungling the investigation into her complaints and of failing to take action against the supervisors at the home.


New Theory Suggests Cell Regulator May Hold the Key to Fighting AIDS
IT all began with a very simple question.
Why, some researchers asked, doesn't the immune system simply replace the white blood cells that are killed by the virus that causes AIDS?
With that as a starting point, two groups of investigators have independently formulated a provocative new hypothesis that could explain how and why the immune system collapses in AIDS.
So far, the hypothesis has only circumstantial evidence to support it.
But there is compelling evidence that the scientists are on the right track, wrote Dr.
Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the Division of AIDS at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, in an editorial accompanying the publication of the new studies.


Fungus Is a Flowerlike Con Artist
AT a glance, the bright yellow bloom might seem to be just another of the many flowers that dot Colorado's alpine meadows as the winter snows begin to retreat.
But a closer inspection reveals that this sweet-smelling, nectar-rich rosette is no flower at all.
Instead, it is the artful display of an extremely manipulative rust fungus, which invades mustard plants and tricks them into assuming an entirely new shape topped by a bizarre pseudoflower fashioned of leaves.


Mets Are Hoping Jones Will Be Bob Terrific
Bobby Jones can't overpower the strike zone, can't invade it with the impunity that comes with a 90-mile-an-hour fastball.
His pitches, instead, overtake the strike zone by deception, through the side door, under the cover of ordinariness.
But often, Jones, without perhaps having thrown a single pitch worthy of awe, is on the mound at game's end, the strike zone his, the night a triumph.


Senna Rejoins McLaren
AYRTON SENNA, the three-time world champion who had threatened to sit out the Formula One season, agreed yesterday to rejoin McLaren for this weekend's South African Grand Prix.
The 32-year-old Brazilian will join MICHAEL ANDRETTI as McLaren's drivers for the opening race of the season.
MIKA HAKKINEN of Finland was bumped to the role of reserve driver for the Johannesburg race.


PATTERNS
Marc Jacobs Flirts in Italy
Fortunately, Marc Jacobs was not yet in Milan when The International Herald Tribune's fashion editor, Suzy Menkes, handed out "Grunge Is Ghastly" buttons.
As it happens, Ms.
Menkes's feelings on the subject are shared by the woman who may finance Mr.
Jacobs in his own collection, Donatella Girombelli, who owns 38 percent of the Genny Holding Company. , producer of Genny, Genny Duo, Complice and Byblos, among others.
"I think it's over," Ms.
Girombelli said just before the Byblos show, which was, by the way, a bit grungy itself.
"When a life-style phenomenon becomes a fashion phenomenon, it's going to weigh itself down quickly."
Ms.
Girombelli is considered an anomaly in fashion: a financier who understands designers.
"I work with the clothes," she said.
"I touch the fabrics. I actually make dresses. I can understand their problems."


BOXING: NOTEBOOK;
Do not look at the record.
Please.
Ignore it; think of it as an aberration.
It is the kind of record that belongs to a fighter on his way down, not on his way up, so don't ask.
Jesse Ferguson is 19-9 and has spent part of his career getting other boxers ready for big fights, but now he is close to one of his own.
By today, he could learn if he will fight Riddick Bowe for the heavyweight title in May, a bout that would earn him $500,000, which is 10 times more than he has earned for any previous fight.


Runaways Often Flee Domestic Violence
To the Editor:
The role domestic violence plays in the tragedy of America's missing children was absent from your Feb. 9 article on tracking leads.
Most of the 450,700 children who run away each year were sexually abused -- usually by a father, stepfather, another male relative or the mother's boyfriend.


Earl Wrightson, 77; Baritone Sang Leads In Touring Musicals
Earl Wrightson, a singer and actor who brought his deep baritone voice and imposing stage presence to dozens of musical comedies and concerts, and who had his own television variety shows in the 1940's and 50's, died on Sunday at his home in East Norwich, L.I.
He was 77.
The cause was heart failure, said his singing partner since 1951, Lois Hunt, who was also his companion.


The Best Of All Possible Weddings
IT probably wouldn't have helped Spencer Tracy or Steve Martin to be better fathers of the bride, but the Wedding Workshop is an invaluable piece of software for parents or principals keeping track of the many details that lead up to a traditional ceremony.
The Wedding Workshop, for Windows 3.0 or later, offers a variety of modules for guest lists, estimated and actual expenses, to-do lists, vendors and service providers.
In computer terms, these are specialized databases and spreadsheets, plus a small word processing program, so you can do everything within the one program.


Arthur E. Coia; Union Leader, 79
Arthur E. Coia, a retired general secretary-treasurer of the Laborers International Union of North America, died Thursday in Providence, R.I.
He was 79.
A union statement said his death followed a long illness.


We Need to Stay With Supercollider Project; Make an Offer for Mir
To the Editor:
"Big Science, Big Budget Cuts" (editorial, Feb. 15) advocates abolishing further work on the space station.


Mexican Leader Asks Executives To Give Party $25 Million Each
After promising repeatedly to make political competition in Mexico more fair, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has provoked a hail of criticism by soliciting wealthy business executives to contribute hundreds of millions of dollars to the governing party.
The protests followed the disclosure that Mr.
Salinas presided over a private dinner on Feb. 23 at which nearly 30 of the country's most powerful executives were asked to give $25 million each to the Institutional Revolutionary Party.


Observer; The Uncobbod Code
I have a cold. Or, to state it orally, I hab a code.
Like all my codes, it is absoludely fascinatig. Would you like to hear about it?


Hearing Focuses on School Corruption
After repeated scandals, New York City's school custodians have become a nationwide symbol of corruption in government, and some Republican lawmakers have begun using those allegations to beat back efforts to get Federal aid to the city's classrooms.
Republican lawmakers, led by Newt Gingrich, the Georgia Congressman who is the minority whip, regularly take to the floors of the Capital to assail the mismanagement of the city's schools and especially the abuses they attribute to the school custodians.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.02
3.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.98
2.99
4.01
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.09
3.08
4.11
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.51
5.50
7.06
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.72
6.73
7.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.66
7.67
8.88
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.76
5.79
6.76
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Dehere Is Top Player
TERRY DEHERE of Seton Hall yesterday was selected as the Big East Conference's player of the year.
The senior guard, who averaged 21.8 points this season, was a first-team all-conference selection for the third straight season.
He and St.
John's DAVID CAIN were unanimous selections.
Also on the first team were Syracuse's LAWRENCE MOTEN, Connecticut's DONYELL MARSHALL and Boston College's BILLY CURLEY.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Mayfair Super Markets Inc., Elizabeth, N.J., is offering $75 million of 11 3/4 percent senior subordinated notes due in 2003 at 100 through Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
Noncallable for five years, the notes are rated B-2 by Moody's and B- by S.&amp; P.
*
Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line Co., Houston, is offering $100 million of 7.95 percent debentures due in 2023 at 100 through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
Noncallable for 10 years, the debentures are rated Baa-3 by Moody's, BBB- by S.&amp; P. and BBB by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Books of The Times; Linking Great Novels of the West to Imperialism
Culture and Imperialism
By Edward W. Said
380 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
Dickens's "Great Expectations," Austen's "Mansfield Park," Forster's "Howards End," Camus's "Etranger," Bronte's "Jane Eyre": one does not routinely think of such novels as political works, much less as works concerned with questions of imperialism and overseas dominion.
But the argument that Edward W. Said, University Professor at Columbia and a frequent spokesman for Palestinian causes, advances in his latest book is that these novels (as well as the fiction of Conrad and Kipling) not only reflected the imperial ambitions of 19th- and early 20th-century Europe, but also helped to buttress, ratify and validate those concerns.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Stocks surged to new highs as investors sought returns no longer available from bank accounts and bonds.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 64.84 points, or 1.9 percent, to a new closing high of 3,469.42.
Other indexes rose as well.  [ Page A1. ]
New York City will sell about $150 million worth of yen-denominated bonds, its first in a foreign currency.
Denominating bonds in yen makes them easier to sell in Japan than bonds denominated in dollars.  [ D1. ]


Review/Piano; A Schubertian Realm of Simplicity in Quietude
Strange are the ways of musical chemistry, especially when the ingredients are as different in appearance as Maurizio Pollini and the music of Schubert.
Mr.
Pollini has become our prototype of high-tech pianistic virtuosity: moving parts of astonishing efficiency administered by thoughtful, clear-headed intelligence.
His amazing skills have wiped the sweat from the most prodigiously difficult endeavors, allowing listeners a calm, measured look at music usually bound up in the struggles of the performer.
Schubert, himself a pianist of uneven accomplishment, was a dealer in dreams and a communicator of personal loss.
The compelling nature of nostalgia is the intense pleasure of its pains, and so the dotted rhythm that announces his G-major Sonata (D. 894) is a cry of loneliness sent out across an unbridgeable divide and at the same time an expression of self-sufficient serenity.


Comptronix in Agreements With Holders and Lenders
The Comptronix Corporation, seeking to regain its footing after an accounting scandal, said yesterday that it had settled a class-action lawsuit filed by shareholders and reached a binding debt-restructuring agreement with its lenders.
Shareholders had sued Comptronix, a contract manufacturer of circuit boards based in Guntersville, Ala., after the company announced in late November that key executives had overstated profits and took part in other irregularities.
Comptronix shares plunged after that announcement.


Review/Theater; Violence Becomes the Urban Solution
The first dramatic event in "Aven' U Boys," a play set around Avenue U in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, is a young white man's gleeful description of smashing open a black man's head.
By evening's end, the audience will have seen a husband and wife beat each other senseless, and another husband return home to his wife with welts on his back after a night of flagellation by a transvestite.
As a framed dime-store Jesus looks down from the wall, the whipped husband drops to his knees, demanding still more punishment.
His wife obliges, pouring alcohol on his open wounds.
Such is the tough theatrical currency of "Aven' U Boys," a work in which the agonized screams of the characters often blend into the apocalyptic metal-on-metal screech of the el roaring above their heads.
The audience at the John Houseman Theater, or at least that part of it with strong stomachs, holds on tight.
"Aven' U Boys" is not for those with a low tolerance for verbal and visual violence, but it can be enthusiastically recommended to anyone who wants to step into a fever dream of urban America 1993, as searingly realized by a new and gifted 29-year-old playwright named Frank Pugliese and as played for keeps by a half-dozen young actors of exciting promise.
While Mr.
Pugliese's Italian-American Brooklyn overlaps the Brooklyn or Bronx of Richard Price, Spike Lee and Martin Scorsese, his gripping style, in which fragmented dialogue and incidents seem to slice through the night like switch blades, casts its own disturbing spell.


Yen Bonds To Be Offered By New York
The Big Apple is going Japanese.
New York City said yesterday that it had decided to include about $150 million worth of yen-denominated bonds in its spring bond sale.
The city's decision to sell what are known in the business as Samurai bonds is one borrowing innovation that municipalities are considering in efforts to reduce their costs.
This will be the first bond sale by the city in any foreign currency.


Back to Work Amid Soot and Stress
For one sign of recovery from the World Trade Center disaster, consider Deloitte &amp; Touche, the huge accounting firm and one of 350 businesses forced out of the center's twin towers.
By yesterday, the firm's emergency response had shifted from the bombing to clients' tax returns and the April 15 deadline for filing them -- a daunting task in any year.


Like a New Drug, Social Programs Are Put to the Test
"WHAT is an ordinary member of the tribe to do when the witch doctors disagree?" Henry Aaron, an economist at the Brookings Institution, lamented in 1978.
Often not much, which is one reason Washington has seemed inclined to write off social science as special pleading.
But a new breed of social scientists offers an answer more likely to satisfy the skeptics.
Social policies, they assert, can be definitively tested in controlled experiments using randomly selected subjects, much the way drug companies test new treatments for asthma or arthritis or hypertension.


Trenton Votes To Control Sex Education
The Assembly passed a bill today making it mandatory that sex-education courses stress sexual abstinence as "the only completely reliable means" of preventing sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS.
The 54-to-7 Assembly vote moved New Jersey toward becoming one of only a handful of states, including California, to dictate to school districts statewide just how sex education should be taught.
It also marked a shift in the battleground over sex-education curriculum from local school board meetings to the floor of the State House.


Julia Jones-Pugliese, Fencer, Dead at 84
Julia Jones-Pugliese, who took up fencing as a New York University student in 1927 and five years later began a 60-year career as one the nation's premier coaches, died on Saturday after coaching Hunter College's men's team at a meet at St.
John's.
She was 84, and according to her family, she suffered a heart attack at Bloomingdale's in Manhattan.


May F. Goodman, 85; Spoke for Jewish Group
May Friend Goodman, who served for two decades as a representative of a leading international Jewish organization at the United Nations, died on Friday at her home in Cedarhurst, L.I.
She was 85.
She died of heart failure, a family member said.


Classical Music in Review
Harolyn Blackwell  Soprano Weill Recital Hall
Harolyn Blackwell has the kind of voice that can strongly project light roles in big opera houses, and her success has been swift and widespread.
The young American soprano brought her talents to a different kind of environment on Friday night, with a program of Purcell, Rachmaninoff, Nicolo, Richard Strauss and Ricky Ian Gordon.


Hard Ball, Networks, Let's Play Hard Ball
Chalk up one major party, the advertising agency of Leo Burnett U.S.A., as objecting vehemently to the possibility that any network will have the gumption to spend madly once more for sports programming.
In talks last week with CBS, NBC, ABC, ESPN and TNT, the Chicago-based agency voiced concern that coming negotiations between the networks and major league baseball, pro football, pro basketball and the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta would yield rights fees that will ratchet advertising rates beyond its clients' desire to pay.
Those clients include United Airlines, McDonald's, Black &amp; Decker, and Dean Witter Reynolds.


Pet Sells Whitman's Brand In Deal With Russell Stover
Pet Inc. said yesterday that it had sold its Whitman's Chocolate trademark and some related assets to a branch of the Russell Stover Candy Company for $35 million.
The sale is part of Pet's effort to focus on its more profitable grocery products, namely Old El Paso Mexican and Progresso Italian foods.
The market responded favorably to the announcement, with Pet's stock closing on the New York Stock Exchange at $16.875, up 37.5 cents on the day.
Over the last two and a half weeks, the stock has risen $2, or 13.4 percent.


Curtain Goes Up for Another 50 Years of Fame


Notes Offering By Sallie Mae
The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, is offering $500 million of floating-rate notes due Sept. 9, 1993, through various securities dealers.
Sallie Mae is a Government-sponsored private corporation that buys student loans made by banks and other institutions.


Melvin Bradford, 58, Conservative Theorist
Melvin E. A. Bradford, a conservative political theorist and professor of English at the University of Dallas, died last Wednesday at Midland Memorial Hospital in Midland, Tex.
He was 58 and lived in Irving, a Dallas suburb.
His wife, Marie, said he died after heart surgery.


Ford Motor Unit Prices Notes
The Associates Corporation of North America, a Dallas-based unit of the Ford Motor Company, yesterday priced $300 million of seven-year notes through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers.
The notes, which are due in 2000, have a 6 percent coupon and are priced at 100 to yield about 54 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Dow Surges 64.84 To a Record High On Trend In Rates
Stocks surged to new highs yesterday as investors large and small braved the market's risks in search of returns no longer available from bank accounts and bonds.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 64.84 points, or 1.9 percent, to a new high of 3,469.42, more than 28 points above its previous record close.


Corrections
An article on Friday about the links between Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and Mohammed A. Salameh, who was arrested in the World Trade Center explosion, referred incorrectly to a description of the sheik's speeches.
In the description, As'ad AbuKhalil, a Georgetown University adjunct professor of Middle East politics, said the sheik's speeches were unsophisticated.


Armored Vehicles Surround Texas Compound


Corrections
An article yesterday about Connecticut women in Congress referred incorrectly to the dean of the delegation.
It is Samuel Gejdenson, not Barbara Kennelly.
The article also misstated Representative Rosa L. DeLauro's committee assignment.
She is on the House Appropriations Committee.


Clinton Challenged on Share of U.S. Aid Going to Israel and Egypt
The Clinton Administration was forced by an influential Democrat in Congress today to confront the delicate subject of whether the United States can afford to pour billions of dollars into Israel and Egypt in light of a shrinking foreign aid budget and President Clinton's determination to resuscitate the American economy.
The Administration immediately said it was committed to continuing the aid, but the mere fact that Representative David Obey, the Wisconsin Democrat, was raising the issue meant that a sacrosanct item in next year's budget, which is just beginning to be debated by Congress, could be in for new scrutiny.


Birmingham Journal; Fried and Salty, Yessir, Matey, but Truly English
By the time Bedders Fish and Chips shop opened one recent morning, there was already a line outside, mothers with children and men in suits, secretaries on early lunch breaks and taxi drivers between fares, all awaiting that delicious moment when Pat Bedder would unlock the front door at last and release the steamy, intoxicating bouquet of fried cod and chips into the brittle air.
It is, in many ways, the most distinctively English of cooking aromas, redolent of raggedy seaside resorts with shingle beaches and working-class terraces in factory towns.


Emily's Loophole
Of course, we've long known that Potomac sleaze is a way of life for some residents of the capital.
But has the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention considered the possibility that it is also infectious?
Consider the tale of Emily's List, a fund-raising group formed to help women Congressional challengers prevail in a corrupt campaign-financing system where money from special-interest political action committees flows overwhelmingly to male incumbents.
In a notable abandonment of its professed good-government standards, Emily's List is fighting for a loophole that would undermine new limits on PAC contributions in pending campaign finance reform legislation.


South's Emblem To Be Retained On Georgia Flag
Gov.
Zell Miller said today that he was giving up his fight to remove the Confederate battle emblem from Georgia's flag because the effort was awakening extremist feelings and detracting from other legislative goals.
In an interview this afternoon, the Governor told reporters that while his effort to eliminate the emblem had prompted national and even international attention the debate over it had stalled other legislation.


Russian Chaos Stalls Disarmament, Senate Is Told
A program to use $800 million in American funds to help dismantle Russia's nuclear weapons has bogged down over chaos within Russia, Moscow's lingering obsession with secrecy and its determination to make as much money as it can on the nuclear materials that the country is giving up, a Senate committee was told today.
Sixteen months ago, Congress authorized the first half of the $800 million, but only $25 million has been spent.
A total of $303 million has been committed to particular projects, but much of that is contingent on decisions by Russia or the other three former Soviet states that have nuclear weapons -- Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan.


Campus Journal; When Students Try to Achieve Perfect Balance
Taking a midterm exam is like working with a safety net: there is always a chance for redemption.
Lynette S. Hester-Bey, an accounting major at Bloomfield College, knew that but was still nervous.
Had she done enough homework?
Could she remember what to do?
Would she flop?


Rider Sinks Wagner at Buzzer
Rider, making a rare appearance on national television, turned in a dramatic buzzer-beating performance tonight to defeat Wagner, 65-64, in the Northeast Conference Championship game and earn an automatic bid to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament before 2,000 spectators at Alumni Gymnasium.
Darrick Suber, 6-foot-4-inch point guard, scored the winning basket for Rider (19-10) with a floater in the lane with no time left on the clock.


UNION WORKERS AT NEW YORK MACY'S AUTHORIZE A STRIKE
Unionized employees at four Macy's stores in metropolitan New York have authorized a strike if R. H. Macy &amp; Company persists with a plan to make deep cuts in their health benefits.


New York Hit By Increases In Migration
About twice as many people moved out of New York as moved in from other states during the late 1980's, according to a new census analysis of a broad population shift over the decade, but New York appeared to have stanched the exodus, compared with the late 1970's.
In a study that gives more details about a trend described in earlier reports, the Census Bureau put New York near the top of the list of areas that lost more residents than they gained from other states.
The list was led by California.
But in both states, immigration from other countries was significant.


In Memory of Matthew and Terrance
Before Matthew Hintzen, 4 years old, and Terrance Fisher, 7, fade from the public's memory, there's something this city and this state can do to honor their brief lives: insure that parents who entrust their children to day-care centers leave them in good hands.
Matthew and Terrance died last month when a flash fire raced through an unlicensed day-care center.
"Unlicensed" means their caretaker's home had never been checked for health and safety hazards, fire extinguishers and smoke alarms, and that the caretaker, 82 and responsible for eight children, had not been given a physical examination.
"Licensed," on the other hand, might have meant life for two little boys.


Mayor Fears Bomb Aftermath May Malign Jersey City Image
It wasn't as if Bret Schundler didn't have enough on his mind: a troubled school system, high property taxes and the May 11 election, in which he hopes to win a full four-year term to the mayoralty he gained temporarily last fall after his predecessor went off to Federal prison.
But since last Thursday, almost a week after the bombing of the World Trade Center, his city has been under siege.
Not by terrorist conspirators but by Federal law-enforcement agencies, whose first and so far only significant arrest, a Palestinian from Jordan named Mohammed A. Salameh, took place here.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.06
3.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.98
2.98
4.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.09
4.15
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.57
5.51
7.11
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.73
6.72
7.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.68
7.66
8.92
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.79
5.76
6.75
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Spiders' Coach Retires
DICK TARRANT, architect of the biggest upset in the modern history of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, retired yesterday in Richmond.
"For us to achieve the level we did was beyond my fondest dreams," Tarrant said of his 12 years as the Richmond Spiders' coach.


Stock Rise Continues as Dow Gains 2.70
Stocks bobbed up a bit to new highs yesterday as individual investors followed through on Monday's mighty advance.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 2.70 points, to 3,472.12, a second straight record, as the American Stock Exchange index also reached a new high.
Even as the mass migration from bonds to stocks that propelled the Dow 64.84 points higher on Monday nearly ceased yesterday, strategists were impressed that the market was so steady.


17 Arrested in Separate Credit Card Schemes
Two Queens men were arrested on Monday in what the authorities said was a $2 million-a-year operation that traded in stolen and fake credit cards, and, in a separate case, 15 others were charged with using fake or stolen credit cards, the authorities said yesterday.
The arrests were part of a yearlong investigation by law-enforcement officials that uncovered a network that involved the manufacture, sale and use of fake and stolen credit cards, the Queens District Attorney, Richard A. Brown, said yesterday.
He said the 15 people who were arrested for using stolen or fake credit cards were not linked to the operation of the two men from Queens.


Victory for Holmes
LARRY HOLMES scored a fifth-round technical knockout over ROCKY PEPELI last night in Bay St.
Louis, Miss.
Holmes (56-4) used a series of left jabs to open a severe cut over Pepeli's left eye in the fourth round. (AP)


Review/Pop; Songs of Love and Politics From Brazil and Beyond
Leci Brandao's show on March 2 at the Ballroom was a travelogue in rhythm, from the sambas of Rio de Janeiro to the forro and sambareggae of northeastern Brazil.
All are noted in "Bate Tambor," the opening song of her current album, "Comprometida" (Copacabana, Brazilian import) and the closing encore of her set.
Her band is lean and percussive; a bassist (Ze Mauricio, who also wrote some of the set's songs), a guitarist, a drummer and two percussionists play transparent, springy vamps.


As Texas Siege Creeps On, F.B.I. Softens Picture of Bellicose Leader
On the 10th day of a standoff at the armed compound of a religious cult near here, Federal officials today sought to soften their earlier statements that the group's leader wanted to engage them in deadly combat.
At a news briefing today, Bob A. Ricks, the chief spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation here, said the leader of the cult, David Koresh, was alternating between making bellicose threats and offering to work out a peaceful solution.


Review/Jazz; Rhythmic Tribute To Tito Puente
The Carnegie Hall Jazz Band's concert on Thursday night made it clear that the band's musical director, the trumpeter Jon Faddis, knows how to turn music that might have been dry and functional into something exciting.
A tribute to the percussionist Tito Puente, the concert at its best had an expansive quality.
Mr.
Faddis, improvising with the arrangements and the instrumentation, created full-blown, distinct pieces that hadn't existed before.
By pulling together a collection of riffs and vamps, and calling on soloists to improvise and compete against each other, he created something that had suspense.
The concert, the third in Carnegie Hall's jazz series, moved around a bit to build a historical narrative, linking Mr.
Puente's extraordinary early orchestrations with pieces by another Latin-jazz pioneer, the trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie.
Mr.
Puente's music, rife with elements of the more advanced be-bop composers and the rhythmic drive of Afro-Cuban music, merged perfectly with Mr.
Gillespie's own Latin-influenced pieces, including "Manteca" and "Woody 'n' You." The historical connection was there and easy to see.


Serbs' Militia Still Blocks U.N. Evacuation of Muslims; Tightening the Screws
In an effort to induce the Serbs and the Muslims to sign a peace agreement, Security Council members are discussing new action to isolate Yugoslavia and Serbian-controlled parts of Bosnia, to enforce the ban on flights over Bosnia and perhaps to allow the Serbs' Muslim enemies to rearm.
The Council members are also discussing closing their diplomatic missions in Belgrade, which are already operating at minimum staff levels.


Coke Trims Pay Package Of Chairman
The Coca-Cola Company has apparently told Roberto C. Goizueta, its lavishly compensated chairman and chief executive, that there are limits to the company's generous definition of largess.
Mr.
Goizueta piloted Coke through a difficult year in 1992, one dominated by recessions at home and abroad.
Nevertheless, operating income rose by nearly 18 percent, creating $1.4 billion in shareholder wealth.


For Blast Survivors, Shock Waves of Stress
By the time he emerged from the smoke-filled World Trade Center that Friday afternoon, gasping, choking and thankful for deliverance from the most terrifying event of his life, the high-powered investment banker did what he always did to shed stress.
He packed his gym bag and headed for the health club.


Slump? O'Brien Is Asking. What Slump?
Thursday night.
That is what the Boston College basketball season has been reduced to, a game in the opening round of the Big East tournament that could lead to another game that could lead to something more; a high-stakes series of circumstances that must begin with Villanova on Thursday night.
It is a night that for all its traditional stigma -- collecting the bottom of the league in a doubleheader matching the seventh-seeded and 10th-seeded teams and Nos. 8 vs. 9 -- still holds possibilities.
There is the chance to continue the positive steps the Eagles have shown in a 9-9 Big East season, the most Boston College conference victories in a decade.
There is the means of measuring progress from that painful night two years ago, when a 1-15 team lost a 10-point lead to Villanova on Thursday night.
N.C.A.A.
Bid in Peril
And there is time to reverse the tone of a season that has seemed, on the surface, to be increasingly contentious.
Jim O'Brien, the coach of the Eagles, understands that his team finished in a four-way tie for fourth place, became the seventh-seeded team as a result of a tie breaker, and could have finished No. 3 if not for an emotional loss here to Providence last Saturday night.


Clinton Plan Would Soften Banking Rules
Hoping to spur commercial lending, the Clinton Administration has developed a set of revised banking regulations meant to encourage a mellower mind-set among bank examiners without encouraging lenders to rebuild shaky loan portfolios.
The proposed new regulations, to be introduced by President Clinton on Wednesday at a White House gathering of business executives, are being presented as a form of economic stimulus that costs the Government nothing, requires no new legislation and benefits mainly small businesses, which the Administration says have the greatest potential to create new jobs and the hardest time getting credit.





Microwave Cooking
THE pleasures of cooking fish in the microwave oven are myriad, as are the health benefits.
The fishy cooking smell is minimized.
The fish cooks perfectly and evenly, all the way to the middle bone; it remains moist throughout, and the outside doesn't get dry and powdery.
Fat is added only for flavor, and all the flavorful juices of the fish remain in the pan to be used to enrich sauces and to moisten the fish.
One of the most striking and flavorful ways to prepare fish is to cook it whole.
The only limitation on cooking whole fish in the microwave is the size of the largest pan that can fit in your oven.
The pan should be deep enough that the plastic wrap used to cover it will not touch the fish.
A fish too large to fit whole into your pan can often be cooked without its head and tail.
There is an exception to the rule of pan size.
The head and tail -- parts not to be eaten -- can be allowed to protrude over the rim of the pan.
The plastic covering should be wrapped over the protruding parts of the fish and smoothed onto the outer edge of the pan underneath.


Sidney Aronson, 68, A Sociology Professor
Sidney H. Aronson, a sociologist and educator, died on Saturday at a hospital in Pittsburgh, where he was visiting.
He was 68 and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.
His family said his death was a result of a heart attack.


U.S. Overstates Trade Deficit With China; Regulation Needed
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 14 and 15 articles on China's awakening economy are timely.
China is booming; the economic revolution is going on.
That is my strong impression from a three-week visit last month after several years of study overseas.
Many people dine in fancy restaurants and shop for famous brand-name products.


Bretts Have a Boy With a 'Great Grip'
Jackson Richard Brett yawned, stretched and slept through his first news conference today as George and Leslie Brett introduced their first child to the public.
Mrs.
Brett gave birth to the 8-pound-9-ounce baby Monday morning at St.
Luke's Hospital of Kansas City.
He was 20 1/2 inches long and, according to his father, has "huge hands and huge feet and a great grip." The boy is named for Brett's father, Jack, who died of cancer last year, and for Mrs.
Brett's father, Richard.


U.S. Overstates Trade Deficit With China; Single in Beijing
To the Editor:
Re your Feb. 17 article on the Westport Unitarian Singles Group, a Connecticut singles club with 2,000 members: "This group just couldn't exist in Idaho or many other places," you quote one club member as saying.
He hasn't been to Beijing.


Mussels a Belgian Way
FOR those with a culinary bent, Belgium means mussels.
Americans tend to eat their mussels one way -- steamed with some wine and parsley.
Belgians tend to eat their mussels a dozen different ways, and on a recent trip to Brugge, I had the best-tasting mussels I had ever eaten, even if they were prepared Provencal style.
For those who like one-dish meals, this version ranks right up there with the best.
All the vegetables are included and all that you'll need to finish off the meal is some crusty bread to dip into the wonderful sauce.


Bridge
It was, as they say, deja vu all over again.
Ten days ago in a Regional Swiss Teams in Smithtown, L.I., John Rengstorff of Manhattan picked up a hand with 7-6-0-0 distribution, which a player can expect once in almost 20,000 deals.
He bid and made five hearts, with 14 high-card points in the partnership hands, but was not pleased with the result: His teammates had doubled the same contract, and it had made an overtrick.
One week later, playing against the same opponent in the Grand National Swiss Team in Manhattan, he picked up the South hand shown in the diagram and blinked.
He considered slam possibilities when his partner doubled the opening one-diamond bid, but contented himself with a cue-bid followed by a bid of four hearts.


Theater in Review
Faust Gastronome  LaMama 74 A East Fourth Street East Village Through March 21 Text adapted and directed by Richard Schechner; music by Ralph Denzer, Michelle Kinney and Charles Gounoud; set by Chris Muller; costumes by Constance Hoffman; lighting by Lenore Doxsee; photography by Dori Urquhart; cow choreography by Leigh Brown; production stage manager, Dawn Hoffberg.
Presented by La Mama E.T.C. and East Coast Artists.
WITH: Leigh Brown, Shaula Chambliss, Daniel Wilkes Kelley, David Letwin, Ulla Neuerburg, Rebecca Ortese, Jeff Rickets, Laverne Summers and Maria Vail.


Leetch Passes Big Test as Rangers Rally to Win
The Rangers talked about caution.
They talked about testing Brian Leetch's weak left arm and shoulder gently, slowly.
Leetch had been out 81 days and 34 games with his malady, and no one wanted to take any risks when he finally returned to the Rangers' lineup.
But this is a playoff race and Leetch is, without a doubt, a vital factor in the Rangers' battle for a Patrick Division berth.
So when the doctors said yesterday that Leetch's arm was strong -- and no longer at risk of re-injury -- Leetch did not hesitate to make his return against the Los Angeles Kings at Madison Square Garden.


A Play About AIDS Makes Its Mark
SOME 400 presumed innocents file in rambunctiously to the chapel at Rikers Island detention center to see a play performed by recovering addicts.
Some trade insults or tap one another on the head, playfully.
A correction officer, Maria Cortez, stands up front, controlling the situation like a border collie herding sheep.
Her weapons: eye contact, an overpowering smile and humor.
"What you got for us tonight?" one man hollers.


U.S. Overstates Trade Deficit With China
To the Editor:
"Stirring Giant," your two-part series on China's awakening economy (front page, Feb. 14 and 15), emphasizes the growth of the United States trade deficit with China to $18.2 billion in 1992, the second largest United States import surplus after Japan.


Unofficial City Hall Candidates Thrust and Parry
No one has officially declared for the mayoral or City Council President's race yet, but in an unofficial way, the candidates were out in force at City Hall yesterday.
In the rotunda, Herman Badillo, the former Bronx Congressman who would be Mayor, attacked the Dinkins administration for what he called a deliberate policy to cut back on the arrests of street-level drug dealers.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  BOMBING'S TOLL IN PAIN AND FEAR
In the aftermath of the World Trade Center bombing, many of those who fled the smoke-filled building in confusion and desperation are discovering they need help to vent their emotional pain and fear.
Because most of the survivors were either well-paid white-collar professionals or office workers with access to medical benefits or counseling through employee assistance programs, they are getting that help.
A1.
SUSPECT SURFACED IN KAHANE INQUIRY
In the months before the trade center bombing, the Federal Bureau of Investigation was monitoring El Sayyid A. Nosair in prison for an investigation stemming from the killing of Rabbi Meir Kahane when Mohammed A. Salameh, turned up as one of Mr.
Nosair's visitors, officials disclosed.
B4.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
ECAC Playoffs
So far, fortune has favored Lake Placid, N.Y., the new site of the ECAC championship tournament, March 19-20.
At least one of the four finalists will be a team from upstate New York, Clarkson or St.
Lawrence, and a second, Rensselaer, seems likely.


The Reluctance to Begin Rehiring
While nobody here is yet calling it a boom, Fred D. Barre says business has improved significantly in recent months at his metal-fabricating company, just a wind shift from Exxon's giant Bayway refinery off the New Jersey Turnpike.
The Barre Company's backlog of unfilled orders now stands at $1.4 million, fully 25 percent above levels a year ago.
And for the last couple of months, Barre workers have been putting in four to six hours a week of overtime.


Russian Deputies Enter Ring For Showdown With Yeltsin
Deputies converged on Moscow today from the far reaches of Russia for the latest showdown with President Boris N. Yeltsin.
Despite three months of brutal maneuvering by both sides, nobody could predict how this session of the Congress of Peoples' Deputies might play out, or even how long it might last.
The Congress, whose 1,000-plus members are the highest legal authority in Russia, was officially summoned to an emergency session beginning on Wednesday to decide a relatively simple question -- should Russia go ahead with a national referendum on the Constitution that the deputies and Mr.
Yeltsin agreed to last December.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ING.
C.
OLIVETTI &amp; CO., the Italian electronics company, said yesterday that it had agreed to become the European partner for EO Inc., a company developing and marketing the personal communicator.
SPRINT CORP., Westwood, Kan., formally completed its $4.7 billion merger with the Centel Corp. yesterday.


In Kings' Goal: $1 Man Banks a 28-Save Effort
Once, Rick Knickle's rights were sold for $1.
By that time, he had tended goal in more than half a dozen minor league cities.
He had ridden on every bus in North America.
He was used to getting insulted, getting released, getting the runaround.
But this was too much.
One dollar?
That wouldn't buy a cheeseburger.
Or breakfast at the corner diner.
It bought Rick Knickle, though.


California Scrambles to Defends Its Bases From Pentagon Ax
Word that a new round of base closings would be concentrated in California has set off a week of clamorous activity by the state's elected leaders, who are reminding the Clinton Administration of its pledge to give special attention to the state's ailing economy, which threatens to stall the nation's recovery.
The full-court press by California's leadership, including the Republican Governor, the two new Democrat Senators, a host of powerful committee chairmen in Congress and dozens of state lawmakers, is the most intense effort to advance a statewide agenda since the earthquake in 1989, when officials set aside partisan and parochial interests to seek Federal aid.


Doubt on Returns of New York Bonds
New York State tax-exempt bonds have been one of the municipal market's best performers in the last two years, but some analysts are wondering if the bonds can keep up the pace.
Investor demand is rising for the bonds, which are exempt from Federal, state and city taxes, because other investments are producing low yields and Federal tax rates are expected to climb.


Review/Fashion; In Milan, Comfort and Flourishes for Fall
Dressing for a worldwide recession elicited two divergent responses from Italian designers as the fall fashion showings reached their midpoint.
On the one hand, there was the escapism of revivals from the distant past, including the jackets of English dandies.
On the other, there was the realism of classic dressing, emphasizing clothes that can last more than one season.
In the realism camp, there is a widespread revival of knitted clothes, long an Italian specialty.
The knits include oversize bulky sweaters and long, skinny skirts.
Both are youthful, durable and, when they are made in cashmere, luxurious.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
American Express is discussing selling its Shearson retail brokerage to Primerica for $1 billion.
The combination would rival Merrill Lynch as the nation's largest broker.
It would also enable Primerica's chairman to rejoin an operation he created.  [ Page D1. ]
A.T.&amp; T.'s aggressive tactics to retain toll-free long-distance customers have produced cries of foul from competitors.  [ D1. ]


3 Slain During a Robbery in a Bronx Restaurant
Two employees of a Mexican restaurant in the Bronx and a nephew of the owner were shot and killed early yesterday during a robbery in the restaurant.
A 14-year-old customer who was shot in the head survived, and a third employee escaped unharmed by sneaking out the back door, the police said.
The shootings left the relatively peaceful Bedford Park neighborhood shaken yesterday, its residents wondering what could have prompted such violence in a restaurant whose owners and employees were known as hard-working, honest and always generous to customers down on their luck.


McGirt to Have Surgery
BUDDY McGIRT, who lost his World Boxing Council welterweight title to PERNELL WHITAKER last Saturday on a unanimous decision, will undergo arthroscopic surgery next Monday to repair a ruptured tendon in his left shoulder.


Harrick Gets Extension
U.C.L.A.
Coach JIM HARRICK, 54, who led the Bruins to four N.C.A.A. tournament bids in his first four seasons, was given a three-year contract extension, the school announced yesterday.
Financial terms of the deal were not revealed, but Harrick, who has one-year remaining on his current contract, will stay with the Bruins through the 1996-97 season.
The Bruins are 20-9 over all and 10-6 in the Pac-10 this season. (AP)


Concern Mounts Over Closing of Bases
The New York region was largely spared in the last round of military base closings in 1991, but members of Congress from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut say the bullet may be harder to dodge this time.
With the public and Congress clamoring for budget cuts, they say, the military will have much less room to maneuver, however well founded the objections.
"This time we're worried," said Representative Jim Saxton, a New Jersey Republican whose district includes McGuire Air Force Base in Wrightstown.


Asylum by Gender
A woman from Saudi Arabia, identified only as "Nada," has helped Canada establish a new basis for political asylum: gender.
Recently Canada's immigration minister, Bernard Valcourt, overruled a refugee tribunal to grant "Nada" the right to remain in Canada.
She had argued that by refusing to wear a veil and otherwise opposing the subordination of women, she risked persecution if she returned home.


Faith and Free Speech Wrestle for Dominance In Brigham Young Case
Professors and students at Brigham Young University are no strangers to rules.
They are not allowed to buy a regular Coca-Cola, smoke a cigarette or chug a beer on campus because such stimulants are prohibited by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Mormon Church, which pays 70 percent of the university's budget.
There is a rule about how high shorts can be worn above the knee and a campus tenet to salute the American flag whenever it is raised or lowered.
Professors have their own rules, and when they are hired, they agree not to say or do anything that attacks the Mormon Church.


Putting Roaches in Touch With a Foe
Humankind, in its long-running war against the cockroach, has enlisted a new ally: a tiny worm known as a nematode.
Nematodes, barely visible to the human eye, carry a bacterium that is harmless to people but deadly to many types of insects.
Already popular among organic farmers and gardeners, who use nematode-laced products to kill pests in soil, the nematode is the active agent in a roach trap invented by Biosys Inc. of Palo Alto, Calif.


New Editor Is Named At Barron's
Almost three months after announcing that it was seeking a new editor for Barron's, Dow Jones &amp; Company named the publication's managing editor, James P. Meagher, to the top job yesterday.
He will succeed Alan Abelson, editor of Barron's since 1981 and its managing editor for 16 years before that.
Besides presiding over the business and financial weekly, Mr.
Abelson has also been its best-known voice through his weekly column, "Up and Down Wall Street," which he has been writing for 27 years.


Jaspers Are Going to the Dance
On the eve of a rather forgettable anniversary, everything had changed.
In the same room, at the same wooden table, nothing was the same.
Fran Fraschilla, the new coach, sat with his assistants and toasted fate, while several of his players danced defiantly to the tune, "Never Gonna Get It."


LESLIE FAY REACHES INTERIM PACT WITH LENDERS
The Leslie Fay Companies said yesterday that it had an interim agreement with its banks on a three-month revolving credit facility to finance its business while accountants continue working to identify and restate fraudulent entries made in the apparel manufacturer's books.


Dell's Sales and Profits Doubled in Fourth Quarter
The Dell Computer Corporation reported today that its spectacular pace of growth continued in the fourth quarter, with sales and net income more than doubling from levels a year earlier.
The company's sales also more than doubled for the fiscal year that ended on Jan. 31, rising to $2 billion.


Post Suitor Turns Fickle, But a New One Steps Up
The New York Post's financial roller coaster ride took new twists and dips yesterday when one of its prospective buyers announced that he wanted to be the newspaper's sole owner, then appeared to back out of the purchase altogether.
Abraham Hirschfeld, who had been working to acquire the newspaper with Steven Hoffenberg, came to Federal Bankruptcv Court in Manhattan yesterday apparently intending to say that the two had reached an agreement.


Arthur S. Parsons; Sociology Professor, 47
Arthur S. Parsons, a professor of sociology and a member of the Smith College faculty for the last 20 years, died Saturday at a nursing home in Northampton, Mass.
He was 47.
The college said the cause was complications of AIDS.


C.I.A. Chief Pleads His Case


Talks Held On Selling Shearson
The American Express Company, intent on rebuilding its financial strength and charge-card business, is discussing the sale of its Shearson brokerage operations to the Primerica Corporation for about $1 billion, the two companies confirmed yesterday.
By combining Shearson with its own brokerage unit, Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, Primerica would create a securities firm rivaling Merrill Lynch's network of 12,000 brokers as the nation's largest.
It would also reunite Sanford I. Weill, Primerica's chairman, with Shearson, a company he pieced together in the 1960's and 1970's, and sold to American Express in 1981.


Theater in Review
Somewhere I Have Never Traveled  Judith Anderson Theater 422 West 42d Street Clinton Through Sunday By Daniel MacIvor; directed by Daniel Selznick; set by Ted LeFevre; lighting by Scott Griffin; costumes by Rodney Munoz; sound by Jim van Bergen; production stage manager, Sally Frontman.
Presented by the Miranda Theater Company, Valentina Fratti, artistic director; Catherine Triant Buxton, executive director.
WITH: Julie Follansbee, Raymond Haigler, Ibi Janko, Jerry Mettner, Aideen O'Kelly and Brad Sullivan.


Italian Energy Chief Held in Scandal
The president of Italy's state-owned energy concern and the head of one of its subsidiaries were arrested on corruption charges today, widening the bribery scandal that is shaking Italy and threatening the Government of Prime Minister Giuliano Amato.
In Milan, justice officials announced the arrest of Gabriele Cagliari, the 66-year-old president of the Ente Nazionale Idrocarburi, or ENI, the giant state-owned energy concern.
In Florence, investigators said they also detained Franco Ciatti, 65, the head of ENI's turbine manufacturing subsidiary.


Review/Theater; A Musical Made of the Story of a Stroke
An incapacitating stroke may not be everyone's most welcome subject for a musical.
There is little more painful or less inspiring of song than watching as someone you love is cut off from life by illness.
But the curious thing about "Wings," an 80-minute musical adaptation of Arthur Kopit's 1978 play, is how faintly it evokes the devastating emotions of the experience.
I arrived at the New York Shakespeare Festival, where this production has been imported from the Goodman Theater in Chicago, with a pocketful of Kleenex.
It was at once a relief and a disappointment to discover that its occasional and ineffectual stabs at sentimentality notwithstanding, "Wings" is more concerned with the mind than the heart.
Indeed, that is literally the case: like the Kopit play, to which it is largely faithful, this quasi opera is obsessed with the collapse of brain functions that is known as aphasia.
In the opening scene, the elderly heroine, Emily (Linda Stephens), an aviator who long ago was an air-show wing walker, has her stroke, and the audience is immediately transported into a mind in which memories are obliterated, language is garbled, logic is short-circuited.
Some of that voyage is accomplished visually, by shattered images projected on sliding screens, and some of it by the evocative Sensurround-style sonic effects created by Richard Woodbury.
Most impressive, however, is Jeffrey Lunden's score, which uses the scrambling of a consciousness as a cue for musical experimentation.


Katie Beers Makes Appeal To Be Granted Her Privacy
Katie Beers, whose kidnapping late last year drew headlines across the nation, has issued an impassioned plea for her privacy.
In a letter to the Family Court urging that a custody hearing be closed to reporters, Katie, 10, wrote, "I don't want people to know what happened to me, because it is none of their businesses."


Alma-Ata Journal; Rushing to Kazakhstan, With a Gleam in the Eye
Like any potential gold mine, Kazakhstan has attracted its share of sophisticated homesteaders, trying to put down stakes for a potentially lavish future.
Frans A. Hoeymans arrived here two years ago, scouting around for A.T.&amp;T.'s Network Systems International, which is based in the Netherlands.
"No foreigner was here then, and nobody could help me, even to figure out the taxis," he said.
"But I thought it could be a great business, and I convinced the company. The fun is to set it up from nothing."


Hayes, Sad Over Yankee Affair, Will Anchor Rockies
Charlie Hayes wasn't in New York long, but he emerged from his experience with the Yankees with an eyewitness view that confirmed what other people have suspected from a distance.
"Who's in control. Who's in charge?" Hayes asked, then answered his own questions.
"No one, I guess. I hear they have two groups, one in New York, one in Tampa. No way you can be successful with one group working against the other."


Serbs' Militia Still Blocks U.N. Evacuation of Muslims
Local Serbian militiamen prevented a United Nations truck convoy from evacuating critically wounded and sick Muslims from a besieged enclave today, one day after the Serbs' top commander agreed to allow Muslims to leave the area, United Nations officials said.
The officials said confusion had arisen over a go-ahead given by the commander, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, to the chief of United Nations military forces in Bosnia, Gen.
Philippe Morillon of France, during talks Monday in the Bosnian Serbs' headquarters at Pale.


Islanders Hang On for 5th Straight
In winning for the fifth consecutive time tonight, the Islanders held off a determined bunch of Philadelphia Flyers, particularly in the final minute of a tense and sometimes ornery affair before 10,166 at Nassau Coliseum.
Protecting a one-goal lead, Goalie Glenn Healy had only three skaters helping him against six Flyers on the attack.
Two Islanders were in the penalty box and the Flyer goalie was on the bench for an extra skater.


U.S. Seeks Mexican Court Changes in Trade Pact
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, told the Senate Finance Committee today that the United States would seek some changes in Mexico's legal system affecting labor and environmental cases during the coming negotiations on side agreements to the North American Free Trade Agreement.
When President Clinton was a candidate, he said he would not sign legislation putting the provisions of the free trade pact into law until three such accords had first been negotiated.
Mr.
Clinton said these agreements would cover labor and environmental matters and surges in imports that might result as the pact gradually reduced tariff and non-tariff trade barriers.
Willing to Walk Away
Mr.
Kantor, in his first appearance at a Congressional hearing since he took office, said the Clinton Administration would be willing to walk away from negotiations on the side agreements if necessary rather than strike a quick deal to insure that the free trade pact could take effect as scheduled on Jan. 1.


Public &amp; Private; Gynocide
Women who have been raped will tell you that it often takes a long time to feel whole again.
They will tell you how they took showers over and over, how they kept husbands and boyfriends at arm's length for months, how they circled the house as night fell, checking the locks and bolts.
And some of them talk of feeling they've lost something.
A woman who was raped told me once, "I feel like he opened this wound and I bleeded out my whole normal personality, like I was just a shell afterward."


Giants Looking and Listening
The Giants lost one unrestricted free agent yesterday when Leonard Marshall, their defensive end for 10 years, signed with the Jets.
And more Giants, including Carl Banks, Sean Landeta, Mark Ingram and Jeff Hostetler, are looking and listening.
Hostetler, who lost the quarterback derby last week when Phil Simms signed, will go elsewhere.
While Banks, the nine-year outside linebacker, is a transition player, meaning the Giants have the right of first refusal, he returned yesterday from a visit to the Cleveland Browns and has visits planned to two unidentified teams in the next week.
Landeta, the eight-year punter, made trips last week to the Washington Redskins and the Browns.
Ingram, a six-year wide receiver, has evoked interest from the pass-conscious Miami Dolphins and Houston Oilers.


California Raising $118.4 Million
The State of California yesterday priced for sale to the public a $118.4 million bond issue through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
The proceeds will be used to refund in advance previous debt sold when interest rates were higher.
The offering, which was repriced to yield slightly less because of good investor demand, produced a maximum yield of about 5.385 percent for an electric refunding revenue bond due in 2013.
The taxable equivalent of that yield is about 7.80 percent for investors in the 31 percent Federal tax bracket.


Jesse Spark, 84, Owner Of an Export Business
Jesse B. Spark, the owner of an export business with headquarters in Manhattan, died on Sunday at a hospital in Boston.
He was 84 and lived in Brooklyn.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


What Took Place At Wounded Knee
To the Editor:
A Feb. 28 photograph showed the previous day's march by native Americans and their supporters to Wounded Knee, S.D., to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the occupation of that hamlet by the American Indian Movement.
Your caption states that "A siege by Indians who contended that the tribal leadership was corrupt took place in 1973 after the killing of two F.B.I. agents on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation." You also refer to the slaying "in 1889" of "150 to 300 Indians . . . at Wounded Knee in the last major clash of the Indian wars."


Yanks Ask O'Neill To Adapt To Left
If spring training is supposed to be about everything that is fresh and new, Paul O'Neill certainly belongs here.
With the Yankees, O'Neill is encountering a new league, a new team, a new manager, new teammates and even a new position.
After six years playing for the Cincinnati Reds, a team he cherished as a boy growing up in nearby Columbus, Ohio, O'Neill is gradually getting accustomed to trading in the red stockings for the pinstripes of New York.
Just two weeks into his American League career, the 30-year-old O'Neill is happy, but hardly content.
Much needs to be done.


No Headline
"I was just trying to stay alive, sir. They never gave me a chance to stay still." -- RODNEY KING.  [ A1:4. ]


60-Minute Gourmet
IT'S remarkable how common skate has become on restaurant menus.
Just five years ago, this delicacy was found only at the most ambitious places, where it was largely consumed by Europeans or those who had sampled it abroad.
Skate is a delectable fish with a mild flavor and -- if cooked properly -- a somewhat delicate texture.
Incorrectly prepared, it can be tough and fibrous.
A kind of ray, it has a flat body and a short, spineless tail.
It is found in oceans worldwide, weighing anywhere from several pounds to two tons.
The whole uncleaned fish is seldom seen in markets.
The wings are the most edible portion.


Hope Drops From the Sky To Besieged Bosnia Town
It was 12:35 A.M. today when a shattering noise erupted in the snowbound plum orchard outside Mehemed Pulutak's bedroom, a blast so like a Serbian artillery shell that Mr.
Pulutak dove for the floor.
But the impact in Mr.
Pulutak's orchard marked the arrival of an American relief airdrop that Gorazde had been awaiting for more than a week.
The blow that severed the branches of one of the plum trees was an 1,100-pound bundle of brown plastic packets known to the United States military as "meals ready to eat."  One Pallet Bursts
There must have been a parachute failure when it was dropped from a United States C-130 transport plane flying at 10,000 feet, because the wooden pallet and its tarpaulin-wrapped load of military rations hit the ground with such force that many of the military ration packs burst open, spilling the contents into a chef's nightmare of meatballs in tomato sauce, escalloped potatoes with ham, beef stew and apple jelly.


A Little Pasta With Your Armani Jacket? Naturalmente!
DESIGNER food, an expression often used to describe trendy culinary concoctions or bioengineered produce, has taken on another meaning here with the opening of an Armani clothing store that offers not only high fashion but also high-priced Northern Italian cuisine.
The restaurant, Emporio Armani Express, which opened in November, is part of a chain that Giorgio Armani has started in the last year in his Emporio Armani stores, which are less expensive than his boutiques but more expensive than his A/X shops.


Broken Toys
Some toy stocks have held up no better this year than some poorly made Christmas gifts.
Mattel fell apart last month on disappointing earnings.
Yesterday, it happened to Fisher-Price, a favorite of investors, when an analyst cut his earnings estimate.
With stocks so high, one analyst said, bad news is nearly fatal.


Personal Health
FACED with a society-wide reluctance to deal medically with matters of the bowel, the American Cancer Society has for years prompted people to get themselves checked for cancers of the colon and rectum with the admonition "Don't die of embarrassment."
When this slogan was coined, the exam involved a proctoscope, an intimidating foot-long rigid instrument inserted through the rectum.
Now the proctoscope, never a favorite among patients, is becoming a museum piece, replaced by newer, more effective and less uncomfortable means for early detection of colorectal cancer.


Glen Ridge Jury Told To Judge Impartially
Jurors in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial deliberated for about five and a half hours today after the judge, R. Benjamin Cohen, admonished them to be impartial judges in the case.
In an apparent reference to the typewritten note he received on Monday from a juror complaining about another's conduct, Judge Cohen told the jurors today that differing views were understandable.
"We want that kind of discussion," he said.
But he told them to proceed rationally, fairly, impartially and calmly.


Militants Go on Trial for Attacks on Egypt Tourists


U.S. Set to Seek Resumption Of Middle East Peace Talks
The Clinton Administration is poised to invite the parties in the Middle East peace negotiations to resume their discussions next month, even though the Palestinian representatives continue to say they will not take part, senior Administration officials said today.


Corrections
An obituary headline yesterday about the singer and band leader Billy Eckstine misstated his age in some copies.
He was 78.


In Europe, Musicals Get Varying Reactions
Cole Porter may have epitomized dapper American sophistication between the world wars, but his image had a Gallic aura.
Porter loved Paris; he wrote a song to say so, and after 1919 he could even claim to be a three-year veteran of the French Foreign Legion (serving, it should be noted, not in some Godforsaken North African hellhole but in Paris and Fontainebleau).
From 1919 to the mid-20's he lived in Paris, studying counterpoint and composition at the Schola Cantorum and becoming known in elegant circles for his soirees in Venice and on the Riviera as well as in the French capital.
His affection for France lasted at least as late as 1956, with his contributions to the film "High Society.".


Drug Manufacturers to Ask for Antitrust Exemption
Under intense pressure from President Clinton to cut prices, the nation's drug companies said today that they would ask the Justice Department for an exemption from antitrust laws to discuss price restraints.
Bruce J. Brennan, senior vice president and general counsel of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, said that as a result of a decision by the trade group's executive committee, he would make the request to the department this week.


The Economist Elevates Business Editor to Top Post
Bill Emmott, the business affairs editor of The Economist, was named today as the next editor of the magazine.
Mr.
Emmott, 36, will replace Rupert Pennant-Rea on March 26 as the magazine's top editor.
He will be the 15th editor of The Economist, which began publication 150 years ago.


Fujitsu Plans to Cut Hiring
In another sign of the tough times in Japan, the nation's largest computer company said that it would slash its hiring of new employees in the coming year to cut its costs.
Fujitsu Ltd. said it would hire only 300 new college graduates in the fiscal year that begins next month, compared with 2,200 hired this year.
No graduates at all will be hired for sales, administration, clerical or factory work, with all the 300 slots going to engineers.
This year, 900 of the people hired were engineers.


Sports of The Times; Playoffs Add Energy To Season
A FUNNY thing happened at the Garden the other night.
Two members of the Gulf-and-Western-or-Whatever-They're-Calling-It-These-Days-Corporate-Dancers dashed over to the celebrity seats after one of their aggressive routines that seem choreographed to represent the artificiality of modern urban life.
Anyway, the noted American character actor, Arnold Schwarzenegger, taking a break from disrupting New York traffic, spotted the dancers coming his way and he got what appeared to be the empty seat next to him and they did one of those cartoon brake jobs, like the Roadrunner coming to a dead halt.
Screech!
Where's Gregory?
They just wanted to make a quick professional salute to their nimble colleague, Gregory Hines, who was off doing a television interview during a timeout.
A cute moment, watching Arnold's faceoid freeze.


Solomon J. Buchsbaum, Physicist And Presidential Adviser, 63, Dies
Dr.
Solomon J. Buchsbaum, a physicist and top official at Bell Laboratories who served as a science adviser to United States Presidents for the last 22 years, died on Monday at a hospital in Morristown, N.J.
He was 63 and lived in Westfield, N.J.
The cause was multiple myeloma, his family said.


Food Irradiation Holds Too Many Risks
To the Editor:
"Time for Irradiation" (letter, Feb. 19) by James Steele exploits a human tragedy -- the E. coli poisoning deaths in Washington State -- to promote food irradiation, a questionable technology.
The sale of undercooked, disease-ridden hamburgers from Jack-in-the-Box is another disgraceful chapter in the history of meat slaughtering and packing.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association  ORLANDO MAGIC -- Named Otis Smith youth basketball programs manager.
Football National Football League  CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed Houston Hoover, guard.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Named Bill Meyers assistant offensive line coach.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Signed Les Miller, nose tackle, to a two-year contract and Mike Brennan and Scott Bowles, offensive lineman, to one-year contracts.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Leonard Marshall, defensive end, to a three-year contract.
Hockey National Hockey League  BUFFALO SABRES -- Called up Billy Houlder, defenseman, from San Diego of the International Hockey League.


U.S. Overstates Trade Deficit With China
To the Editor:
"Stirring Giant," your two-part series on China's awakening economy (front page, Feb. 14 and 15), emphasizes the growth of the United States trade deficit with China to $18.2 billion in 1992, the second largest United States import surplus after Japan.


Hurricane Bill Threatens San Juan
Puerto Ricans are distressed by a provision of President Clinton's generally fair economic reform plan.
Though we occupy the bottom rung of the income ladder in the United States, one facet of the plan would amount to a requiem for Operation Bootstrap, which has elevated the island's standard of living.
Because of proposed changes in tax laws, the 3.5 million Puerto Ricans would be deprived of their principal legal instrument for economic development.
The result would be stagnation, reduced productivity, lower wages, lower-quality jobs -- in short, a drastic reduction in our living standard, and dislocation.


Conrad L. Christensen; Consulting Engineer, 89
Conrad Lincoln Christensen, co-founder and first president of the Ulster Performing Arts Center in Kingston, N.Y., died on Feb. 26 at Benedictine Hospital in Kingston.
He was 89 and a resident of suburban Hurley.
The cause of death was leukemia, his family said.


CLINTON IS PUSHING WEALTHIER NATIONS TO BOLSTER RUSSIA
President Clinton said today that he would support an emergency meeting of the major industrialized democracies to discuss how they can bolster the Russian democracy movement, adding that the group's next planned summit in July might be too long to wait.
"The important point I'd like to make," Mr.
Clinton said, after talks with President Francois Mitterrand of France, "is I don't believe we can wait until July for the major countries of the world, who care about what happens in Russia and who would like very much to keep political and economic reform on track there, to move."


Jet Sack Has $4.5 Million For Marshall
The Jets wooed and won Leonard Marshall, that former Giant stalwart, by taking him out to dinner, promising him a starring role on defense and, incidentally, agreeing to pay him $4.5 million over three years.
"This is like college recruiting with the bag of money on top of the table, not under it," Jets Coach Bruce Coslet said today.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  CLINTON BACKS MEETING ON RUSSIA  In the latest step in his campaign to prop up reform in Russia, President Clinton said he would support an emergency meeting of the Group of Seven major industrialized nations to discuss ways to bolster the Russian democracy movement.
A1  RUSSIAN BALLET ON REFERENDUM  The battle between President Yeltsin and the Congress of Peoples' Deputies over whether Russia should proceed with a constitutional referendum has become a game with complex rules but a simple object: cancel the vote but blame the other side.
A10


Food Notes
A Taste of California
"A View From the Vineyards," the annual wine and food tasting usually attended by more than 1,000 people, will be held March 19 from 7:30 to 11 P.M. at Tavern on the Green, 67th Street and Central Park West in Manhattan.


Politics Plays a Legitimate Role in Selections for Public Office
To the Editor:
It must be 30 years or more since I first wrote The Times that "merit" and "politics" were not necessarily inconsistent in selections for public office.
"No Way to Pick a Comptroller" (editorial, Feb. 26) once again states your old view that the best government is obtained if politics is excluded.
Not true.


Nets Pack Up and Take Woes on the Road
When the Nets took off yesterday for their four-game trip out West, Kenny Anderson was with them.
He was wearing a cast up to his elbow to protect the left wrist he fractured when he was fouled by John Starks of the Knicks.
Anderson's season is over, and the Nets are not looking for a miracle cure on the West Coast.


Rodney King Testifies on Beating: 'I Was Just Trying to Stay Alive'
Sometimes groping for words and sometimes almost inaudible, Rodney G. King today narrated his beating two years ago by police officers who he said taunted him with racial epithets, threatened to kill him and provoked him to try to flee before clubbing him in the head with a baton.
In his first public testimony about the beating, Mr.
King radiated vulnerability and a sense of guilelessness, telling a prosecutor, "I was just trying to stay alive, sir."


'Conversations' to Close
"Conversations With My Father," a play by Herb Gardner, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Royale Theater, 242 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
The Sunday matinee of the play, directed by Daniel Sullivan and currently starring James Belushi, David Margulies and James Sutorious, will be its 420th regular performance; it had 30 previews.


The Economist Elevates Business Editor to Top Post
Bill Emmott, the business affairs editor of The Economist, was named today as the next editor of the magazine.
Mr.
Emmott, 36, will replace Rupert Pennant-Rea on March 26 as the magazine's top editor.
He will be the 15th editor of The Economist, which began publication 150 years ago.


Books of The Times; The Black Family's Role in Society
Climbing Jacob's Ladder The Enduring Legacy of African-American Families By Andrew Billingsley 444 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.
In his classic study, "An American Dilemma," published 49 years ago, Gunnar Myrdal wrote that the problems confronting disadvantaged blacks in a dominant white society put a spoke through the wheels of democracy.
Yet the Swedish economist recognized that despite slavery and adversity, blacks helped to hold the country's social fabric together.
In his chapter on black family life in the rural South, he said that blacks had built up their own kind of close-knit family organizations that were conducive to social health.
Now in "Climbing Jacob's Ladder," Andrew Billingsley, a respected black sociologist, builds on Myrdal's work and offers his own surprisingly optimistic study about the inner strength and stability of black families.
Professor Billingsley, chairman of the family studies department at the University of Maryland and visiting scholar in residence at Spelman College in Atlanta, finds that like white strivers on the lower rungs of society, blacks also want to gain entry into the American middle class.
The new book, a sequel to his "Black Families in White America," published in 1968, continues his argument that black families are born survivors and contain the seeds of their own rejuvenation.


SALINAS ENDORSES PARTY-GIFT LIMITS
Seeking to dispel criticism of his role in soliciting $25 million donations to the governing party from wealthy business executives, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari today endorsed new limits on political contributions.
Moments before the President spoke, the head of the governing party, Genaro Borrego, announced that it would no longer accept donations of more than one million pesos, or about $325,000.


Demers Hospitalized With Chest Pains
Montreal Canadiens Coach JACQUES DEMERS was hospitalized with chest pains yesterday and will miss tonight's game against the Islanders and tomorrow's game at Boston, while kept under observation in Montreal.
Demers, 48, was preparing for practice at the Forum when he first felt the pains.
Trainer GAETAN LEFEBVRE drove him to Montreal General Hospital, where the coach will be watched for 48 hours.


Productivity Is Increased
The nation's workers increased their productivity at an annual rate of 4.8 percent in the last three months of 1992, well above the 4 percent initially estimated a month ago, the Labor Department reported today.
This was the biggest quarterly advance since early 1986.
The October-through-December surge lifted the full-year gain in the productivity of nonfarm businesses to 2.8 percent from 2.7 percent, confirming the biggest gain since 1972.


Costly Hotels For Homeless Still in Plan
The Dinkins administration said in a report released yesterday that it would not be able to end New York City's reliance on expensive hotels to shelter homeless families until July 1995, five years after the deadline the city had originally set for itself, largely because of the unrelenting demand for shelter.
The annual updating of the city's plan for helping the homeless, required by city law, also formally buried Mayor David N. Dinkins's politically unpopular plan to spend $280 million to create 24 new shelters for homeless individuals, a plan that met with neighborhood opposition throughout the city.
Less Than a Year Left
City Council leaders said the plan was disappointingly short on specifics.
Advocates for the homeless criticized the administration for its failure to deliver on its promises, saying Mr.
Dinkins has less than a year left in his term to make good on the new ones.
But city officials said they thought they had now charted a sensible and realistic course.


From the Student Body to the Body Politic; After High School, What's Next? For One Bronxville Teen-Ager, Maybe Mayor
Like other high school seniors, Patrick English is nervously wondering where he will attend college next year, having mailed off applications to Princeton, Dartmouth, Middlebury and Colgate, among others.
But there is something beyond the applications that could shape his academic plans: he is asking the voters of this exclusive Westchester County village to elect him mayor next Tuesday.


Book Notes
A Dark Side to Larkin


The Pop Life; Two Cities That Want Grammys
New York City wants the Grammys back.
Los Angeles wants them to stay.
So the two cities are once again in the thick of their longstanding bidding war to have the next ceremonies on their turf.
Michael Greene, the president of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, which gives the awards, says that the lucky city will be announced within the next month -- or the next four months.
The ceremonies returned to Los Angeles this year after two years in New York.


For L.I. Family, Wondering Ends With Grief
Lillian Ayala's disappearance at the age of 16 left the Sapolin family a wealth of uncertainty that stretched over a decade: Did their adopted daughter go off to find her biological parents and fall on danger?
How was she living?
Could wanting her badly enough bring her walking through the door one day?
Last Wednesday, in an action that her brother described as "out of the blue," a kidnapper serving time on an unrelated charge confessed to choking Lillian Ayala in 1983 and burying her behind his cousin's house in Brentwood, a mile or so from the Sapolins' home here.
As the police brushed the dirt from the girl's skeletal remains, the grief her family had suspended for so many years broke loose.


Judith Rothschild, 71, a Painter; Began Foundation to Help Artists
Judith Rothschild, an abstract painter whose works were shown internationally and who left a multi-million-dollar estate to support contemporary American artists, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 71 and lived in Manhattan and in Wellfleet, Mass.
The cause was a stroke, her family said.


Accounts
*
Computer City, Fort Worth, a computer superstore chain owned by Tandy Corp., to the Richards Group, Dallas, to handle broadcast media buying on its $10 million account, previously handled in-house.


CHRONICLE
Everything you ever wanted to know about SPIRO T. AGNEW -- maybe.
The former Vice President, who resigned in October 1973 after pleading no contest to charges that he evaded taxes and took kickbacks, has donated his papers -- 56 boxes of them -- to the University of Maryland in College Park.


Pennant Systems Selects Korey, Kay
Pennant Systems in Norwalk, Conn., an I.B.M. spinoff that manufactures, sells and services printers, said yesterday that it had selected Korey, Kay &amp; Partners in New York to handle its account, with billings estimated to exceed $5 million.
Korey, Kay was awarded the account after a review that began with 12 agencies and was later narrowed to four finalists that besides Korey, Kay also included Keiler &amp; Company in Farmington, Conn.; Partners &amp; Shevack in New York, and Poppe Tyson in New York.


Data Can Move 45,000 Times Faster, for a Price
The most debated set of letters in the telecommunications business these days is not A.T.&amp; T. or MCI, but A.T.M.
And it has nothing to do with getting cash from an automated teller machine.
A.T.M., short for asynchronous transfer mode, is a futuristic format for packaging and transmitting computerized data and images over telephone lines.
It is blazingly quick, able to send digitized information at more than 45,000 times the speed available on typical telephone lines.
But the technology is also fiendishly expensive, at least so far.


Clinton Hails Congress on Budget Cut
As Congress began voting in committee on his economic program, President Clinton said today that he was pleased that the lawmakers were considering even deeper budget cuts than those he proposed last month.
But the President warned that he might raise objections when Congress moved from dealing with general figures to specific ones.
At a news conference, Mr.
Clinton praised Congress for trying "to get even more deficit reduction." But he added, "That doesn't mean we don't need more specifics, because we have to define how we're going to cut."


Market Place; Accounting for the lofty share price of Anchor Bancorp.
THE stock of most healthy savings and loans sells for about 1.2 times the institution's book value.
The very best commercial banks, when they are acquired, sell for 2.5 times book value.
Why then is Anchor Bancorp, which just a few years ago was on the brink of failure, selling for $14.50 a share, nearly three times its tangible book value of $4.98?
This has perplexed the savings bank's chief executive, James M. Large Jr., who has seen the stock run up from less than $1 two years ago.
The answer is that investors are looking at Anchor's earnings rather than book value.
Anchor earned $1.85 a share in the last four quarters for a price-earnings multiple of 7.8, which is about average for healthy savings institutions.
And investors have become confident that the bank, under Mr.
Large, has put its problems behind it so that the earnings will continue to grow.


Arnold Franchetti, A Music Professor
Arnold Franchetti, a composer and a faculty member at the University of Hartford, died on Sunday at Middlesex Hospital in Cromwell, Conn.
He was believed to have been at least 84, and he lived in Middletown, Conn.
The cause was complications from a stroke, his family said.


Nobel Laureate Warns, Don't Learn Too Much
With eyes bright as new ideas, with a slouch that failed to camouflage his intellectual swagger, the Nobel laureate James D. Watson made one of his annual high school visits today to espouse his belief that a few things are worth knowing, and a lot of things are not.
While giving a nod to the benefit to a well-rounded education, he also warned that excessive efforts to learn everything get in the way of mastering anything.


New York City to Detain Patients Who Fail to Finish TB Treatment
The New York City Health Department yesterday adopted strict regulations for detaining tuberculosis patients who fail to complete treatment on their own, a move that could require the confinement of patients for more than a year.
The regulations are intended to curb the spread of tuberculosis and the deadly drug-resistant strains of the disease that develop in patients who repeatedly start and stop treatment.
Curing most strains of the disease can take from six months to two years.


Eating Well
LIKE thousands of other Americans, the people at Rodale Press, who publish Prevention and Organic Gardening magazines, have a lot of ideas they want to pass on to President Clinton and the First Lady, who seem more receptive than other recent inhabitants of the White House to new ideas from the public.
What better way to get their message across than a demonstration lunch at the Sheraton-Carlton in Washington featuring low-fat, pesticide-free versions of Bill Clinton's favorite recipes?


Politics Plays a Legitimate Role in Selections for Public Office; Amend the Constitution
To the Editor:
I commend you for "No Way to Pick a Comptroller" (editorial, Feb. 26).
It reflects points I outlined in a Feb. 18 press release, which called for a State Constitution amendment authorizing a special election if a vacancy occurs in the office of the Comptroller or Attorney General.


BASEBALL: METS Notebook; Injury List for Mets In Midseason Form
There is no surgery scheduled, and so for the Mets there should perhaps be no cause for panic.
Every day, though, it seems as if a minor medical crisis arises: players are held out of games, players have their routines restricted, veteran players retreat to the trainer's room for diagnoses.
Today, Ryan Thompson, the young center fielder who had missed the first four games of what had been deemed a crucial spring training education, was removed in the third inning of his first start.
Thompson, bothered by a sore hamstring, was lifted after feeling discomfort pulling up at second base after doubling past third.


CHOICE FOR JUSTICE IS TREATED GENTLY
Janet Reno breezed through a balmy first day of confirmation hearings today before the Senate Judiciary Committee, where the gentle questions contrasted sharply with the turbulent selection process that led to her nomination to be Attorney General.
From the moment she loped up the aisle in the packed hearing room and took her seat behind the green felt-covered table, Ms.
Reno seemed in command.
Her testimony combined careful coaching, legal training and the political skills honed in five election campaigns as Dade County prosecutor.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
I am generally shy about asking cabdrivers to slow down, but when this one went through his third red light and careered around the corner of Broadway and 42d Street, I could keep silent no longer.


Disarmament at a Snail's Pace
An American commitment to help dismantle the nuclear arsenal of former Soviet lands is ensnared in Russian unrest and indecision.
Page A11.


The Perfect Gift for Mr. Yeltsin
That long-running Russian cliffhanger, the Perils of Boris Yeltsin, resumes in Moscow today.
Once again the anti-Communist hero, President Yeltsin, is fighting for political survival against a hostile, holdover Congress of People's Deputies, elected in the waning days of the old Soviet Union and packed with former Communist apparatchiks.
Despite the trappings of melodrama, extremely serious issues are at stake.
President Yeltsin claims that his own political future and the future of reform are one and the same.
Congressional leaders insist that they represent a more grass-roots version of reform and that Mr.
Yeltsin's real aim is personal dictatorship.
Mr.
Yeltsin's authoritarian tendencies are undeniable.
But his version of the present political stakes is far closer to the mark.


Ruth B. Schnurmacher; Philanthropist, 83
Ruth Bernice Schnurmacher, a New York philanthropist and benefactor of medical institutions, died on Monday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
A resident of Manhattan, she was 83.
Among her principal beneficiaries were the Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Beth Israel Medical Center, which named its Schnurmacher Nursing Home last year in recognition of the many years of support received from her and her husband of 61 years, Adolph.
She was a member of the Society of Founders at Albert Einstein.


Pepsi Adds To Stake In Hungary
In another volley in the global cola wars, Pepsi-Cola International said yesterday that it would invest more than $115 million in a leading Hungarian soft-drink and mineral-water company.
David Jones, president of Pepsi-Cola International's Eastern Europe and Central Asia division, said Pepsi was buying 79 percent of the company, the Capital Mineral Water and Refreshment Corporation.


'To Shoot, Just for Fun'
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 22 sports profile of Goran Ivanisevic quotes the young Croatian tennis star: "They showed me how to shoot, just for fun. They let me shoot a machine gun. It was tough to control, but, oh, it was a nice feeling -- all the bullets coming out. I was thinking it would be nice to have some Serbs standing in front of me."


Riley Says Oakley Is Solid as an Oak
When Pat Riley came to New York, a few people told him Charles Oakley would complain about not getting enough shots.
Riley didn't listen, and he's glad.


How to Think on Your Feet and Shop Your Mind
THE French housewife fantasy has probably struck every cook at one time or another: to go to the market just before dinner, to see what looks fresh and to take it home and whip up something so simple but so good that guests or family members are left begging for more.
For the millions of Americans who grew up on frozen and fast food, selecting fresh food each day must seem awfully tough.
A long, fond look at a robust cabbage probably doesn't lead to 10 different ideas for preparing it.
It leads to a simple thought: Look at that cabbage.
Maybe some cole slaw from the deli would be good.


Subway Riders Criticize Proposed Fare Increase


Corrections
A picture caption with the Advertising column in Business Day yesterday, about DDB Needham Worldwide, misstated the position held by Page Thompson.
He is executive vice president and media director of DDB Needham.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the management of repair work at the World Trade Center referred incorrectly to the assistant director of the world trade department at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
He is Robert DiChiara.


Wine Talk
"HOW old are you, mate?" Len Evans asks.
Taken aback, the other fellow mumbles something unintelligible.


Israeli Army Warns Settlers to Stop Attacks
The Israeli Army's Chief of Staff warned Jewish settlers today to stop vigilante attacks in the occupied territories after one of them shot and killed an Arab on Monday while returning from the funeral of an Israeli farmer who had been stabbed by Palestinians in the Gaza Strip.
Settlers are up in arms following the killing of four Israelis in a week by Palestinians from the Gaza Strip, and army officers are concerned that Jewish-Arab violence in the area might spin out of control.


MCI Says A.T.&amp; T. Uses Price Threats in '800' Fight
Some of A.T.&amp; T.'s recent hard-hitting tactics to retain its share of the huge long-distance market drew cries of foul play from competitors today.
The MCI Communications Corporation charged that A.T.&amp; T. was trying to prevent defections in the $3 billion market for toll-free "800" numbers by threatening businesses with rate increases if they consider switching long-distance carriers.


Teresa Stratas Cancels
The soprano Teresa Stratas has canceled her two scheduled performances in the Metropolitan Opera's production of "Pagliacci," tonight and Saturday at 8 o'clock, because of illness.
Replacing her this evening is Barbara Daniels; on Saturday, it will be Diana Soviero.
Information: (212) 362-6000.


Weeding Federal Panels, but Where?
When President Clinton vowed to eliminate some of the 700 Federal advisory committees that "have spread across this Government like kudzu," he cited one panel that actually went out of business last year.
The continued operation of the Commission on the Bicentenary of the Constitution -- four years after the bicentenary was celebrated -- was cited by the White House as a typical example of Government waste.
As it happened, the panel died last June 30.


Mobutu Foes Boycott Talks On Political Crisis in Zaire
The latest effort to resolve Zaire's political crisis broke down today when members of the country's interim government failed to appear for scheduled talks with President Mobutu Sese Seko.
The fate of the Prime Minister, Etienne Tshisekedi, was expected to be discussed.
The President is seeking permission from the High Council to dismiss the Prime Minister, his rival, as well as to organize a referendum on a new constitution and presidential and parliamentary elections.


Elsie and family return to help revive Borden's flagging dairy fortunes.
AFTER 20 years in retirement, 57-year-old Elsie the cow is back as the lead spokes-bovine for a $20 million marketing campaign by Borden Inc.
Talk about a makeover.


U.S. Panel Backs Testing All Babies To Uncover Hearing Losses Early
One in every 1,000 babies born in the United States is deaf at birth or suffers a severe hearing disorder.
Yet fewer than half of them are recognized as being hearing-impaired until their condition has already compromised speech and language development, a panel of experts assembled by the National Institutes of Health has concluded.
The 15-member panel, which met here for two days last week, recommended that all infants be screened for signs of hearing impairment, noting that the current practice of testing only those considered at high risk of hearing problems, like children exposed to severe infections early in life, allows many cases to go undiagnosed until it is too late to forestall lifelong problems.
The panel recommended testing for all infants in the first three months of life, preferably at hospitals before they are discharged from newborn nurseries.


Archbishop Concedes He Had Relationships With 3 Women
The Roman Catholic Archbishop of Santa Fe, N.M., acknowledged yesterday that he once had some kind of relationship with three young women who have told of sexual encounters with him in interviews taped by a television network.
The prelate, Archbishop Robert F. Sanchez, who has served as secretary of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops since 1991, released a statement expressing regret for his actions but not specifying what they were.


Indonesia's Suharto Faces Another 'Election'
When the grandfatherly face of President Suharto began appearing last month on Indonesian bank notes, no one who understands local politics would have described it as an election-year ploy.
The outcome of this week's presidential election was determined long before the notes were printed.
President Suharto is the only candidate in Wednesday's vote of the People's Consultative Assembly, which meets every five years to pick a President for Indonesia, a nation of 180 million that has begun to assert itself as a leader of the developing world.


CHRONICLE
It was the least she could do for her longtime friend, JEWELL JACKSON McCABE reasoned.
So on Monday evening, Ms.
McCabe, the founder and chairwoman of the National Coalition of 100 Black Women, gathered together some 30 political, philanthropic, civil rights and financial leaders to meet Dr.
JOYCE F. BROWN, New York City's newest Deputy Mayor.
Ringing a crystal dinner bell in her Upper East Side apartment, Ms.
McCabe diverted her guests from their hors d'oeuvres to introduce Dr.
Brown, a former vice chancellor of the City University of New York who is now the Deputy Mayor for Public and Community Affairs.


WORKER PERIL SEEN IN WASTE CLEANUP
The Office of Technology Assessment said yesterday that the Energy Department was unprepared to protect tens of thousands of workers who would soon embark on a 30-year cleanup of the department's vast nuclear weapons production complex.
The technology office, an analytical arm of Congress, said in an 80-page report that protection of workers in environmental restoration projects of any kind was often inadequate, but that the Energy Department, because of the way it is organized, might do worse than private polluters in cleaning up.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Mar. 5
Feb. 26
Mar. 6
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
7.1
6.4
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.9
2.5
Gasoline stocks
238.1
239.3
225.4
Distillate stocks
106.2
113.9
105.7
Crude imports, daily
5.7
6.9
5.5
Product imports, daily
1.5
1.8
1.4
Crude stocks
337.4
333.1
346.8
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
84.4
84.4
80.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Atlanta School Ends Policy Of Hiring Christians Only
After more than a year of debate, an elite college preparatory school here has abolished its policy requiring faculty members to be Christians.
The policy of the Westminster Schools, which has two campuses here, had prompted the resignation of a trustee as well as criticism from some students and parents and several prestigious colleges.
The colleges had suggested that the hiring restriction could affect the fate of college applicants from Westminster.


AT LUNCH WITH -- Betty Rollin; After First Crying, Laughing at Cancer
"I only wear a bra when I go to Loehmann's," Betty Rollin confessed.
Sitting on a cushy banquette at the Sea Grille in Rockefeller Center, she laughed mischeviously as she envisioned the looks she would get in the store's communal dressing room without that bow to modesty.
"I don't need a bra, they stay up by themselves," she said of her saline breast implants -- made necessary by two bouts with breast cancer.
And she chuckled again as she looked up to notice a stone-faced waiter who was trying to pretend he was not listening.


People
*
Alan Fonorow was named senior vice president and creative director at Kobs Gregory Passavant Inc., Chicago, assuming duties handled by Bill Gregory, who will remain an executive vice president.
Mr.
Fonorow was previously president at Alan Fonorow Creative Services, Glenview, Ill.


COMPANY NEWS: Scouring the Forest; Laundry Detergent Takes Formula From Nature
Imagine a bunch of researchers crawling around on the floor of a forest, collecting broken twigs and nature's other detritus: this is the genesis of a new laundry detergent.
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company introduced Cheer with Advanced Color Guard yesterday, saying it contains a naturally occurring enzyme that not only helps plant material decompose in the wild, but also chews up the fuzzy stuff that accumulates on socks and other colored cotton clothes after repeated washings.


Woman Killed in Hit-and-Run in Queens
As her two daughters waited in her car last night, a woman who was crossing a Queens street to go to a store was struck and killed by a hit-and-run driver, the police said.
The car, the police said, traveled with the woman on its hood for a block before braking, flipping her over the top of the vehicle and down its back.


A Family Separated, Not Split, By Skating
Bill Ervin gazed proudly at his teen-age daughter, Lisa, in the press room today, and he wished he could give her more than these two weeks at the world figure skating championships.
"I see her on weekends, but it's still not like raising my own child," Ervin said, at the Sports Hall.
"You look at her, and you know her mom has done a good job."


Broncos Sign Habib
The Denver Broncos signed the free-agent guard BRIAN HABIB to a series of three one-year contracts for a reported $4.2 million, which his agent said makes him the N.F.L.'s highest-paid offensive lineman.


F.B.I. Says Suspect Visited Figure in Kahane Slaying
The man charged in the World Trade Center bombing came under surveillance months earlier when he paid prison visits to a fellow Muslim fundamentalist, officials disclosed yesterday.
The surveillance was part of a Federal civil rights investigation growing out of the killing of Rabbi Meir Kahane.
Although the F.B.I. was known to have followers of a fundamentalist Islamic cleric, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, under surveillance for at least a year, this is the first indication that Federal agents were monitoring the suspect in the World Trade Center bombing and the man convicted in connection with Rabbi Kahane's slaying before the bombing.


Company Plans Private Bank Deposit Insurance
Moving to capitalize on the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's new policy of not covering the uninsured deposits of failed banks, the General Reinsurance Corporation said yesterday that it would insure bank deposits exceeding the $100,000 limit of F.D.I.C. coverage.
The Federal Deposit Improvement Act requires that uninsured deposits be used to cover the cost of bank failures.
In 1992, depositors lost $200 million on uninsured deposits, up substantially from the year before.


Review/Dance; The Pittsburgh Ballet In Works Created for It
After a more than respectable performance in a program of familiar ballets commissioned by other companies, the Pittsburgh Ballet Theater made an even better showing in two works created specifically for its dancers.
The company's second program in Whitman Hall at Brooklyn College, presented on Sunday afternoon by the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, focused on local and contrasting premieres by two alumni of the New York City Ballet: Bruce Wells and Lisa de Ribere.


Citing Race Angle in a Float, Parade Bars a Police Entry
Organizers of a neighborhood St.
Patrick's Day parade today barred a police union's float that would have honored five white officers who have been disciplined for involvement in mistreating blacks.
George Hendry, an organizer of the parade, said he was surprised when he learned that the float's theme was "Travesties of Justice." He said he was earlier told that the float, sponsored by the Fraternal Order of Police, would salute officers killed in the line of duty.


INSIDE
An Industry Counterattacks
Under pressure to cut prices, drug companies say they want an exemption from antitrust laws so they can discuss price restraints.
Page A16.
Scandal Widens in Italy
Reverberations were felt in the Government and around Italy when two more prominent figures were arrested on corruption charges.
Page A3.
Shearson May Be Sold
American Express is discussing the sale of its Shearson securities brokerage subsidiary to Primerica for about $1 billion.
Page D1.
A Net Loss of New Yorkers
About twice as many people left New York State as moved in from other states during the late 1980's.
Page B1.


Theater in Review
The View From Here  Lamb's Little Theater 130 West 44th Street Manhattan Through March 28 By Margaret Dulaney; directed by Matt Williams; set by Michael Anania; costumes by Elsa Ward; lighting by Michael Gilliam; sound by Tristan Wilson; production stage manager, Karen Moore.
Presented by the Lamb's Theater Company, Carolyn Rossi Copeland, producing artistic director, in association with Novi Productions Inc.
WITH: Angelina Fiordellisi, Lily Knight, Tudi Roche and Adam LeFevre


Warning of Violence Was Unheeded After Cult Leader's Gun Battle in '87
In a commando-style raid five and a half years ago, David Koresh and members of his insular religious sect gave the outside world a warning about his passionate attachment to firearms and his potential for violence.
The outside world chose to look the other way.
The raid could have been a scene from the movie "Platoon," one of Mr.
Koresh's favorites.
On the morning of Nov. 3, 1987, he and seven of his followers, dressed in camouflage uniforms and combat boots, with charcoal smeared under their eyes and armed with military-style rifles and shotguns, crawled onto the sect's property east of here.
Their objective seemed to be to retake the land that Mr.
Koresh had left three years earlier in a dispute with the sect's leader, although Mr.
Koresh and the others said they were trying to uncover evidence of illegal activity by the leader.


A 3-D View of Architectural Plans
PEOPLE who are comfortable drafting architectural plans for a remodeling job or a new project may have heard about the Home Series software programs that allow you to create a two-dimensional kitchen, bathroom, landscaped yard or even an entire home on your computer.
A new 3-D program for the series lets you walk through a room in the drawing on the computer screen.
With this 3-D view, you can move around a room from different angles, and zoom in on details.


Tokyo Official Faults Japan's Technology Industry
Signaling that Japan is preparing to respond to President Clinton's proposals to improve American competitiveness, a senior Government official contends that Japan's high-technology companies have grown lazy in recent years and that the country may be forced to begin Government-led research and development projects to restore its position in electronics and computing.
Noboru Hatakeyama, the Vice Minister of International Trade and Industry and the man responsible for overseeing the country's industrial strategies, harshly criticized Japanese technology companies.
He said Tuesday that they had failed to master some critical technologies like microprocessors and computer work stations and that a concerted effort in coming years would be needed for Japan to catch up.
"We cannot keep losing," he said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The Administration is drafting a trade policy covering Japan, China and Southeast Asia that would combine aid to American high-technology industries with talks to open Asian markets.  [ Page D1. ]
Japan may be forced to begin Government programs to restore its electronics and computing industries.  [ D7. ]


Pop and Jazz in Review
The Fureys, and  Dolores Kean  Carnegie Hall
The term world music generally refers to African beats, Middle Eastern melodies or other styles that sound exotic to white European ears.
But on Saturday night at Carnegie Hall, the Fureys and Dolores Kean demonstrated that Irish music, a genre as familiar and nostalgic to many New Yorkers as a letter from home, has a worldwide scope as well.


Yeltsin Survives a Vote in Legislature on His Powers; New Embassy in Doubt
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today that he was recommending that the United States cancel its plans to build a new $240 million embassy in Moscow, saying the money could probably be better spent elsewhere.
In June the Bush Administration approved arrangements for constructing a new chancery with American workers to replace an unfinished structure that was never occupied because it was bugged by the Soviets.


For the Modern Seder, Modern Seder Plates
YOU don't have to use your aunt's old-fashioned seder plate for Passover, which starts on April 6.
The Jewish Museum in Manhattan has opened a Passover gift shop, selling seder plates designed by contemporary artists. (It also sells traditional plates, for those who hate breaking away from family customs.)
The modern plates include a handpainted ceramic one, left, by Susan Garson and Tom Pakele, and one by Linda R. Relin called "Deco LA 92" that has the off-kilter look of a Frank Gehry house.
The 40 plates are $30 to $1,000.
Tom Otterness, a sculptor, has designed a sterling-silver seder plate, in a limited edition, which is $4,500.


GARDEN Q. &amp; A.
Allergic Plants
Q.
Can you explain allelopathy and how it affects plants?
I'm concerned that sunflower seed hulls from a bird feeder will injure my flowers. -- Beth J. Pfaff, Chester, N.J.
TXT&gt;
A.
Although the reasons for it are not fully understood, allelopathy (pronounced al-lull-LOP-path-ee) is a kind of antagonism between two plant species.
It is believed to be a protective device that enables one plant to prevent certain other plants from intruding into its territory, said Doris Stone, a botanist and former head of education at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
"The most notorious case, and one known since the time of Pliny in the first century, is the black walnut (Juglans nigra)," Ms.
Stone noted in her book "The Lives of Plants" (Charles Scribner's Sons, 1983).
The black walnut roots, leaves and branches produce a substance that becomes toxic to other plants in the soil.
Tomatoes and alfalfa are among the susceptible species that, if grown in the area, will die.
Allelopathic effects have also been found on the balsam poplar (Populus balsamifera), whose roots inhibit the growth of the green alder (Alnus crispa mollis).
The toxins produced by the roots of the desert sagebrush (Salvia leucophylla) and the California artemesia (Artemesia californica) result in their being surrounded by three to six feet of bare space.
"Possibly this is a way for these plants to insure more water or nutrients for their own needs," Ms.
Stone said.
The allelopathic property of the annual sunflower (Helianthus annuus) was described in the December issue of Horticulture magazine by Kathy Piper.
Last week, Ms.
Piper, a Pittsburgh gardener, told me that she had found that certain flower seeds would not germinate in the area beneath her bird feeder where sunflower hulls had dropped.
But she added that this allelopathic effect appeared to be limited to only a foot or two, and could be mitigated by regularly raking up the hulls and discarding them.
I suggest you substitute hulled sunflower seeds or, better yet, another bird food, like thistle.
You might also consider moving the feeder to a less vulnerable part of your garden in spring and summer.
Silver Curry
Q.
Last summer I saw a garden edged with a lovely silver-leaved plant that had a curry-like scent.
Can you tell me what it was and where I can find it? -- Renee Rogers, Marblehead, Mass.
A.
The plant you saw is called the curry plant (Helichrysum angustifolium, now sometimes called H. italicum) because of the aroma that you noticed.
But strangely enough, its fragrant and extremely handsome, narrow silver leaves are not an ingredient in the curry powders that flavor Indian dishes.
The word "curry" was actually coined by British colonials in India, and curry powders are typically blends of an assortment of spices, among them turmeric, coriander, cumin and chilies.
The curry plant is a tender subshrub (like Lantana) and native to the Mediterranean.
It is one of some 500 species in the daisy family whose cousins include the popular strawflower.
Although it is a true sun lover, as its botanical name suggests -- "helios" is Greek for "sun" -- the curry plant is undemanding and needs only well-drained soil.
If left untrimmed, this dainty plant ultimately reaches a height of about a foot and bears clusters of small, yellow, daisy-like blooms.
I have used curry plants massed in rows as a low border in my summer herb garden.
But like rosemary, which its leaves somewhat resemble, individual curry plants can also be trained into lollipop-shaped topiaries known as standards.
Since the curry plant is not frost-tolerant, it's too early to place it outside, but it's not too early to send away for catalogues.
Prices vary from about $2.50 to $4, depending on size, and if you're lucky, you may find curry plants at a local nursery.
Two mail order sources are Sunnybrook Farms Nursery, 9448 Mayfield Road, P.O.
Box 6, Chesterland, Ohio 44026, (216) 729-7232 (catalogue $1), and Well-Sweep Herb Farm, 317 Mount Bethel Road, Port Murray, N.J. 07865, (908) 852-5390 (catalogue $2).
Address questions to Garden
Q.&amp; A., The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York 10036.
Those of general interest will be published.
Unpublished questions cannot be answered individually.


Sarajevo Leader Seeks Change in Peace Plan
The Muslim leader of Sarajevo's Government has delayed his return to New York until next week, saying that local opposition to an international mediation team's peace plan is stronger than expected and that he will seek changes in the proposal.
Bosnia's United Nations representative, Muhammed Sacirbey, said that President Alija Izetbegovic, who had promised to come back here this week to say finally whether his Government would accept the plan, will not now reach New York until next week because he wants more time to gather support for it.


Mitchell Receives a Mark of Perfection
The search for perfection began with a magnet on the refrigerator.
Mark Mitchell drew a big "6.0" in red magic marker on a piece of paper in January and stuck it to his refrigerator in Wellesley, Mass.
Whenever he ate leftovers, whenever he drank flat soda, the number was there.


Electric-Car Venture Adds Honeywell
A start-up company hoping to provide a nonbattery source of power for electric cars has found a big, established partner: Honeywell Inc.
American Flywheel Systems, which is based in Bellevue, Wash., and is known as A.F.S., has a patent for an electromechanical device that the company says can last up to six times as long between rechargings as conventional batteries that use chemicals.
The concept has intrigued people in the automotive and academic communities, but until there is a working prototype, skeptics abound.


New Policy Forming on Asia Trade
The Clinton Administration is drafting a trade policy toward Japan, China and Southeast Asia that would combine aid to American high-technology industries with negotiations to open Asian markets for these products, Administration officials said today.
The new policy of supporting specific exports is a sharp departure from the Bush Administration approach of seeking across-the-board trade liberalization, which sometimes benefited other countries as much as American companies.


Lamb Chop Lends a Voice (Someone Else's) for Children's Programming


Pop and Jazz in Review
James Williams  Pianist Bradley's
The pianist James Williams is a member of jazz's lost generation.
Like a whole group of musicians in their 40's, Mr.
Williams started his career before jazz's renaissance and doesn't fit the criteria of easy marketing -- elder master, young genius -- that obsess the record industry.
But at 42, Mr.
Williams has just about everything: he plays with the exhilaration of youth and he brings an enormous amount of knowledge to his work.
At Bradley's on Monday night, with a trio that included the bassist Chris McBride and the drummer Tony Reedus, Mr.
Williams rummaged through all sorts of ideas at the keyboard and made them all dispense a sort of joy.
Each tune, from his own complicated originals to "Embraceable You" and "Gee Baby, Ain't I Good to You," moved easily from lush, almost overripe chordal bursts to an austere formal mathematics in which a three- or four-note idea, running through permutations, slashed apart a piece's harmony.
At times Mr.
Williams invoked a tempest, flinging his hands around and creating dissonances, only to move into hornlike single lines.


Review/Pop; From the Past and Escaping the Past
In the late 1970's, English punk rock made its stand as an antidote to nostalgia; the music tried to be hypersonic, speeding faster than the history that spawned it and escaping that past in the process.
It seemed like punk bands couldn't age; they wouldn't allow themselves the luxury.
But growing up doesn't have to mean settling down, as the Gang of Four proved in its show at the Limelight on Tuesday night.
The band gained fame in the late 1970's as one of the most intellectual punk groups, criticizing consumerism while creating a nearly irresistible product.
Songs like "I Love a Man in Uniform," "Anthrax" and "Natural's Not in It" (all heard Tuesday) are dialectical arguments transformed into sparse, insistent dance rock.


Rate Increase Of 5% Allowed For Con Edison
The New York Public Service Commission yesterday approved a 5 percent rate increase for electricity customers of Consolidated Edison, to take effect on April 1.
For a typical apartment dweller using 250 kilowatt hours a month the bill would rise to about $40.50 from $39; for a customer in a house the increase would be about twice that much.


THE TWIN TOWERS;
Federal investigators say they believe that money used to finance the bombing of the World Trade Center was transferred in recent months from Europe to a New Jersey bank account used by the two suspects now under arrest.
One law-enforcement official said that the Federal Bureau of Investigation was trying last night to trace the source of the wire transfer and that the existence of the money trail "suggests some foreign group was financing them."


Jets Consider a Bengal
After two free-agent signings in two days, things calmed down at the Jets' training center yesterday.
The biggest activity was a visit by Bengals receiver TIM McGEE, a free agent who played for Jets Coach BRUCE COSLET when he was with Cincinnati.
The Jets signed safety RONNIE LOTT on Monday to replace LONNIE YOUNG, who will miss next season because of reconstructive knee surgery.
LEONARD MARSHALL was signed on Tuesday, replacing DENNIS BYRD, the defensive end whose career ended last season with a tackle that left him partly paralyzed.
Now, the Jets are looking for a receiver to replace AL TOON, who retired with a severe concussion.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Ngoc Lam and Que Lam Music of Vietnam Metropolitan Museum of Art
Vietnamese music, as played by Ngoc Lam and her daughter Que Lam on Sunday afternoon, is a sphere of pristine melodies, openwork counterpoint and an occasional delicate swirl.
Both women play dan tranh, the Vietnamese zither that is kin to the Japanese koto and the Chinese zheng; like those instruments, it can play sweetly sustained tones that bend and glide like the most delicate sighs.


Death at a Fraternity Is Ruled Accidental
The death of a Cornell University senior whose body was found lodged in a fraternity-house chimney in January was an accident, the Tompkins County Medical Examiner said today.
Toxicology reports and an autopsy confirmed the initial determination that the student, Terrence Ward Quinn, 21, died of asphyxiation caused by a prolonged bending of the neck, the Medical Examiner, Dr.
John G. Maines, said.


Arrests May Signal End of Basque Terrorism
A string of arrests of leading guerrillas in France last month has stirred cautious optimism in Spain that the end of the Basque terrorist movement may finally be in sight.
Sweeps by the Spanish and French police over the last year have dealt a severe blow to the group, experts say, and prompted debate in its ranks over whether it should seek a negotiated end to 25 years of bombings and killings.
The organization, Basque Homeland and Freedom, is known as E.T.A. for its initials in Basque.


Pep in Pills
Until last year, drug stocks were at the core of many an institution's portfolio, delivering profit growth and price gains at a rate virtually no other industry could sustain.
Now many money managers are embarrassed to own them.
Yesterday, favorable news from Washington helped bring back some bold investors.


Beijing Goes All Out to Get Olympics in 2000
No visiting king or president in the last two decades received a welcome as overwhelming as the one that Beijing bestowed this week on a group of obscure but, in certain ways, very powerful foreigners: representatives of the International Olympic Committee.
For starters, the authorities cut off heat to vast neighborhoods so coal smoke would not mar the sky.
Taxi drivers and snack peddlers were advised to take a few days off so the visitors would not be slowed by traffic or offended by the sight of people munching on oily dough sticks.


Excerpts From Complaint Against Nidal Ayyad
Following are excerpts from the complaint against Nidal Ayyad filed yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan:
. . .
When  [ Mohammed A. ]  Salameh rented the van, a Ryder employee stated that Salameh was accompanied by another person.
The employee also stated that Salameh and the second person arrived at the rental location driving a red Corsica vehicle bearing New York license plates, which the employee described as looking like a rental vehicle.


Saatchi &amp; Saatchi's turnaround team plays back the highlights.
THE agenda called for a discussion of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi's 1992 finances with a small gathering of reporters in New York yesterday.
But Charles Scott and Robert Louis-Dreyfus, respectively the incoming and outgoing Saatchi chief executives, were in a breeze-shooting mood, happier to talk about their past team efforts and independent futures than Saatchi's results.
But first, those sobering numbers.
The company reported this week that it lost $:595.1 million, or about $859 million, largely because of a write-down to conform to new British accounting rules.
Those rules, addressing the way good will is carried, saddled Saatchi with a $:600 million, or $866 million, write-down, reflecting Saatchi's generosity in making acquisitions during the 1980's.
Still, operating profits were $:18.9 million, or $27.3 million, better than many analysts' expectations.
And revenue rose 1.1 percent, to $:748 million, or $1.08 billion.


New York Lottery Picks 10 Finalists
The New York State Lottery has sent requests for proposals to 10 large New York-based agencies in the next step in a mandated review of its estimated $25 million to $30 million account.
The account has been at DDB Needham New York since 1988.
The 10 finalists must outline how they would handle the account on a three year contract.


Increased Cigarette Tax Could Reduce Fires
To the Editor:
Former President Jimmy Carter's Feb. 22 letter promotes the laudable idea of a $2 excise tax on each pack of cigarettes to deter smoking and raise revenues for good causes.


Review/Theater; How a Labour of Love Turns Out Well for All
With its many roles for young actors and its light literary motifs, "Love's Labour's Lost" is a salutary choice for a youthful company like the one assembled by Michael Langham at St.
Clement's Church.
Most of the actors graduated from the Juilliard School, where they presumably studied with Mr.
Langham, until recently the head of its drama division.
The result is a closer responsiveness between the performers and the director than is often found at Theater for a New Audience.
The cast evokes memories of that earlier group of Juilliard graduates who became the charter members of the Acting Company.
In his distinguished career, Mr.
Langham has staged a number of productions of "Love's Labour's Lost," in England, at the Stratford Festival in Canada and at Juilliard.
He is a master of the play's gently satiric humors.
This time, he views the comedy as more autumnal than vernal.
Russet colors dominate the palette in Douglas Stein's attractive set.
One might suggest that the feeling in the air is that of homecoming or post-graduation, as the King of Navarre gathers his three closest friends for three years of celibacy and learned discourse.


Dispute Erupts Over Proposal For Homeless
A dispute over a small, relatively inexpensive program to house homeless families erupted into a bitter battle between the Dinkins administration and the New York City Council yesterday.
The program, which gives bonuses and rent supplements to landlords who house homeless families, appeared innocently enough, as a $5.8 million item tucked into a routine administration proposal for $400 million worth of changes in the city budget.
The city makes such proposals to reflect costs and other developments unanticipated when the budget was drawn up during the previous year.


If Parade Is Religious, It's Illegal, Suit Will Charge
Like Hydra and its heads, the St.
Patrick's Day parade controversy has spawned another lawsuit, this one charging that if the parade is a religious event, as its sponsors say, then it violates the separation of church and state.
The suit is expected to be filed today, just six days before the parade, in State Supreme Court in Manhattan by the Center for Constitutional Rights and its lawyers, William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby.
It seeks a court order barring the city from issuing a parade permit to the Ancient Order of Hibernians, who won a suit in Federal District Court on Feb. 26, establishing their claim to the permit and their right to exclude a gay Irish group from the march up Fifth Avenue. 'A Frivolous Claim'
"It's ridiculous," said Lorna B. Goodman, chief of litigation in the Office of the Corporation Counsel, the New York City's lawyers.
"It's a frivolous claim, an absolutely frivolous claim."


Foreign Affairs; Where's Bill?
The big mystery is, where is President Clinton on national security business?
The answer is, keeping mostly out of sight, but very much involved and in charge -- to the point of telling his top aides exactly what he wants them to keep in mind even before policy choices bubble up to him.
In a demanding and sometimes intimidating style, he almost always urges them to think broadly and act cautiously within a consensus.
Mr.
Clinton actually devotes considerable time daily to his foreign chores.
But he shuns the world spotlight, partly to show the folks at home he's minding their business and partly because he's still leery about his international footing.


Review/Fashion; Sexy Austerity From Jil Sander
For the most part this season, fashion here has been tailor-made for the MTV generation -- young people with short attention spans.
Trends on trends are piled on one runway (and sometimes on one outfit), a number of epoques are resurrected at once, and eight shows are crammed into one day.
Four design houses would survive the itch to switch stations: Jil Sander, Moschino, Prada and Callaghan.


Bungee Jumping at the U.N.
In a graphic phrase not common to United Nations reports, Dick Thornburgh writes that funding peacekeeping is "much like a financial 'bungee jump,' often undertaken in blind faith that timely appropriations will be forthcoming." The former Attorney General, in his final report after a year as Undersecretary for Administration and Management, sensibly proposes a new Office of Inspector General.
It would check waste and fraud and discourage bungee jumping.
But it's hard to demand businesslike behavior at the U.N. when its members set an example of gross negligence.
Because of chronic shortfalls in regular contributions -- the U.S. still owes $240 million in past dues and $309 million in current dues -- the U.N. has to borrow from special peacekeeping accounts for normal expenses.


INSIDE
H.U.D. Is Again Under Fire
A report warns that another scandal at the Department of Housing and Urban Development "is a distinct possibility." Page A21.
Smooth Sailing for Reno
President Clinton's nominee for Attorney General, Janet Reno, won unanimous approval in the Senate Judiciary Committee.
Page A21.
Deficit Plan Clears Hurdle
The President's plans to shrink the deficit cleared their first Congressional hurdle.
Page A20.
Indian Casino for New York
New York officials and the Oneida Indians reached accord on a plan for a high-stakes casino.
Page B1.


A.T.&amp; T. AND HUNTINGTON BANK END PHONE PROJECT
A.T.&amp; T. and Huntington National Bank of Ohio said yesterday that they were abandoning work on an advanced telephone for bank customers after three years of development but that they would continue to work separately on less expensive phones using the technology.


U.S. PRESSING NATO FOR A PEACE FORCE TO PATROL BOSNIA
The United States is urging its allies to start preparing an international force, expected to exceed 50,000 troops, that would be sent to Bosnia and Herzegovina immediately after a peace settlement there, diplomats and military officials said today.
But planning for the force, which could include as many as 20,000 American troops, is being hampered by a dispute between the United States and France over who would command it.


Senate Panel, 18-0, Backs Attorney General Nominee
The Senate Judiciary Committee voted unanimously today to approve Janet Reno as the first woman to be Attorney General.
Before the 18-to-0 vote, lawmakers from both parties were effusive in their praise for Ms.
Reno, the 54-year-old prosecutor of Dade County in Florida who was nominated after President Clinton's first two attempts to fill the job collapsed under a furor over his candidates' hiring of illegal immigrants as household workers.


Designed With Tongue in Chic
There's a whole new generation of designers out there who speak a new language: a visual vernacular, a smart shorthand, a clever form of communication.
The objects they design are both fun and functional.
And they know it.
Marco Pasanella, 30, and Alexander Brebner, 32, are quickly becoming the Mutt and Jeff of the with-it design set.
They have just completed their first apartment renovation for Emily Oberman, a friend who speaks their language.


Accord Signed for a Casino in New York State
Negotiators for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the Oneida Indians have reached agreement on a compact that would allow the opening of New York State's first high-stakes gambling casino in a tiny rural community near the center of the state.
The compact must now be signed by Mr.
Cuomo and the United States Secretary of the Interior before the Oneidas can open a new $10 million casino that is near completion on rolling farmland owned by the Indians adjacent to the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway about 30 miles east of Syracuse.


Comical Everyman Of Italian Cinema
When an actor has made 187 films, as Alberto Sordi has, there are few things in life that do not serve as a cinematic lesson.
That includes prosciutto, which is, in a way, the key to his art, although the subject will probably not come up during the two-week Sordi program, "Italy's Everyman," that began on Tuesday at the Film Society of Lincoln Center.
Speaking through an interpreter at Harry Cipriani's in Manhattan, Mr.
Sordi explained the prosciutto theory, one that he arrived at while filming a long, complicated tantrum scene in "Un Borghese Piccolo Piccolo" ("A Very Little Man").
As Mr.
Sordi tells the story, Shelley Winters, playing his wife, insisted on lengthy preparations for the scene, which included listening to 10 minutes of Israeli folk songs.


Celebrating Heroines of Drudgery
IRONING, laundering, vacuuming.
This litany of household chores is, to most women, synonymous with tedious, boring drudgery.
The tasks are work that has to be done, that no one wants to do and that has seldom received applause, until now.
"Woman's Work," Rhonda Roland Shearer's eight bronze sculptures of women scrubbing toilets, vacuuming and shopping for groceries, while also clutching squirming children to their bosoms, are on display at Union Square Park on 14th Street through the end of May.


The Republicans Strike Back
Republican critics of President Clinton's budget have taken a polemical pasting in the past few weeks for not offering a specific alternative.
But when the House Budget Committee's Republican members laid out 80 pages of detail for the committee yesterday, they were brushed aside with barely a nod.
Their effort deserved better.
The President's challenge to the Republicans, to offer their own "specifics" if they didn't like his, was smart politics and smart budget strategy.
Politically, it put the Republicans -- the party of budget cutters -- on the defensive, mocked for criticizing a Democratic President who proposed real deficit reduction.
And strategically, by demanding that they be specific, the President was bidding the Republicans to take specific risks, as he had done in proposing unpopular spending cuts and tax increases.


Narcotics Officer Slain
An undercover narcotics detective who had just returned with backup officers to complete a a "buy and bust" marijuana deal was killed yesterday when one of the suspects opened fire at an East Village store.
He was the first officer killed in the line of duty this year.
Article, page B1.


Aspin May Clash With Powell on Long-Term Plan
Defense Secretary Les Aspin has ordered a review of how to shrink the military's long-term budget and troop levels that could put him and Gen.
Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, on a collision course.
The review's methodology borrows heavily from a plan Mr.
Aspin used last year, when he was chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, to shape the current military budget.
But it runs at cross-purposes with an approach favored by General Powell, the nation's senior military adviser.


Barry K. Wade, Editor, 41
Barry K. Wade, an editor and director of W. W. Norton &amp; Company, died on March 3 at his home in Manhattan at the age of 41.
The cause of death was liver failure, said his companion, George Dumbadze.


Suharto of Indonesia, Re-Elected, Picks a Deputy
President Suharto, whose 27 years of iron rule have brought new prosperity but only limited personal freedom to Indonesia's 180 million people, was re-elected today to a sixth five-year term.
The 71-year-old President announced immediately after his re-election that he wanted the country's former armed services commander, Gen.
Try Sutrisno, to serve as his Vice President.


Palestinians Reject Invitation to New Peace Talks
Palestinian leaders rejected an American and Russian invitation today to attend a new round of Middle East peace talks next month, saying that Israel had yet to resolve the issue of its expulsion of some 400 Muslim fundamentalists from the occupied territories in mid-December.
While the surprising refusal of the Palestinians even to accept the invitation was a setback for the Clinton Administration, they stopped well short of declaring that they would not ultimately rejoin the negotiations, scheduled to resume on April 20 in Washington.


Trial Set for Newman
The manager of the heavyweight champion RIDDICK BOWE and a member of Bowe's entourage face an April 7 trial on misdemeanor battery charges stemming from the beating of a photographer, DOUGLAS PIZAC of The Associated Press.
A Las Vegas, Nev., justice of the peace, NANCY OESTERLE, set the trial date yesterday for ROCK NEWMAN and a camp member, BERNARD BROOKS JR., who are charged in an altercation that occurred after Bowe won the title from EVANDER HOLYFIELD last Nov. 13.


Knicks Finally Break Lakers' Spell at Garden
The Knicks have reached the point where they expect to win at home.
So instead of celebrating last night's victory, they critiqued it.
The Knicks talked about how sloppy they were against the Los Angeles Lakers' defensive pressure.
They talked about how they became careless down the stretch.
But New York did enough good things to win its 10th consecutive home game, 110-104, at Madison Square Garden.


New Sex Abuse Charges Revealed in Katie Beers Case
When 10-year-old Katie Beers was living with her godmother two years ago, she was sexually molested on at least two occasions by the godmother's husband, according to an indictment unsealed today.
Salvatore Inghilleri, the defendant named in the indictment, was charged with two counts of sexual abuse and two counts of endangering the welfare of a minor.
The incidents occurred in April and December 1991, officials said.


New Features Next Season For Chamber Music Society
The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center is expanding its roster and adding a contemporary-music series to the offerings for its 1993-94, 25th-anniversary season.
It has also appointed the pianist Andre Watts as its first guest-artist member, a new position to which a different performer will be named each year.
And it has awarded its $10,000 annual Stoeger Prizes to the English composer Nicholas Maw and to the American composer Aaron Jay Kernis.
The society's main series, at Alice Tully Hall, will open with a nonsubscription concert on Oct. 20 and run through May 3.
There will be 12 subscription programs, each played twice: the same number of performances as this season.
Charles Kargacos, the society's executive director, said the budget would be about $2.5 million, up from $2.2 million this season.


Schools' Managing of Texts Is Called Inadequate
The Board of Education's system for keeping track of its purchase and inventory of high school textbooks is totally inadequate, City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman contended yesterday.
Because of that, she said, many textbooks in the high schools may be out of date, but it is impossible to know how many students are actually using the old texts because of the board's inadequate inventory methods.
The Comptroller reported in an audit released yesterday that a random sample of 266 of the 700 different textbooks found in 30 city high schools showed that about 30 percent were outmoded and were an average of 19 years old.


Female P.A. Voice
The San Francisco Giants made baseball history yesterday by picking a woman as their public-address announcer.
SHERRY DAVIS, a legal secretary from Walnut Creek, Calif., will be the first full-time female stadium announcer in major league history, according to team officials.
"I was surprised, but I hope that other women will try out now," said Davis, who beat out two finalists in auditions at Candlestick Park.


Clinton Plan for Banks Gets Mixed Reception
In the words of a Treasury Department official outlining the Clinton Administration's new proposals today to spur lending to small businesses, the credit crunch is not a matter of clogged arteries but of constricted capillaries.
So what the economic doctors apparently prescribed today was a thorough massage of bank regulations, not open heart surgery.
And the prescription, presented by President Clinton after weeks of promotion, was cheered quietly by advocates of less regulation but criticized mildly by others concerned with the safety of the banking system.


METRO DIGEST
SECOND SUSPECT IN TRADE CENTER BLAST
A chemical engineer of Palestinian descent was charged with aiding in the World Trade Center bombing.
He became the second suspect directly linked to the blast that left at least five dead and more than 1,000 injured.
A1.
FOCUS ON A SHARED BANK ACCOUNT
Investigators are focusing on about $8,000 that recently flowed through a New Jersey bank account shared by the two suspects.
A1.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Buffalo Tom, and Pond  Maxwell's Hoboken, N.J.
Undue modesty reigned when Pond and Buffalo Tom shared a bill on Saturday.
"Thanks for bearing with us," said Bill Janovitz, the guitarist and lead singer of Buffalo Tom, which had played some new, unfamiliar songs during its set.
"Thanks for putting up with us," said Charlie Campbell, the guitarist and lead singer of Pond, who had joked throughout the band's set that the audience was simply waiting for Buffalo Tom.
They were both enacting a standard alternative-rock strategy: speak uncertainly and carry a loud guitar.


Banks Gets An Offer He Can Refuse
While the Jets dig deeper into their pockets and await a visit from Reggie White, their next big free-agent target, the Giants have reacted coolly to free agency, allowing the departure of Leonard Marshall and making only a minimum contract offer to keep Carl Banks.
The Giants are one of the vast majority of clubs that has failed to sign a free agent in the 10 days the market has been open.
Meanwhile, the Jets have shelled out contracts worth a combined $8.1 million to 33-year-old Ronnie Lott and the 31-year-old Marshall.


A Revolution Italian-Style
For decades Italy functioned with a split personality.
An overstaffed and grossly inefficient state was balanced by a dynamic and inventive private sector led by the likes of Fiat and Olivetti.
While the former piled up debts and handed out patronage, the latter carved out an international reputation and kept the economy more or less buoyant.
It was not an ideal system.
The lost mail, the useless factories and the general waste of time and money by the state cost the country dearly.
But the system limped along, sustained by the endless elasticity of Italians.
Now, however, the bribery and corruption scandal enveloping the nation has struck both the public and private sectors, undermining both and casting the country's future into doubt.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Named Walter Freeman director of promotions for the Baysox of the Eastern League.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Optioned Andy Nezelek, pitcher, to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
Sent Shawn Estes, Ron Villone, and Bob Wolcott, pitchers, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
National League  HOUSTON ASTROS -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Bagwell, first baseman, on a one-year contract.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Named Sherry Davis public address announcer.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  DETROIT PISTONS -- Suspended Dennis Rodman, forward, for one game without pay for chronic violations of team policy.
PHOENIX SUNS -- Activated Oliver Miller, center, from the injured list.
Football  National Football League  CHICAGO BEARS -- Signed Joe Cain, linebacker.
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Signed John Jett and Steve Domingos, punters.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed Cornell Holloway, defensive back, and Steve Avery, running back.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NEW YORK RANGERS -- Sent Steven King, right wing, to Binghamton of the American Hockey League.


Coors Spinoff Encounters Snags
ACX Technologies Inc., a packaging concern spun off from the Adolph Coors Company in December, announced yesterday that it was having trouble with a new process for making aluminum sheets for can manufacturers and that it would not meet its goal of perfecting the process by early this year.
ACX shares closed down $4 each, to $25.50, a loss of 13.6 percent, in over- the-counter trading yesterday.
Volume was 623,000 shares, the highest since Dec. 10, the stock's first day on the market.


Tough Abortion Law Provokes Dismay in Poland
The crowd in the auditorium of what used to be the Soviet-Polish friendship center listened respectfully as a member of Parliament, Barbara Labuda, denounced the new law limiting access to abortion.
What was truly frightening, she said, was that more and more people were saying that Poland should become a Catholic theocracy, that democracy did not count as much as religion.


For Real Cooks, Surreal Aprons
EVEN though Salvador Dali apparently didn't cook, Bob Blumer, a fan of the artist, does.
Mr.
Blumer wrote and illustrated a cookbook, "The Surreal Gourmet" (Chronicle, 1991).
He approached the Salvador Dali Museum in St.
Petersburg, Fla., with the idea of making aprons using three of his cookbook illustrations.
The museum took him up on it (it sells Mr. Blumer's cookbook) and now offers the aprons through its catalogue and shop.


Fancy Feet (Ouch!) Through the Ages
AROUND 1740, clogs -- at least French brocaded-silk ones with taffeta ribbons -- were a sign of wealth.
That was also the case with silk moccasins embroidered by American Indians for Englishwomen in the first half of the 19th century.
These shoes and others are featured in "Fancy Feet: A Historic Collection of Ladies' Footwear From the Brooklyn Museum," a yearlong exhibition that opens on March 17.
The show illustrates that in centuries past, comfort in footwear wasn't a priority in stylish circles.


Derailment Disrupts Long Island Service


As N.A.A.C.P. Seeks a New Leader, The Talk Is of Jesse Jackson's Fitness
As the N.A.A.C.P., searches for a new executive director, a single question is occupying many of its members: Would the Rev.
Jesse Jackson be a good fit for the nation's oldest and largest civil rights organization?
To be sure, Mr.
Jackson is only one of a handful of candidates to succeed the Rev.
Benjamin L. Hooks, who is stepping down at the end of this month after heading the organization for 15 years.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Sunday about curtailing the spread of AIDS referred incorrectly to efforts recommended by some experts, including Dr.
John Gagnon of the State University of New York at Stony Brook.
They recommend concentrating on neighborhoods in 25 to 30 cities, not 23 to 30 neighborhoods.


New Bonilla, but Old Issues Tag Along
Bobby Bonilla, roughed up but not repentant after the 1992 season, said he wanted nothing so much as "a fresh 162" in 1993.
He has changed his physique.
He said the Mets would be a more cohesive, sounder outfit with the experience of last year.
He said he would alter his erratic relationship with the media.
Already, though, Bonilla, if he isn't yet engulfed by them, is being surrounded again by troublesome issues raised during his first season as the $29 million right fielder for the Mets.


More Twin Tower Mysteries
Of the many questions emerging from the World Trade Center blast, two deserve special attention.
The first concerns causes: How much did Federal investigators actually know --
before
the bombing -- about the mysterious Muslims in Jersey City?
The second deals with consequences: How should the twin towers deal with the threat of further terrorist attacks?
The question of what the F.B.I. knew took on fresh meaning with the disclosure that the F.B.I. had begun watching its prime suspect, Mohammed Salameh, well before the attack.
The agency also arrested another suspect yesterday, a man who may have known how to make a bomb and certainly knew Mr.
Salameh.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 2 about the appointment of George E. Rupp as president of Columbia University referred imprecisely to a statement by Henry L. King, chairman of Columbia's trustees, about challenges facing the university.
Mr.
King said Dr.
Rupp was ideally suited to meet those challenges.
But he did not mention any challenges specifically; the adjoining list of issues was The Times's.
Mr.
King pointed out the distinction in a letter dated March 4.


A Trail of Clues That Was as Simple As Picking Up Suspect's Calling Card
One link at a time, the chain of clues grew.
First, a suspect was arrested carrying the business card of another man.
The suspect, it turned out, had made calls to the man from what may have been a bomb factory in Jersey City.
The two men shared a bank account.
Their names appeared on the same car rental agreement.
Each clue forged a stronger link between Mohammed A. Salameh, the initial suspect in the the bombing of the World Trade Center, and the man the Federal Bureau of Investigation arrested yesterday at his suburban New Jersey home, Nidal A. Ayyad.


Rodney King Unsure on Beating Details
Under insistent cross-examination, Rodney G. King conceded today that he had lied in the past about his beating two years ago and that he was not sure today whether the police officers who beat him had used racial epithets or threatened to kill him, as he testified Tuesday.
But throughout a grueling day, Mr.
King's demeanor remained quiet as he seemed to search his memory and grope for answers.
Licking his lips and puffing his cheeks in seeming exhaustion in the final hour, he admitted his confusion but insisted, "I'm telling you the best way I remember it."


Breast-Feeding Strategies for Busy Mothers
IT was somewhere at an altitude of 32,000 feet, breast pump in hand, airline blanket over my head, that I had a profound realization:
If God had meant women to express breast milk on airplanes,
He
wouldn't have invented coach.


BIO-TECHNOLOGY TO ACQUIRE GYNEX IN STOCK SWAP
The Bio-Technology General Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Gynex Pharmaceuticals Inc. in a stock swap valued at $48 million.
Under the agreement, approved by the boards of both companies, Bio-Tech General, based in Manhattan, will exchange 0.61 share of new common stock for each Gynex share.
Bio-Tech General shares fell 37.5 cents yesterday, closing at $5.625 in Nasdaq trading; Gynex shares closed at $2.938, up 12.5 cents.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  U.S.
SEEKS NATO BOSNIA FORCE  The U.S. is urging allies to prepare an international force that would be sent the Bosnia immediately after a peace settlement there, but planning is being hampered by a dispute between the U.S. and France over who would command it.
A1  The U.N. military chief in Bosnia is headed for besieged enclave.
A16


Rebels in Liberia Reported to Suffer Setbacks
After three years of tangled politics and intermittent warfare in Liberia, the rebel leader Charles Taylor's military position is deteriorating rapidly, according to reports from West Africa and State Department officials.
The officials say Mr.
Taylor's rebel force, the National Patriotic Front of Liberia, is being pressed hard by a better armed West African peacekeeping force and their militia allies.


Mario Berini, 80, Dies; Tenor at Met in 1940's
Mario Berini, an opera singer known for his interpretation of dramatic tenor roles, died on Monday at Beth Israel Hospital.
He was 80 and lived in Manhattan.
His wife, Anna Lee, said he had been ill for some time.


Robinson Big Again, Thus Nets Win Again
Strange bunch of guys, these Nets.
It seems they enjoy adversity.
Tense is just a five-letter word to them.
Apparently, so is Kenny.
New Jersey began its four-game road trip across the West with an impressive victory tonight against the Los Angeles Clippers.
What's more, they won their third straight game without star point guard Kenny Anderson, who was at the game, dressed in bright sweater -- and with a cast on his injured left hand.
Of course, they miss Anderson, but it's been hard to tell.


Hush Puppies Narrows Review to 4
The Hush Puppies Company, a unit of Wolverine World Wide in Rockford, Mich., said that it had narrowed the review on its footwear account, previously handled by Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis, to four agencies.
Jim Lovejoy, a Wolverine spokesman, identified the finalists as Ayer Detroit; CME KHBB Advertising in Southfield, Mich.; Hal Riney &amp; Partners in Chicago, and Rossin Greenberg Seronick in Boston.
Billings have been estimated to range from less than $2 million to $5 million.


No Headline
"I'm not sure he's reachable, period. I'm not sure he's that interested in surviving. If he genuinely perceives this to be the commencement of the end-times events, then he may see his role as being one of dying a martyr's death." -- DEREK DAVIS, professor of church-state studies at Baylor University, speaking of David Koresh.  [ A1:2. ]


Medical Stocks Help Lift the Market
Signs of life among medical stocks were all it took for the stock market to continue reaching new highs yesterday.
The Dow Jones industrial average set its third straight record, rising 6.22 points, to 3,478.34, with stronger gains among the broader market averages.
Many medical issues gained yesterday after having lost nearly a third of their value since President Clinton promised to put controls on medical costs late last year.
News that drug executives have offered to devise their own plans for holding down prices furnished the occasion for buying but not the full reason.


Why Landmarking's Not 'Taking' and Needs No Compensation
To the Editor:
In "When Preservation Becomes Appropriation" (letter, Feb. 24), Edward K. Campbell asks why the operation of New York City's landmarks law -- which prohibits an owner of a designated landmark "from making any alterations to the property that some bureaucrat does not approve" -- is not an eminent domain "taking," requiring compensation under the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution.


CHEMICAL ENGINEER IS HELD IN THE TRADE CENTER BLAST
A chemical engineer who had immigrated from the Mideast in 1985 and who had studied the principles of explosives was arrested and charged yesterday with aiding in the World Trade Center bombing.
He became the second suspect directly linked to the Manhattan blast that left at least five dead and more than 1,000 people injured.
The suspect, Nidal A. Ayyad, a 25-year-old employee of Allied-Signal Inc., was seized at his apartment in Maplewood, N.J., at 6:42 A.M., by a SWAT team of Federal agents after a long trail of clues led from the initial suspect, Mohammed A. Salameh, 25, to the young chemist.
The clues included a business card the authorities said was found in Mr.
Salameh's possession when he was arrested last Thursday.


Laker Big Apple Glow Dims in Knicks' Luster
On the day he walked into the Los Angeles Lakers' locker room, having fled for his basketball life from the Continental Basketball Association, Tony Campbell was sure he had signed and gone to heaven.
There sat Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, James Worthy, Michael Cooper and Byron Scott.
Here came Magic Johnson to shake his hand and show him around his new luxury quarters.
In walked Pat Riley to ask him how it felt to have traded in his Albany Patroons outfit for the uniform of champions.


Max A. Zorn, 86; Developed a Theory That Changed Math
Prof.
Max August Zorn, who developed a fundamental premise of algebraic structure theory, died Tuesday at Bloomington Hospital in Bloomington, Ind.
He was 86 and lived in Bloomington.
The cause of death was congestive heart failure, said Indiana University, where Dr.
Zorn taught mathematics from 1946 until his retirement in 1971.


Auto Makers See Troubles in Energy Tax
Top Detroit auto executives told a Senate panel today that President Clinton's proposed energy tax would hurt their ability to compete with imports.
Robert A. Lutz, the president of the Chrysler Corporation, said that because steel production required a lot of energy the tax could add $50 million to $100 million to the cost of his company's annual steel purchases.
He pointed out that foreign car makers would not have to pay the tax.


COMPANY NEWS: Not for Calorie Counters; Miller, the Maker of Lite, Promotes a Heavier Ale
After decades of catering to the "fill me up but not out" crowd with its Lite beer, the Miller Brewing Company introduced a product yesterday that it believes will appeal to customers because it tastes good.
The new entry is Miller Reserve Amber Ale, a full-flavored brew not for the calorie conscious.
It packs 158 calories a 12-ounce bottle, compared with about 100 calories for light beer.
Though Miller played down the size of the market for the ale, it intends to market the new brew aggressively.


Treasuries Off in Narrow Trading
Treasury prices bounced around in a narrow range yesterday, ending lower as investors and traders tried to figure what the next move in interest rates would be.
The yield on the 30-year bond rose to 6.75 percent.
Some of the downward pressure on prices came from the announcement of President Clinton's plan to encourage bank lending to small businesses.
As earlier in the week, there was selling of intermediate Treasury securities because investors feared the proposal would make banks sell some of the billions of these securities they hold.


U.N. GENERAL GOING TO BOSNIAN TOWN
The commander of the United Nations military forces in Bosnia set out from here today to visit Srebrenica, where about 60,000 Muslims have been trapped for months by attacking Serbs, a United Nations official here said.
Before departing, the commander, Gen.
Philippe Morillon of France, sent an urgent message to United Nations headquarters in New York asking international peace negotiators to apply pressure on Serbian leaders to have their forces honor a pledge to hold their fire on a battle line between Srebrenica and the Serbian-controlled town of Bratunac, from which the Serbs are staging their offensive, the United Nations official said.


AT HOME WITH -- Michael Douglas; Angry Everyman With Reason to Smile
Michael Douglas opens the front door of his Central Park West apartment looking friendly and agreeable, though Mr.
Nice Guy is not one of his familiar roles.
On screen, he is much more likely to seethe, bait, tease or intimidate than to wave politely in the direction of a study and offer a cup of coffee.
A moment later, he sinks into a pumpkin-colored brocade sofa with leopard-patterned throw pillows.
It takes some effort to connect the everyday Mr.
Douglas with the brush-cut fanatic currently rampaging his way across America's movie screens in "Falling Down."
In the leading box-office hit of the last two weeks, Mr.
Douglas can be seen wearing a short-sleeved white business shirt with plastic pocket holder full of ball-point pens, playing a stressed-out military worker who stalks his way angrily across Los Angeles.
At home, he leans back in rumpled jeans and a soft-looking brownish sweater, wearing his own horn rims rather than the film's geekier glasses.
He runs his hands through longish hair, a big improvement on his movie coiffure.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
BUILDING a corner closet is not too difficult, and it is a good way to learn basic carpentry skills.
If you are a novice, allow three to five weekends to complete the project.
The basic corner closet with a single door uses 2-by-4-inch lumber (which actually measures 1 1/2 by 3 1/2 inches) throughout.
When buying lumber, be sure all pieces are straight.
Buy two or three extra boards to allow for mistakes and the need for scrap pieces.


Calendar: Flower Show And Other Exhibitions
A Floral Feast
Pier 92, Twelfth Avenue (51st Street); (212) 757-0915.


House Committee Clears Clinton Plan To Shrink the Deficit Over Five Years
President Clinton's plans to shrink the deficit cleared their first Congressional hurdle tonight when Democrats pushed his proposals through the House Budget Committee on a 26-to-17 party-line vote.
The Senate Budget Committee scheduled votes for Thursday on a similar measure calling for $502 billion in spending cuts and revenue increases over five years.


Much At Stake In Big East Tourney
In the 1980's, the Big East tournament was less a four-day exercise to determine the conference champion than a lucrative tuneup for the National Collegiate Athletic Association's 64-team tournament that followed, as five to six teams went into the weekend virtually assured of moving on.
But as the tournament begins tonight, the Big East has only two invitations it can count on: for St.
John's and Seton Hall.
By Sunday, Big East officials are hoping to have earned two more spots.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
2.98
3.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.98
4.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.08
4.23
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.61
5.57
7.32
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.75
6.73
8.00
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.69
7.68
8.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.84
5.79
6.78
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Frankfurt Gips Undergoes Split
Philip G. Gips, chief creative officer at Frankfurt Gips Balkind in New York, said yesterday that he would leave the agency after 20 years, to open his own agency, effective immediately.
Although Mr.
Gips, 60, said his departure from Frankfurt Gips was "amicable," he added that it was spurred by an ongoing disagreement over the direction of the agency with Aubrey Balkind, its chief executive; Mr.
Gips said he preferred the "creative intimacy" of a smaller shop.


Negotiations With Texas Cult Cover Ever-Shifting Ground
The telephone conversations ramble on late into the night, veering from haggles over milk delivery to confessions of childhood failures to disquisitions on the Book of Revelation, like a game of three-dimensional chess with ever-changing rules.
But as negotiations at the compound continued today for the 11th day, it was clear that a resolution revolved around two questions: What does David Koresh want?
And can the authorities offer the besieged cult leader, who could face life in prison or worse, anything more appealing than an apocalyptic martyr's death that would fulfill his own biblical prophecies?


CHAMBERS DEVELOPMENT SAID TO PUT 2 UNITS UP FOR SALE
The Chambers Development Corporation is trying to sell two waste collection and hauling subsidiaries as part of a plan to restore the company to profitability, a big stockholder said yesterday.
Chambers, the nation's fourth-largest waste management company, declined to comment on the possible sale of the units, Chambers Waste Systems of Rhode Island and Chambers Waste Systems of Texas.


21 Reported Killed In 9 Egyptian Raids On Muslim Militants
In one of the biggest armed crackdowns against Muslim militants since the assassination of President Anwar el-Sadat in 1981, 21 people were killed and two dozen wounded in nine raids in Cairo and Aswan Tuesday night and today, security officials said.
The Interior Ministry said the police and security forces had killed 15 Islamic extremists, eight in one attack at the Al-Rahman mosque in Aswan.
Three policemen, a woman and a child were reported killed in the Cairo raids.


Arnold Franchetti, A Music Professor
Arnold Franchetti, a composer and a faculty member at the University of Hartford, died on Sunday at Middlesex Hospital in Cromwell, Conn.
He was believed to have been at least 84, and he lived in Middletown, Conn.
The cause was complications from a stroke, his family said.


Increased Cigarette Tax Could Reduce Fires; Raise the Levy on Beer
To the Editor:
Let's hope that President Clinton's reluctance to go on the record supporting an excise tax increase on alcoholic beverages (Feb. 26) doesn't mean he's going to let the Budweiser Clydesdales who marched in his inaugural parade get in the way of good, old-fashioned horse sense.


Senate Needs Open Budget, Democrats Say
A group of Democratic senators used the unusual vehicle of a legislative hearing today to criticize what they called one of the most secretive parts of the state's budget and one of the most effective means of protecting incumbents: the money the Legislature spends on itself.
At a hearing described as the first in memory on the subject, the senators called for changes in the convoluted process that would make the Legislature's own budget, proposed at $168 million for next year, more open to scrutiny by the public and even the lawmakers themselves.


Howard N. Porter, 76, A Professor of Classics
Prof.
Howard Newton Porter, professor emeritus of Greek and Latin at Columbia University and former chairman of its classics department, died on Tuesday at a nursing home in Yarmouth, Me.
A former resident of Guilford, Conn., he was 76.
He died after a long illness, his family reported.


More Nurses, Better Medicine
The U.S. has a shortage of primary-care physicians.
This limits the options for improving access to cost-effective health care.
Nurses are a national resource with the potential to meet this challenge.
Since the late 1960's, Federal policy has promoted two strategies to increase primary care.
The first included Federal support for establishing a new physician specialty in family practice.
It has not yet been successful.
Between 1970 and 1990, the proportion of doctors in primary care declined, and the rate of decline is accelerating.


SUPER-FAST STAR MAY LEAVE GALAXY
Astronomers have clocked a star traveling faster than any ever seen before.
It is leaving behind a luminous wake of gases in the shape of a guitar and going so fast that it should eventually escape the gravitational bonds of the Milky Way galaxy.
The tiny, dense neutron star is traveling 2,232,000 miles an hour, more than 100 times as fast as the Sun, meaning it could cover the distance between New York and Los Angeles in less than five seconds.


Debunking Doubts That H.I.V. Causes AIDS
Researchers have found evidence that contradicts what has become a tenet of a persistent but widely disparaged theory of the cause of AIDS: that recreational drug use and not the human immunodeficiency virus causes the deadly collapse of the immune system in people with AIDS.
In a commentary published today in Nature, the British science journal, researchers reported data showing that there is no relationship between recreational drug use, excluding intravenous drugs, and the development of AIDS.


50 Years Later, Nazism's Terrors Live On
To the Editor:
"She Spied, but Hitler Was the Traitor" (Op-Ed, Feb. 20) by Shareen Blair Brysac begins with the execution at Plotzensee Prison in Berlin on Feb. 16, 1943, of the Milwaukee-born Dr.
Mildred Harnack-Fish, a leader in the anti-Nazi Red Orchestra organization.
Her beheading still strikes terror into the hearts of those who witnessed the rise and empowerment of the Nazi regime, which reached its height of brutality in those days of 1943 and 1944, when its leaders realized the war was lost.
Stalingrad had just become the nemesis of the Eastern front, and the air bombardment of German cities had begun, bringing home that the supposed invincibility of the German Reich was a myth.
Mildred Harnack-Fish, I presume, was married to the son of Dr.
Adolf von Harnack, the theologian and humanist, once director general of the Prussian State Library and president of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute (after World War II, the Max Planck Institute).
Adolf von Harnack was a scientist of great distinction, who represented the best of German culture and thinking.
It is no wonder that in such an environment as the young Harnacks lived, Nazi ideology kindled active resistance.
Almost concurrent with Mildred Harnack-Fish's death, Hans Scholl and Sophie Scholl, brother and sister students at the University of Munich, were executed at Stadelheim Prison in Munich.
They and several more students and a professor were members of the White Rose, a secret society whose main sin had been to print and distribute leaflets and other material to appeal to the conscience of academic circles in Bavaria and to counter the lies of German victories on the many war fronts.
These young people, like the July 20, 1944, resistance group, were victims of the Volksgerichtshof (the People's court) under Judge Roland Freisler.
All were condemned to death.
Luckily for Freisler, he died in an air raid, instead of at the Nuremberg war crimes trials, where he belonged.
HELLA MARIA HOLMAN  Springfield, Ill., Feb. 26, 1993


Miami Officer's Retrial Moved Yet Again
For the fourth time in a year, a state court has moved the retrial of Officer William Lozano, the Miami policeman charged with manslaughter in the deaths of two black men in 1989.
Today's decision shifts the trial back to Orlando from Tallahassee and delays it two more months, until May 17.
The ruling, by the District Court of Appeal here, came at the request of both defense and prosecution.
Both sides objected to a district judge's decision to shift the trial, which was to have started this week, from Orlando to Tallahassee to improve the likelihood that blacks would be on the jury.


Steel Tables Can Look Like Wood
RICK RUBIN is a sculptor who says he got so fed up with the art world about five years ago that he started making furniture full time.
What links Mr.
Rubin's sculpture to his furniture is his use of metal, mostly steel, for table tops.
"Steel has great tensile strength," said Mr.
Rubin, shown below, who works in Brooklyn.
"It's not a cold surface to eat on, but you might have to be more careful when using china." The table tops are often finished with varnish and wax, leading some people to mistake the steel for mahogany.


CHRONICLE
The play "Seconds Out" started out as a collaborative effort by eight teen-agers enrolled in the St.
Francis Center, a special school in Cork, Ireland, for youths coping with such problems as drug abuse, alcoholism and homelessness.
Through the efforts of JACK HOFSISS, the Tony Award-winning director, JEAN KENNEDY SMITH and the Very Special Arts program she organized in 1974 to involve people with disabilities in cultural endeavors, it will open April 13 at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
It will be produced by the Irish Repertory Theater, a Manhattan company.
"These young people, who are ages 13 to 18, did it as a play-writing project at the school, in which they were asked to submit a play about disabilities," Mrs.
Smith said the other day, explaining that the play deals with the problems of a dyslexic boy.
It won first place in a contest run by the Very Special Arts program in Ireland and toured there in 1991, when Mrs.
Smith saw it.
She sent the script to Mr.
Hofsiss, who was paralyzed from the chest down in a diving accident in 1985.
He agreed to direct, and rehearsals began on Tuesday.


Deadly Bomb Was Cheap and Easily Made, Experts Say
The bomb that savaged the World Trade Center, investigators and explosive experts said yesterday, apparently was put together with ordinary chemicals that are widely and cheaply available at chemical supply houses and gardening centers throughout the country.
Experts now estimate that the bomb weighed about 1,000 pounds and that the chemicals to make it were bought for a little more than $400.


For a German Gadfly, a New Play, a New Furor
Rolf Hochhuth, the German playwright whose provocative dramas have been setting off political controversies for 30 years, has ignited another one with a play that some say seeks to justify the killing of a senior German official in 1991.
The official, Detlev Rohwedder, was president of the Treuhand agency, which is charged with privatizing businesses formerly owned by the East German state.
In his new play, which opened in Berlin last month, Mr.
Hochhuth accuses the Treuhand of "plundering East Germany" and condemns Mr.
Rohwedder as "a useful idiot for speculators" who practiced "brutal economic Darwinism."


New Jersey Air Base Stands to Lose Jobs
McGuire Air Force Base in New Jersey will apparently not be on the list of military bases to be shut down, but it could still lose 7,000 of its 12,000 jobs by 1996, according to preliminary plans presented to New Jersey's Congressional delegation by Pentagon officials today.
Under the plans, all active-duty military personnel now stationed at the base, which is home to the Air Force's 438th Airlift Wing, a supply unit, would be transferred to Plattsburgh Air Force Base in upstate New York.
Three reserve squadrons, including two units of the New Jersey National Guard, would be left.


Pentagon to End Secrecy About Poison Gas Tests
Responding to pressure from Congress and the White House, the Defense Department did an abrupt about-face today and promised to end the secrecy surrounding World War II experiments in which servicemen were subjected to poison gases.
Deputy Defense Secretary William Perry rescinded a secrecy oath imposed on the test participants and said the military would declassify research records in an effort to help those who took part qualify for veterans benefits.


No U.S.-Jordan Chill To the Editor:
A Feb. 21 news article paints an inaccurate picture of United States-Jordanian relations.
The statement by Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher acknowledging Jordan's role in the Middle East peace process as the most forthcoming party, as well as his strong endorsement of Jordan's democratization, can hardly be referred to as a "chill" in relations.
For the first time, a Secretary of State hints that Israel might not be the only democracy in the region.


Indy Ride for Cogan
RICK GALLES, the car owner for last year's Indianapolis 500 winner, AL UNSER Jr., will be back at Indy in May with a third driver, besides Unser and his regular teammate, DANNY SULLIVAN.
Galles, an Albuquerque, N.M., businessman, announced yesterday that KEVIN COGAN of Palos Verdes Estates, Calif., who hasn't been in a race car since he was hurt in the 1991 Indy 500, will drive for the team next May.
"We think he has great potential," said Galles.
That, and a sponsor willing to pay for the one-race deal, clinched it for Galles.


Review/Fashion; In Milan, a Costume Party
Score some more points for the costume-party look.
The leader of the band is Rifat Ozbek, the Turkish-born designer who won a vast following among fashion groupies when he started showing his clothes in London.
Since they are now made in Italy, where the audience is considerably larger, he now stages his shows here.
And what a melange they are.
The takeoff point was Java, according to the program notes for his fall and winter collection, with subsequent stops at Tibet, Thailand and other points east.


Jurors Acquit Teen-Ager In Killing of Yale Student
After only four hours of deliberation, a Superior Court jury today acquitted a New Haven teen-ager of murder in the 1991 killing of a Yale University sophomore.
The defendant, James Fleming, 18, who was being tried a second time in the death of the student, Christian Prince, also was acquitted of attempted robbery.


Paramount's Net Plunges 95% in Period
Paramount Communications Inc. reported yesterday that its net income fell 95 percent in its first fiscal quarter this year.
The company said it earned $900,000, or 1 cent a share, in the three-month period ending Jan. 31, compared with $18.4 million, or 16 cents a share, in the corresponding 1992 quarter.
Paramount's revenue fell nearly 12 percent, to $943.7 million in the first quarter from $1.07 billion a year earlier.
Poor Performance by Film Unit
The company said the weak performance of its films in the first quarter of the year depressed operating income from its entertainment division, despite higher profits from television programming such as "Wings" and "Star Trek: The Next Generation." During the quarter, Paramount released such films as "Jennifer 8" and "Leap of Faith."


Home Video
Status of Video on Demand
Suppose you could watch any movie at any time simply by punching numbers on a telephone or a television remote control.
That prospect, referred to as video on demand, has got so much publicity lately that some consumers and video dealers are under the impression that video on demand is here and about to do away with the video store.


Toys 'R' Us Inc (N)
Santa Claus, his elves and millions of grandparents apparently did their shopping at Toys "R" Us Inc. last Christmas, lifting the retailer's profits for the fourth quarter and the year to record levels.
The company reported its 14th consecutive year of sales and earnings increases yesterday.
Sales in stores open at least a year, considered the best indicator of a retailer's performance, rose 10.6 percent for the fourth quarter, which ended Jan. 30.


Andrea Boroff Eagan, 49, Dies; Writer and Women's Advocate
Andrea Boroff Eagan, a journalist, educator, union founder and advocate for women, died on Tuesday at Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan.
She was 49 and lived in Brooklyn.
The cause of death was cancer, her family said.


St. Jovite Will Miss Race at Gulfstream
The American debut of the European champion St.
Jovite will not take place Sunday in the $500,000 Gulfstream Park Handicap, his trainer said, because the 4-year-old colt needs about three more weeks of training.
The horse, owned by Virginia Kraft Payson, has been training at the Payson Park complex at Indiantown, 70 miles north of Gulfstream.
But his trainer, Roger Attfield, said Tuesday, "The Gulfstream Park Handicap is coming up a little too quickly, and I'm returning to my original thinking of giving St. Jovite more time."


Man, 19, Shot in Gunfight
A 19-year-old man was wounded yesterday in a gunfight with narcotics officers who had gone to a house in Jamaica, Queens, to execute a search warrant, the police said.
Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman, said five officers were fired upon as they were getting out of their cars in front of a house at 102-34 184th Street in Jamaica about 4:30 P.M.
The police fired back, hitting Anthony Forbez, who was in front of the house, in the upper right chest, he said.
The wounded man, who gave no address, was taken to Mary Immaculate City Hospital in Jamaica, where he was reported in stable condition.


Bridge
A prizeworthy lead, with honors to the partner who doubled and the opener, who figured it out.
If there were an annual prize for the best opening lead, West on the diagramed deal would be a strong candidate.
Gene Saxe of Stamford, Conn., was in that seat, playing in a Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Match eight days ago, and he was steered delicately in the right direction by his partner, Tom Smith of Greenwich, Conn.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
ALTHOUGH her parents strongly supported her interest in school, Dr.
Claire Etaugh says that throughout her childood and adolescence she received many direct and indirect messages from others that because she was a girl, she shouldn't be so bright or inquisitive.
These subtle discouragements came from neighbors, classmates and even teachers.
She says she felt the pressure acutely but resisted, at least most of the time.
"I remember, when I was younger, acting more coy about my accomplishments when I was talking to a boy; with girlfriends, I was more likely to boast," said Dr.
Etaugh, who is now a professor of psychology and dean of the college of liberal arts and sciences at Bradley University in Peoria, Ill.
"When I started graduate school, a friend's mother called my mother and asked why she was letting me get my doctorate, because I'd never meet a man."


BRITISH LEADER HIT BY TORY REBELLION
Only 11 months after the Conservative Party won a narrow re-election victory, Prime Minister John Major's grip on government has slipped, strained by a growing rebellion within his party over Europe and deepening public dismay over his failure to turn the country's moribund economy around.
The latest setback came Monday, when a minority of defiant, right-wing Tory defectors cost Mr.
Major a vote in the House of Commons, only the second time since the Conservatives took control of Westminister in 1979 that they have failed to carry their majority.


REPORTS WARNING OF H.U.D. PROBLEMS
Four years after corruption and mismanagement scandals mired the Department of Housing and Urban Development, a succession of reports has warned that the department's management systems remain out of control, and its Inspector General has warned that "another H.U.D. scandal is a distinct possibility."
The reports say problems in staffing, data systems and accounting controls are leading to the misuse of hundreds of millions of dollars, leaving the department with an uncertain grasp of more than $1 trillion in financial commitments.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Commonwealth Edison Co., Chicago, is offering $130 million of 6 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 1998 at 99.498 to yield 6.118 percent through Paine Webber Inc.
The noncallable bonds are rated Baa-2 by Moody's and BBB by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps. *
CSX Corp., Richmond, is offering $73.5 million of equipment trust certificates with maturity dates that run from 1994 to 2008 through First Boston Corp.
Yields range from 3.54 percent to 6.48 percent, with the issue rated Aa-2 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp; P.


Amateur Is Delighted Taking Long Drives
Even as Vicki Goetze has built a reputation as the finest American woman amateur golfer since Juli Inkster, she has been perceived as a weak hitter who must rely on short-game wizardry to be successful.
So at today's pro-am at the Honda Classic, Goetze could take some pleasure in seeing her drives end up 100 yards past those of her partner, Jack Nicklaus.


Why Canadians Grew Cold to Mulroney
To the Editor:
Were you being tongue in cheek in "Mr. Mulroney Steps Down" (editorial, Feb. 25), praising Brian Mulroney, the Canadian Prime Minister?
While you acknowledge that he is unpopular at home (he has the lowest popularity rating of any Canadian Prime Minister in this century), you state that he has been a "good friend" to the United States.


Trump Owes Back Taxes on Land for Tower
Donald J. Trump owes New York City $4.4 million in back property taxes for his land on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, where he plans to build a huge $3 billion apartment complex, city records show.
Mr.
Trump said in an interview on Tuesday that he was thinking about withholding his tax payments, and would continue to do so until he gets new benefits from the city and state, including tax breaks and state-backed financing.


Detective Dies In Shooting In Drug Case
An undercover narcotics detective who had just returned with backup officers to complete a "buy and bust" marijuana deal was slain yesterday afternoon when one suspect opened fire at a silk-screening store in the East Village, the police said.
He was the first officer killed in the line of duty this year.


Senator's Transit Plan Differs From Cuomo's
The chairman of the State Senate's Transportation Committee proposed a transportation financing plan today that he said would freeze mass transit fares for at least two years and would devote significantly more money to road, bridge and rail construction than a plan offered by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
But the key to paying for the spending would be the sale of $7.1 billion in revenue bonds over the next five years, 30 percent more than has been proposed by the Governor.
Mr.
Cuomo's aides, who have yet to see a copy of the plan, questioned whether enough revenue could be produced by petroleum taxes, bridge tolls and similar sources to support such a bond sale.


Essay; Communostalgia
As a tourist enters the 700-year-old Matthias Church, she is jostled in the crowd; moments later, she reaches into her pocket and cries, "My wallet is gone!" At the police station, she meets two couples, Dutch and German, also victims of pickpockets in the same place on the same afternoon.
The policemen sympathize: Gypsies, they explain.
Or a Bulgarian gang.
It becomes apparent that the feeble authorities will do nothing to stop the systematic rip-off.


The Repertory of Counting Absentee Ballots; The Banter Is Constant, and Therein Hangs the Margin in a City Council Election
More than two weeks after a City Council election on the Upper East Side, a group of caviling men with one magnifying glass, one pearl-handled letter opener and a seemingly bottomless repertory of show tunes is still picking through the absentee ballots, trying to determine the winner.
Because of New York State's Byzantine election laws, who will win depends in part on the skills of two lawyers in the group, who are representing the two leading candidates.
Despite their frequent florid testimonials to the glories of democracy, the lawyers are scrutinizing each ballot they suspect of being in favor of their opponent for anything -- a stray mark, a faulty signature, a missing line of information -- that might disqualify it.


Increased Cigarette Tax Could Reduce Fires; Phase Out the Growing
To the Editor:
Former President Jimmy Carter doesn't go far enough when he proposes that President Clinton raise the tobacco tax $2 a pack to improve health care and reduce Federal budget deficits (letter, Feb. 21).
He argues that this would raise more than $20 billion a year in new revenue and reduce smoking rates, particularly among the young, enough to save two million lives.


Fatal Dispute Finally Ready for Trial
It was a minor slight, the sort that happens every day in New York City, that led to the death of Grady Alexis.
Mr.
Alexis, a Haitian-born artist, and two friends were walking down Eighth Street near Fifth Avenue in Greenwich Village when a four-wheel-drive vehicle passed uncomfortably close to them.
One of the three men shouted at the driver.


Yeltsin Survives a Vote in Legislature on His Powers
President Boris N. Yeltsin dodged an opening attack by his belligerent legislative opposition today as the Congress of People's Deputies, meeting in emergency session, voted down a proposal that would have stripped him of most of his powers.
The proposal won 420 votes, short of the majority needed in the 1,033-member Congress.
But it was seen as a sign of Mr.
Yeltsin's eroding support and of the open hostility he faces in his battle with the legislature.


Aid to Russia: Should Yeltsin Be the Focus?
The Clinton Administration's energetic new campaign to help Boris N. Yeltsin comes at a time when the Russian President's political future is again precarious and he is engaged once again in the trenches with a hostile Congress.
And once again, the instinct of the more democratic, prosperous West to protect the tender shoots of freedom in Russia has run up against difficult questions: Can Western aid really help Russia until it sorts out its political and economic mess?
What sort of aid does Russia need?
Is Mr.
Yeltsin really on the ropes?
Should the West be concentrating so hard on Mr.
Yeltsin -- or on Russia?


Islanders Take Loss in Stride
After winning a grueling game the night before on Long Island and traveling through the early hours of the morning, the Islanders were exhausted and likely to be beaten by the league's best team tonight, even if the well-rested Montreal Canadiens were without seven injured regulars plus their hospitalized head coach.
So, Montreal's 5-1 victory at the Forum tonight wasn't that big a surprise.
It ended the Islanders' five-game winning streak and spoiled their chance to move up in the Patrick Division.
The Islanders remain in fifth place, 1 point behind the Rangers, who hold the final playoff berth.


To Clip, Perchance to File (Not Likely)
There are organizations to help compulsive drinkers, compulsive smokers, compulsive shoppers, in fact, people compulsive about almost anything, with one notable exception: compulsive clippers.
These are the men and women who can rarely read a newspaper or magazine without a pair of scissors or a specially designed razorlike instrument within reach.
Sometimes, if no tools are handy, they just rip away.
If they get through a publication without a tearing sound or a snip, snip, they're both relieved and pleased.


Economic Scene; Planting the Clinton flag on what might have been Bush's recovery.
TO stimulate or not to stimulate?
Listening to Bill Clinton, one might guess that he is still eager to use fiscal policy to wrench the economy out of the doldrums.
"We certainly cannot declare a victory now," the President told a radio audience last week.
"For while employment is edging up, unemployment is still higher than it was at the depths of this recession."
In fact, Mr.
Clinton has proposed only symbolic stimulus for the current fiscal year -- a mere $15 billion dollop for a $6 trillion economy that at very most would add two-tenths of a percentage point to the 1993 growth rate.
And when the White House's new agreement with House Democrats to pare an extra $55 billion of spending between 1994 and 1998 is taken into account, the economic plan actually becomes mildly restrictive in the years thereafter.


Accounts
*
Weyerhaeuser Co., Marshfield, Wis., to Lindsay, Stone &amp; Briggs, Madison, Wis., to handle its architectural door division's account, previously handled in-house.
Billings were estimated at $1.5 million to $3 million.


JUDGE PUTS LIMITS ON SECRET SESSIONS FOR HEALTH
A Federal judge ruled today that a panel that is forging the Administration's health policy under the direction of Hillary Rodham Clinton must announce all its meetings in advance and make sessions where it collects facts and information open to the public.
But he said the panel could meet in private when "formulating its recommendations for the President."
The judge, Royce C. Lamberth of the Federal District Court here, said Mrs.
Clinton's Task Force on National Health Care Reform could not hold any meetings until it complied with a 1972 law governing the operation of Federal advisory committees.


Cleaning Upholstry With Care.
Most upholstery cleaners also clean carpets, but it doesn't always work the other way around.
"Upholstery is harder to clean than carpets," said Barry Swidler, a partner in Long Island Carpet Cleaners, a 76-year-old Brooklyn concern that cleans both upholstery and carpets.
Carpets usually have a straightforward, easily identifiable fiber composition, be it wool or synthetic.
"With upholstery, you need to know all kinds of fabrics," he added.


Senate Panel Summons 12 From the Fed
On the surface, they were called to talk about the economy, which they said was slowly improving.
But there were other reasons why Congress, for the first time in decades, summoned the presidents of the Federal Reserve System's 12 regional banks to testify: several senators wanted to show them who was boss.
And on the same day, the Fed reported in its survey of economic conditions, the so-called beige book, that growth continued early this year, although New England and California remained weak.
The report said that retail sales held up well after Christmas and that manufacturing continued to increase, with the strongest gains in household items and durable consumer goods.


Giving Smaller Factories Big Ideas
When Paul Carman first saw the big Cincinnati Milacron T-10 at the Byrd Institute here, he gazed straight into his own future.
The computer-controlled milling machine could spit out intricately shaped metal parts in 12 minutes -- 15 times faster than his own shop.
And he could use the $350,000 T-10 for only $30 to $35 a hour.
Mr.
Carman's first visit to West Virginia's "teaching factory" was an eye-opener.
A hands-on center that gives small manufacturers low-cost access to some of the most advanced technology and management expertise around, it is equipped with the computerized tools and instruments that can ignite productivity and sales but that most small companies simply cannot afford to test.


Review/Television; Teen-Agers at Risk From Health or Law
Six teen-age boys -- three of them critically ill; the other, slightly older three serving sentences in a detention camp for juveniles -- are brought together in "A Time for Life." The two-hour program is part of a series, "Desperate Passage," that Lee Stanley, a West Coast documentary producer, has been making about juvenile offenders.
In inviting the group onto his yacht for a three-day sail around Catalina Island, the centerpiece of the program, Mr.
Stanley was evidently trying to arouse viewer sympathy for the three Los Angeles gang members, whose lives, he says, are no less at risk than those of the sick boys.
All face untimely death, and as Mr.
Stanley sees it, there may be more hope for those receiving medical help than for those whom he calls "throwaway kids."


Review/Dance; Movement Toward Death? If You Like
Beauty is in the eye of the ticket holder, and "Enter," a magisterial hourlong new dance work by Merce Cunningham, is guaranteed to affect viewers in myriad ways.
Quite rightly, the loyalists who packed the house at the opening of the Merce Cunningham Dance Company's two-week season at City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan) virtually rose as one to give this fiercely danced local premiere a roaring ovation.
"Enter" immediately impresses itself upon the eye: it is filled with taut Matisse-like circles of dancers, figures cast upon the floor like abandoned statuary, and dominant dynamic activity subsiding into serenity against a backdrop that Seurat might recognize in its updated pointillism.


Berlin Journal; Silent Still, the Old Man Who Trafficked in Secrets
The accused is Erich Mielke, once chief of the East German secret police, sitting in a bulletproof glass cage in Courtroom 700 of the Berlin Superior Court, head down, hardly ever saying a word.
Little of the testimony is about the secret service or the network of nearly 100,000 officers and 109,000 informers who kept the 16.5 million people of East Germany obedient to Communism until power turned to dust in their hands in November 1989.


Lumber Prices Are Soaring On Shortages and Owl Feud
Lumber prices have jumped 82 percent since September and are likely to continue to soar with the arrival of spring, when building increases and the demand for lumber picks up.
Because the cost of lumber usually amounts to 10 to 15 percent of the cost of a new home, the shortage of lumber could eventually push up home prices.


Sports of The Times; Manhattan's Own Shining Moment
IT'S known as Manhattan College, but it's in the Bronx, a cluster of red-brick dorms and classrooms perched on a steep hill above Broadway among the now leafless trees of the Riverdale section.
"All these stairs," one of its 3,600 students mentioned yesterday.
"That's why Manhattan has always had good track teams."


Abbott Is Prepared to Wear Out the Pinstripes
The words tumbled out of Jim Abbott's mouth thoughtfully and clearly today.
Hours of lengthy discussions with his agent this week had culminated in a momentous decision about his future and Abbott wanted to insure that the message was delivered precisely.
Quite simply, Abbott proclaimed, he wants to play with the Yankees for a long time.
In a quiet clubhouse after his teammates had departed for an exhibition game against the Braves in West Palm Beach, Abbott revealed that he was eager to begin negotiations with the Yankees for a long-term contract.
He conceded that three weeks of spring training, the positive impressions made on him by Manager Buck Showalter and deep days of thought about the direction of the Yankees had convinced him New York was the perfect arena for him.


Market Place; Wall St.'s Optimism on Primerica
Even before the Primerica Corporation disclosed its plans to acquire the Shearson brokerage business, it was well advanced in its transformation from a sleepy Baltimore-based consumer-lender into a highly profitable company involved in securities, insurance and consumer finance.
Primerica's net income totaled $593 million last year, and annual earnings increases of more than 20 percent since Sanford I. Weill took charge late in 1988 lifted its stock price from a low of $11.25 in October 1990 to yesterday's close of $46.875, up $2.125.


Revco D.S. Inc (N)
Revco D.S.
Inc., the big drugstore chain that emerged from bankruptcy and dismissed its chief executive last June, said yesterday that operating earnings jumped 37 percent in the three months ending Feb. 6, compared with a year earlier.
The Twinsburg, Ohio, chain of 1,180 stores said operating profits were $24.6 million in the quarter, up from $18 million.
Sales rose 5.7 percent, to $552.4 million.


Atlanta Stadium Is Done Deal Following a Five-Ring Circus
After weeks of bitter debate and charges of race and class betrayal, an agreement was reached today that will allow construction of a $207 million Olympic stadium and its conversion after the 1996 Summer Games to a baseball park for the Atlanta Braves.
In a 6-1 vote, the Fulton County Commission approved an agreement that will permit construction of an 80,000-seat stadium just south of downtown Atlanta and adjacent to the existing Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium.


Clinton Is Seeking to Soften The Impact of Base Closings
Seeking to cushion the political fallout from a round of forthcoming base closings, President Clinton will embark on a public relations offensive this week to demonstrate his commitment to help workers affected by cuts in military spending.
On Thursday, Mr.
Clinton plans to visit a Baltimore company that is converting much of its business from military to civilian items.
There, he plans to propose spending $15 billion to $20 billion over the next five years to help the communities and workers who would be hit hardest by military cuts and to encourage military contractors to pursue new technologies.


Bridge
A prizeworthy lead, with honors to the partner who doubled and the opener, who figured it out.
If there were an annual prize for the best opening lead, West on the diagramed deal would be a strong candidate.
Gene Saxe of Stamford, Conn., was in that seat, playing in a Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Match eight days ago, and he was steered delicately in the right direction by his partner, Tom Smith of Greenwich, Conn.


Two Women And a Man Found Slain
Three people were found shot to death execution-style yesterday afternoon in an apartment near the northern end of Central Park, the police said.
The bodies of two women and a man were discovered about 4 P.M. in Apartment 53 on the fifth floor of 225 West 110th Street.
All three victims had been gagged and shot in the head, the police said.
The man was also bound and his throat had been slashed, they said.


Home Video
Status of Video on Demand
Suppose you could watch any movie at any time simply by punching numbers on a telephone or a television remote control.
That prospect, referred to as video on demand, has got so much publicity lately that some consumers and video dealers are under the impression that video on demand is here and about to do away with the video store.


Executive Changes
ACORDIA INC., Indianapolis, an insurance brokerage company, named L. Ben Lytle, chairman and chief executive officer, to the additional position of president.
Also, Keith R. Faller, chief executive officer of the Acordia Small Business Benefits unit, was named executive vice president.
CANDIES INC., New York, an apparel and footwear marketer, named Glenn Spencer president of the footwear division.


Delahoussaye Milestone
EDDIE DELAHOUSSAYE became the 14th jockey in racing history to win 5,000 races when he captured yesterday's fifth race at Santa Anita on Ackler.
BILL SHOEMAKER, LAFFIT PINCAY JR., ANGEL CORDERO JR.  and JORGE VELASQUEZ are among the other riders who have accumulated 5,000 victories.
Shoemaker is the career leader with 8,833.
"This is a great personal goal for me," Delahoussaye said.
"Ten years ago, I was happy to win 3,000, then I got 4,000, and I didn't think it could get better. Maybe I'm just getting better as I get older.'


Brooklyn Academy Gets $565,000 Drama Grant
The Brooklyn Academy of Music received a $565,000 matching grant yesterday from the National Endowment for the Arts to expand its collaboration with international theater companies.
The academy and 13 other New York City arts groups, among them Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center, the Alvin Ailey Dance Theater and the Big Apple Circus, received a total of $3.35 million from the endowment.
In all, 60 challenge grants, worth $14.5 million, were given to arts organizations around the country yesterday.
Under the conditions of the grants, they must be matched threefold by contributions from other sources over the next three years.
To receive the money from the Arts Endowment then, the 14 groups in New York City must raise just over $10 million by 1996.


Prosecutor Says He Will Return A Seized BMW
The Suffolk County District Attorney, a car buff who has been using a BMW seized from a drug dealer as his official car, is about to trade down.
The District Attorney, James M. Catterson, said today that he planned to retire the BMW because of high mileage and because publicity about it "has compromised my personal security."


Events: Talks, Tours and Discussions
Building New York
92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; (212) 996-1100.


Farm County's 4-H Cuts: Head, Heart, Hand, Help!
The boys and girls of the Dairy Dudes Club were out last month selling candy bars for $1 each.
So were the members of the Sheep Thrills, the Hop-a-Lot and about 45 other 4-H Clubs here in rural Schoharie County.
The candy sales, along with chicken barbecues, bowlathons and other fund-raising, took in more than $56,000, enough to save the 4-H Clubs from extinction, at least for a while.


Jann Wenner Shifts Focus To Families
Jann S. Wenner, who founded Rolling Stone 26 years ago and became a leading voice of the baby-boom generation, will start a new magazine for his peers this summer.
Titled Family Life, it will be aimed at parents in their 30's and 40's and help them "become more intensely involved with their children," Mr.
Wenner said.


Doctor Is Slain During Protest Over Abortions
An anti-abortion protester shot and killed a doctor during a demonstration outside his clinic here today, then surrendered to police officers, the authorities said.
They said the slaying was the first of its kind in the nation.
The doctor, David Gunn, was shot several times after he got out of his car and approached the unmarked rear entrance of the Pensacola Women's Medical Services clinic, which he had opened this year.
The 47-year-old doctor, who performed abortions at several clinics in Florida and other Southeastern states, died about two hours later in surgery at Sacred Heart Hospital.


Colleagues Recall a Detective Who Lived for Street Work
In the hazardous world of the undercover narcotics officer, Luis Lopez was considered one of the best.
He had worked in narcotics for four years and had taken a step up to become an investigator.
The barrel-chested man who was always quick with a smile or a joke seemed to have no fear of throwing himself into dangerous situations.
This was true on his first day of the job, friends and colleagues said.
And this was true yesterday, on the day he died.


DIRECTOR LEAVING DISEASE CENTERS
Dr.
William L. Roper resigned today as chief of the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, continuing the removal of some Bush Administration appointees from top health posts.
Dr.
Roper, 44, a pediatrician who was appointed to the position in 1990, was asked to step down, said officials of the Department of Health and Human Services, which oversees the centers.
The resignation will take effect on June 30, and a successor has not yet been named.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
WILLIAM BAKER, president of Channel 13, WNET, says he has figured out how to put on a television show without spending any money,
"This may be perhaps the lowest cost program in the history of Channel 13," he said yesterday as he described the program, "Inside 13," that has been on the air on Wednesdays at 5:30 P.M. since October.


'Soul Sisters'
Nine singers, musicians, dancers and writers will perform in "Soul Sisters" tonight and tomorrow night at 8 and Sunday at 3 P.M. at Davis Hall at City College.
The program, part of the theater's "New Faces/ New Voices/New Visions" series, is a mini-festival of female performers.
Appearing tonight and tomorrow night in "Women Improvisers" are Pura Fe and Jeanne Lee, singers; Valerie Naranjo and Lesa Terry, musicians, and Marlies Yearby, a dancer and choreographer.
"Words and Performances of the Here and Now" features stories and poetry by Jewelle Gomez, Dor Green, Tracie Morris and Malika Lee Whitney.
Tickets are $12.
Information: (212) 650-6900.


Review/Film; Liam Neeson in Lead Of Wharton Classic
Bent almost double and limping awkwardly through a snowy landscape, Ethan Frome (Liam Neeson) cuts a strangely familiar figure when first seen in the film version of the classic Edith Wharton novella.
Though humpless, he seems to be as gnarled of frame as Laurence Olivier's Richard III, which is unfortunate.
There's also something about him that suggests the skittishness of Charles Laughton's Quasimodo, mysteriously transported from Notre Dame in Paris to the cold granite hills of New England.
That's also misleading.
Ethan's spectacularly grotesque initial image is arresting and picturesque, but like the film itself, it's only a distant reflection of the Wharton work, which is about terrible deformity only to the extent that it is a reminder of one great love's awful futility.
In the movie, there is no great love to remember; just scenery.


Parade Permit Challenged
A civil rights group filed a lawsuit yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, asking that the city be barred from issuing a permit to the Ancient Order of Hibernians for the St.
Patrick's Day parade.
The case was assigned to Justice Alfred Toker and set for a first hearing on Monday, two days before the march on Fifth Avenue.
The group, the Center for Constitutional Rights, contends that if the parade is a religious event, as the Hibernians claimed in arguing for their right to exclude the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization from the parade because homosexuality violates church teachings, then the doctrine of the separation of church and state should forbid the city from granting the use of a public street or police protection.


Budget Panel Approves Clinton's Plan
On party-line votes, the Senate Budget Committee tonight rejected Republican efforts to change President Clinton's economic plan and approved, 12 to 9, the framework of a budget close to what the President had proposed.
In the House of Representatives today, the opposition of conservative Democrats to the President's short-term economic stimulus program seemed to have withered away.


Agony and Ecstasy For St. John's Mahoney
The basketball season was barely two weeks old, and the signs of agony could already be found at St.
John's.
There had been that odyssey through the Bronx, a late-arriving bus, and a loss at Fordham.
The Redmen would meet Indiana in Bloomington; Kentucky in a Madison Square Garden homecoming for Jamal Mashburn, and then the Big East schedule.
A worst-case scenario in Brian Mahoney's first season as the coach of the Redmen -- an end to the 28-year streak of post-season tournaments and 29 consecutive winning seasons -- had to be considered a possibility.
From a distance, the Rev.
Donald J. Harrington, the university's president, thought he had to say something to his coach.


A Paper for the Unsung Small Firms
Small-firm lawyers, who have to worry as much about running their offices as about writing brilliant briefs, will get their own newspaper next month.
The paper, Lawyers Weekly USA, is scheduled to begin publication on April 12 for a target audience of firms with 25 or fewer lawyers.
While the big firms with hundreds of lawyers get most of the attention, an American Bar Association study found that two-thirds of the nation's 800,000 lawyers work in firms with five or fewer lawyers.


New Rules Will Aid Cable TV Customers
The Federal Communications Commission issued new rules today that could bring relief to cable television customers who complain of poor service.
One of the rules is that cable companies must answer their phones within 30 seconds and respond to problems within one day.


North Korea, Fighting Inspection, Renounces Nuclear Arms Treaty
North Korea, in a defiant move against international pressure to inspect its suspected nuclear weapons development program, announced this morning that it was withdrawing from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty to defend "its supreme interest."
The surprise announcement came just after the International Atomic Energy Agency gave North Korea a deadline of later this month to accept inspection of two buildings that the United States believes contain evidence of the extent of the bomb project.
It marks a sharp reversal of course for the hard-line Communist government in Pyongyang, which had declared a new era of openness last year in an effort to save its desperate economy.


Cost-Cutter Is Leaving G.M. Post
The hard-charging Spaniard who turned the General Motors Corporation on its ear by demanding lower prices from suppliers and forcing changes in manufacturing operations said today that he was leaving the company.
It had been rumored for weeks that Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua would leave G.M., and although he did not say today where he was going, he is expected to accept a top executive post Tuesday with Volkswagen A.G., one of G.M.'s toughest competitors in Europe.
Although Mr.
Lopez's authority has steadily expanded since he came to Detroit, the VW post would be much more powerful, according to reports circulating in the industry, and may include responsibility for all production operations.


At the Bar; Love it or hate it, a book listing 'The Best Lawyers' is hard to ignore.
It inflates the egos and earnings of 11,000 lawyers in the United States and leaves at least some of the remaining 789,000 legal noses severely out of joint.
Last year it briefly jeopardized the livelihoods of 150 of Iowa's finest lawyers.
After that it was an election issue in Florida.
And fairly or unfairly, in dog-eat-dog times, it gives a competitive edge to a very select few.
"It" is "The Best Lawyers in America," a book that every two years for the last 10 has purported to list the nation's premier practitioners.
In the process it has generated waves of pride, resentment and indifference, all of which started again last month with the publication of the fifth edition.


Car Thief Drops Off Tiny Passenger
The bundle in the back seat was more than the carjacker had bargained for.
And so, the police said, moments after forcing a woman from the front seat of a van and stealing it in Morningside Heights yesterday afternoon, the thief pulled over and deposited the bundle, an 8-month-old baby girl, in a parked car.
He left a note advising the person who found the child to contact the authorities.


Mogadishu Journal; G.I.'s Storm the Beach to Get Away From It All
In the last three weeks, the half mile of gently curving sand of Arroyo beach, complete with a newly built wooden beach club, has become the favorite gathering spot for American and United Nations forces in Somalia.
Under the deafening screech of C-5 transport planes landing at the airstrip less than 100 yards away and the dust from hovering helicopters, tattooed marines tan on hoods of humvees or bake in the sand.
There are volleyball, Italian music and more illegal pursuits: alcohol and women.


Review/Cabaret; Daugherty, Field and Arlen
Near the end of "Over the Rainbow," an engaging new cabaret show of Harold Arlen songs, the musical comedy team of Daugherty and Field performs the entire score of "The Wizard of Oz" in a condensed medley that lasts barely 15 minutes.
Impersonating most of the movie's characters, from the Wicked Witch of the West to the Munchkins, they turn the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel (59 West 44th Street, Manhattan), where they are appearing through March 27, into a nostalgic time capsule.
The medley is so exhaustive it even includes "The Jitterbug," a song that was dropped from the movie.
It culminates in an elaborate, semi-barbershop arrangement of "Over the Rainbow," sung a cappella with a recorded chorus of their own voices.


Rangers Do Their Own Leap On Skates
It is hard to pinpoint when things changed for the New York Rangers.
It wasn't really a particular game, or a particular moment, or when a particular player returned from injury -- although Brian Leetch's return certainly has something to do with it all.
It is obvious, though, that the Rangers now are playing good hockey, strong hockey and -- save for that embarrassing defeat in Quebec last Saturday night -- they are playing consistently competitive hockey at a time when remaining competitive is what this game is all about. 3 Quick Goals
Take tonight in Chicago Stadium, for example.
New York adjusted to the Blackhawks' style and small rink, remained competitive through two periods, then broke the game open with three goals in a 6 minute 29 second span to take a huge 4-1 road triumph over the Campbell Conference's top team.


Would-Be Publisher Says The Post Might Be Closed
In a theatrical move apparently aimed at gaining leverage in his negotiations to buy The New York Post, Steven Hoffenberg called a news conference yesterday to say that his talks to buy the newspaper had broken down and that he could not assure the survival of the newspaper beyond this weekend.
With a new bankruptcy court hearing scheduled for this morning to consider, once again, the fate of The Post, Mr.
Hoffenberg also sent guards to The Post's headquarters.
He said the guards were told to protect the assets of the newspaper.
It was not clear from whom.


Trade Center Blast Raises Crowding Questions; Making a Smoke Filter
To the Editor:
The Feb. 26 events at the World Trade Center bring back old memories.
I was in the MGM Grand Hotel when it burned in 1980.
It is likely that 84 of the 85 people who died there might have lived if they had done what I did.
I walked down 10 flights of stairs, through thick, acrid smoke.
But it could have been 110 flights, because I made a wet breathing filter for myself.
I took a towel, wet it and wrapped it around my head (to leave my hands free) and draped an end over my head (against flame and falling embers).
Some smoke got through, but the filter worked well enough to let me make an orderly descent with my belongings.


Police Discount Phone Threat In Killing of Narcotics Officer
The police described the killing of Detective Luis Lopez yesterday as a routine drug purchase that went bad, rejecting a link between the slaying and an anonymous telephone threat only hours before that warned that a narcotics officer would be shot.
Detective Lopez, who was 35 years old, was trying to complete a marijuana deal on the Lower East Side on Wednesday when a man opened fire, shooting the detective in the chest.
He died soon after and the police arrested three men in the killing.


Money of Suspects Traced to Germany
The foreign money wired into the New Jersey joint bank account of two arrested suspects in the World Trade Center bombing has been traced to Germany, authorities said.


No. 1 Rice Loses C.H.S.A.A. Semi
As the only team from Queens in the Catholic High Schools Athletic Association Final Four, Monsignor McClancy took the homecourt advantage seriously last night with a 39-36 upset victory over Rice of Manhattan, the top-ranked team in New York State, in the C.H.S.A.A. semifinals at St.
John's University.
Ivan Jaklenec, a 6-foot-7-inch senior center from Woodside, Queens, turned in team highs of 12 points and 8 rebounds and a game-high 4 blocked shots to lift McClancy (20-6) into Sunday's championship game at Fordham University.
St.
Raymond of the Bronx (20-6), which beat LaSalle Academy of Manhattan, 80-67, last night, will have the home advantage.


Islanders' Kurvers Loses in Arbitration
Islanders defenseman TOM KURVERS has lost his gamble to determine his contract through salary arbitration.
After a ruling from the arbitrator RICHARD BLOCH, Kurvers will be paid $395,000 this season and again next season.
Bloch considered bids of $351,000 submitted by the team and $850,000 submitted by Kurvers.
Three months ago, the Islanders offered Kurvers, the club's player representative, a two-year deal for $450,000 and $550,000.
He chose arbitration.
Yesterday, he said he was "surprised and disappointed" with the decision.


The Tricks And Traps Of the Hunt For Videos
IT'S the nightmare version of a high-school mixer: all the good ones are taken, but you still have to choose.
On Saturday night at the video store, the customers look anxious and the potential for making mismatches is everywhere.
It shouldn't matter, since there's nothing easier than turning off a VCR 15 minutes into the wrong movie rental.
But it does.
It's a point of pride.
Nobody likes being snookered, and snookering is much of what the home video-rental business is about.
Prowl the aisles of any video store and you will find many mysteries, few of them welcome.
Even the season is confusing: there may be snow on the ground, but in stores featuring "new" titles like "Death Becomes Her" and "Single White Female," it's still last summer.
And as for less familiar films, caveat emptor: they may be anything from repackaged television dramas to previously unreleased imports, presented in boxes that rarely reveal much about their origins.
Then there are the stores' peculiar categories, like the Blockbuster Video section that collects the Bible, "Color Me Beautiful," "Terrific Sex" and "The Math Tutor" under the heading of "Self-Help."


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Lemieux, Gretzky Shine  Mario Lemieux and Wayne Gretzky, healthy again and apparently back on their games, figured in all but one goal as Jaromir Jagr's power-play overtime goal gave the Pittsburgh Penguins a 4-3 victory last night over the visiting Los Angeles Kings.
Jagr had two goals and won it by tipping in Larry Murphy's slap shot from the right point at 3 minutes 18 seconds of overtime, but this was a night for the National Hockey League's two biggest stars to stage one of their rare head-to-head shootouts.
Lemieux, recovering quickly from his two-month layoff for cancer treatments, had a goal and two assists and Gretzky had a goal and an assist as the Penguins beat Los Angeles for the first time in five games since March 7, 1991. (AP) Flyers 6, Capitals 4: Garry Galley had two goals and two assists as Philadelphia defeated Washington at the Spectrum.
Washington, second in the Patrick Division before last night's game, has only one victory in its last seven games (1-5-1).
The victory snapped a two-game losing streak for Philadelphia.
Washington dominated the Flyers in the first period as Dmitri Khristich scored his 25th goal at 6:51 to give the Capitals a 1-0 lead.
Just 36 seconds later, Sylvain Cote scored on a pass from Michal Pivonka. (AP)


TVWeekend; Young Indy's Real-Life Crisis in the Ratings Jungle
"The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles" on ABC is still another one-hour drama series that faces, like NBC's "I'll Fly Away" and ABC's "Homefront," an uncertain future.
So returning from an ominous hiatus tomorrow night at 8 as a special two-hour movie, the George Lucas series, made in association with Paramount Television, has a lot riding on its resumed run.
A one-time guest appearance by Harrison Ford underlines the urgency of the situation.
Mr.
Lucas, whose "Star Wars" and "Indiana Jones" trilogies are among the most popular movies ever made, sees television's Young Indy as a vehicle for education, an opportunity to introduce viewers, especially youngsters, to historical figures around the world who made a difference in this century.
The concept is unassailable.
The execution, however, has been distressingly uneven.
Scripts are rarely as impressive as the superb production values and special effects, often achieved with computerized composites, the kind that can make a handful of people look like a teeming crowd.


2 CALIFORNIA BASES SPARED FROM LIST OF MILITARY CUTS
Throwing a bone to California, an economically depressed and politically crucial state, Defense Secretary Les Aspin has decided to spare two military installations there that had been on the armed services' list of those that should close, senior Pentagon officials said today.
But Mr.
Aspin, ignoring pleas from dozens of lawmakers and communities nationwide, plans to recommend on Friday that about 30 other major installations be closed and as many as 150 other depots and smaller sites be consolidated or reduced.
Acknowledging the importance of the base-closing issue, President Clinton visited a Maryland factory today and announced a plan to ease conversions from military to civilian manufacture.  [ Page A14. ]


Petrovic to the Rescue In Nets' Fourth in Row
Looking for a way to shake the stubborn Golden State Warriors, the Nets tonight went to a well they've tapped many times before but one that never seems to run dry.
Drazen Petrovic.
Early in the third quarter New Jersey trailed 59-51 against the undermanned Warriors, who dressed only nine players because of a barrage of injuries.
Here the Nets went on 10-0 run, fueled by two Petrovic jumpers and went on to a 103-91 victory.


C. Northcote Parkinson, 83, Dies; Writer With a Wry View of Labor
C.
Northcote Parkinson, the British historian and writer who propounded the notion that "work expands so as to fill the time available for its completion," died Tuesday at a clinic near his home in Canterbury, England.
He was 83.
The cause of death was not announced.


Review/Art; Ancient Greeks at the Met: Matter Over Mind
What's in a name?
Problems, for the exhibition titled "The Greek Miracle: Classical Sculptures from the Dawn of Democracy" at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Visually, the show is enthralling.
Among its 45 works in metal and stone are some of the treasures of Western art, many on loan from Greece for the first time, others borrowed from premiere European collections, still others drawn from the Metropolitan's own holdings.
They have been beautifully installed in the museum's Robert Lehman Wing.
The prospect of large-scale fifth-century B.C. marble sculptures bathed in natural light and in view of one another across the airy courtyard is one of the must-see sights of this art season.
Yet the exhibition itself (organized by the National Gallery of Art in Washington, where it appeared in a somewhat smaller version last fall, with the Metropolitan and the Greek Ministry of Culture) not only lacks any evidence of a shaping hand but has barely an original thought in its handsome head.
The world-renowned objects have been gathered not in the interest of new scholarship nor in an attempt to see with fresh eyes the complex society that produced them, but as a kind of travel brochure, replete with a jingoistic promotional title meant to perpetuate cliches about art and its meaning that recent art history has been trying to dislodge.


RUSSIAN LEGISLATURE VOTES TO REDUCE YELTSIN'S POWERS AND ASSUME DOMINANT ROLE
The People's Congress voted overwhelmingly today to sharply curb President Boris N. Yeltsin's powers and to cancel a planned referendum next month that he had hoped would give him a popular mandate to accelerate economic change.
A final vote is expected Friday.
But already this evening it was evident that the thousand deputies, elected three years ago under the Communist system, intended to reject any proposals put forth by Mr.
Yeltsin and to assume more authority for themselves and for their chairman, Ruslan I. Khasbulatov.


U.S. Discounters Invade Mexico
The discounters that revolutionized retailing in the United States are at it in Mexico now, underselling not only the department stores and specialty shops but sometimes even the street vendors, kiosk operators and other members of the big informal economy.
The invasion began a year ago, after the Mexican Government lifted import restrictions on most American consumer goods in anticipation of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
That meant that a Wal-Mart could transplant its high-volume merchandising to Mexico, and it was not long before a Wal-Mart's Sam's Club set up shop in a former candy factory on one side of town, and the Price Club opened one of its warehouse-like stores on the other side.


Will Janet Reno Run Justice?
Janet Reno will face plenty of challenges as Attorney General -- a rudderless Justice Department and an embattled F.B.I. chief, to name two.
But the biggest challenge is the schizophrenic nature of the job itself.
Ideally, an Attorney General is "the people's lawyer" -- an impartial seeker of national justice.
In practice, the Attorney General often doubles as the President's political mouthpiece whose first master is the White House.


Sounds Around Town
The Mummies' Look
The Mummies, CBGB, 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street, East Village, (212) 982-4052, and Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
There are times in rock-and-roll when the visuals count.
Elvis had his pompadour, Mick Jagger has his big lips; Iggy Pop of the Stooges had a skinny little body that he cut up with broken glass.
The Mummies, a torturous garage band from San Francisco, has mummy costumes.
Sometimes the four musicians wear tuxedos and bow ties over the mummy costumes, with space left just for their eyes and mouths; sometimes they mount mohawks on top of their mummified heads.
Their raw, crass surf-punk is a beach party gone horror show, with primitive, distorted guitar, shrieked vocals and the ever-present shatter of bludgeoned cymbals.
But how much finesse can you expect from a band of guys wrapped head to foot in bandage strips?
Tomorrow night's show at CBGB with the Swingin' Neckbreakers, Vacant Lot and Supercharger starts at 9:30; admission is $8.
Sunday's show at Maxwell's with Supercharger starts at 9 P.M.; admission is $7.
Voices of the City
Television, Academy, 234 West 43d Street, Manhattan, (212) 249-8870.
A secret history of New York City is written in Richard Lloyd and Tom Verlaine's guitars: gray afternoons on the Lower East Side, dark nights at CBGB, an epoch of shadowy moments before and after the punk explosion of 1977.
In the glory days, Television released two beautiful albums, "Marquee Moon" in 1977 and "Adventure" in 1978, then splintered.
But Mr.
Lloyd never stopped playing guitar and Mr.
Verlaine never stopped writing words, and the group reunited last year for a new album, "Television." The spare, desolate guitar notes in songs like "1880 or So" and "Rhyme" are the sound of a place nobody wants, the story of a city's forgotten voices.
Show time is Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $19.50 in advance or $21 at the door.


John Outlaw Is Dead; AIDS Song Writer, 37
John Outlaw, an actor and musician who had fought AIDS since 1979 and used songs to dramatize issues about the epidemic, died of the disease on Monday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 37 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Outlaw was one of the longest known survivors of AIDS, said Anne Levine Ezer, a friend.
He had experienced early-stage symptoms before medical authorities recognized AIDS as a new illness.


Chief Administrator of State Courts Resigns
Matthew T. Crosson, the Chief Administrator of the New York State court system, announced his resignation today, saying he wanted to give the Chief Judge-designate, Judith S. Kaye, a chance to select her own administrator.
Judge Kaye, who was nominated by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo last month to head the Court of Appeals, said she was grateful for Mr.
Crosson's years of service.
She declined to comment on a replacement, saying her attention was focused on her State Senate confirmation hearings that begin Wednesday.


Edward R. King, 89, Insurance Executive
Edward R. King, a marine-insurance executive for three decades, died on Wednesday at his home in Lakewood, N.J.
He was 89.
His death came after a brief illness, said his executor, Carroll W. Dawson of Norwalk, Conn.


Irving Selkin Is Dead; Court Official Was 83
Irving N. Selkin, former chief clerk of the state appeals court in Brooklyn, died on Wednesday at Maimonides Hospital.
A Brooklyn resident, he was 83.
The cause was complications from multiple myeloma, his family reported.


TV Weekend; Priests, Celibacy And Regret
Tonight's edition of "20/20" carries a report on celibacy, or, more to the point, the lack of it among Roman Catholic priests.
Although the subject is not without its sensational side, the treatment is relatively subdued.
A former priest, presented as a expert on the subject, estimates that half of the American Catholic clergy belongs to the "secret world" of the "sexually active." He may, of course, be including homosexual encounters, but since Tom Jarriel, the reporter, does not press the matter, you will not learn that tonight.
Instead, you will hear from a few heterosexually inclined priests whose desire for marriage and family has put their vocation at risk.


Art in Review
Ellen Brooks  Stux Gallery  163 Mercer Street (near Houston Street)  SoHo  Through March 20
When you walk into Ellen Brooks's new installation of color photographs, Star Trek seems just a moonbeam away.
Life-sized prints of male and female nudes, hung upside down, flank a color print as big as a movie screen that shows spotlights playing across an empty stage.
The figures, lost in dreams or suspended animation, seem to await only William Shatner's word to be materialized on the stage.


33 Vietnamese Are Slain in Cambodia
At least 33 Vietnamese fishermen, women and children were killed by unidentified gunmen on Wednesday night in a floating village on Tonle Sap Lake, south of the monuments of Angkor in northwestern Cambodia, the United Nations Transitional Authority announced here today.
Twenty-six others were wounded.
The United Nations said one of the attackers was killed by a local woman.


Review/Film; 3 Rappers Seeking Stardom
Made in the shadow of "Wayne's World," "CB4" is another "Saturday Night Live"-related music parody, this time skewering rap instead of heavy metal.
Desperately uneven, it works best as a string of sketches about the title band, three guys who were born Albert (Chris Rock), Otis (Deezer D) and Euripides (Allen Payne) until they realized it might be more profitable to rename themselves MC Gusto, Stab Master Arson and Dead Mike.
The names are funny, and so is the act: taking their group's name from the cellblock inhabited by an enemy, the members of CB4 appear in concert wearing denim prison fatigues while the set behind them features uniformed patrol guards and searchlights.
Outfitted with gold chains, gold teeth and fake long hair, the group members belt out lyrics that are pure hostility and glare angrily at their fans.
The film makers are savvy enough to enlist real rappers (Daddy-O, Hi-C and Kool Moe Dee) to blast out the vocals and give CB4's records a salable sound.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend "CONVERSATIONS WITH MY FATHER," Royale Theater, 242 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
A comedy by Herb Gardner with James Belushi, David Margulies and James Sutorius; directed by Daniel Sullivan.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8 P.M., Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $45.
Information: (212) 239-6200
"ON THE OPEN ROAD," Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Steve Tesich's drama, featuring Byron Jennings and Anthony LaPaglia; directed by Robert Falls.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8 P.M., Saturday at 3 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $25 Information: (212) 598-7150.
"SAINT JOAN," National Actors Theater at the Lyceum, 149 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
George Bernard Shaw's drama, featuring Maryann Plunkett; directed by Michael Langham.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8 P.M., Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $45.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"THE INTENSITY OF AN ACTOR: AN AL PACINO RETROSPECTIVE," American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
Through Sunday.
Museum admission: $5; $2.50 for children and students; $4 for the elderly.
Screenings are an additional $2.
Screening times and other information: (718) 784-0077.
Closing Next Weekend "PHAEDRA," Pearl Theater, 125 West 22d Street, Chelsea.
The 17th-century drama by Racine, directed by Shepard Sobel.
Through March 20.
Performances: Tuesday through Friday at 8 P.M., Saturday at 5 and 9 P.M., Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $14 weeknights, $16 weekends.
Information: (212) 645-7708.
"BUBBE MEISES, BUBBE STORIES," Cherry Lane Theater, 38 Commerce Street, Greenwich Village.
Ellen Gould's one-woman musical, directed by Gloria Muzio with music by Holly Gewandter and Ms.
Gould.
Through March 21.
Performances: Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 5 P.M.
Tickets: $30 matinee, $35 evenings.
Information: (212) 989-2020.
PHOTOGRAPHY EXHIBITION, Saul Gallery, 560 Broadway, near Prince Street, SoHo.
Vintage portraits of artists, writers and philosophers from the archives of the French magazine Nouvelles Litteraires.
Through March 20.
Wednesday through Saturday, noon to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 431-0747.
ABSTRACT LANDSCAPE PAINTINGS, by Nancy Brett.
Victoria Munroe Fine Art, 9 East 84th Street, Manhattan.
Through March 20.
Hours: Wednesday through Saturday, noon to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 249-5480.


Italian Police Arrest Three Top Energy Executives
The Italian state energy conglomerate was rocked today by a further wave of arrests that threw the country's third largest industrial group into chaos and intensified an increasingly vitriolic debate over the fate of Italy's political and economic leaders.
In predawn raids in Milan, police rounded up the heads of the oil, gas and engineering subsidiaries of the state-owned energy corporation, a group that provides about 44 percent of Italy's energy needs and is known by its acronym in Italian, ENI.


Mrs. Clinton Says Judge's Ruling Is 'Stamp of Approval'


Demers Ruled A-O.K.
Coach JACQUES DEMERS was released from a Montreal hospital yesterday and planned to be on hand for the Canadiens' practice session at the Forum today.


A Movie-Go-Round on the Laser Disks
Welcome to the extravagant world of laser disks.
If you can't wait another instant before learning what Dustin Hoffman did every morning in the sauna before facing the cameras in "Tootsie," or what Sydney Pollack gave up when he started to direct the film, or what Mr.
Pollack and some of his associates went on during production, then rush to the nearest video store.
There, for a list price of $99.95, you can buy the Criterion Collection's two-disk laser edition of "TOOTSIE," the videocassette version of which you can rent for a couple of bucks.
But then, the tape is only the movie, or "Tootsie" au naturel, as the French might say.
The laser disk is a surfeit of celebration.


Greeks At the Met: Matter Over Mind (C20)


In a Surprise, Glaxo's Chief Departs
Glaxo Holdings P.L.C.'s chief executive, Ernest Mario, resigned unexpectedly today, citing differences with the chairman, Sir Paul Girolami, over the management of the world's second-largest drug company.
The news unsettled investors, who were already concerned about Glaxo's strategy at a time when the drug industry is facing the prospect of growing restrictions on its profits.


I.B.M. AND BLUE CROSS FORM JOINT PROJECT
The national Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association and the International Business Machines Corporation announced a joint project yesterday to speed electronic processing of hundreds of millions of health insurance claims.
They said the project could eventually reduce administrative costs by $1.5 billion a year.


Art in Review
Joshua Neustein  Jane Gifford
Grey Art Gallery  New York University  33 Washington Place  Greenwich Village  Through tomorrow
The Grey Art Gallery has paired two very different artists working, with mixed success, in a serial mode.
The 67 pieces of Joshua Neustein's "Carbon Series" are made of sheets of multi-layered, stationery-store carbon paper.
Each sheet is folded several times, then sliced or pricked or cut away and folded back to reveal the layers of white, gray or blue-black paper beneath.


Rise in Gay Bias Crimes Reported
An advocacy group that monitors bias attacks against homosexuals said yesterday that the number of incidents in which gay men and women were victims rose 12 percent last year, and the intensity of violence nearly doubled.
In its sixth annual report on hate crimes against gay people, the New York City Gay and Lesbian Anti-Violence Project said 662 gay men and women were victims of anti-homosexual crimes last year, compared with 592 in 1991.
The increase follows a 16 percent rise from the year before, the group said.


Hundreds Gather to Mourn a Friend, Lillian Gish
A few of Lillian Gish's friends gathered yesterday to say farewell to the last of the great silent movie stars.
The mourners -- nearly 700 people -- attended her memorial service under the vaulting Romanesque spaces of St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in Manhattan, where she had worshipped for decades.
But many of those present, including Douglas Fairbanks Jr., James MacArthur and Irene Worth, recalled her not as a film star, but as a friend.
During the hourlong service there were stories, songs, hymns and readings in honor of the actress, who performed for more than 85 years in movies, theater and television.
Miss Gish died at the age of 99 on Feb. 27 at her home in Manhattan.


Primerica Seen Near Shearson Pact
The Primerica Corporation has nearly completed a deal to buy the Shearson brokerage business from the American Express Company for about $1 billion, and people close to the negotiations said yesterday that an agreement might be announced as early as today.
Indeed, the deal is close enough to completion that Sanford I. Weill, Primerica's chairman, and Frank Zarb, who would head the securities firm after the merger, have planned visits to several big Shearson offices on Monday.
Mostly Cash Deal
People close to the transaction said that the purchase price of about $1 billion consisted mostly of cash.
But it was not yet clear what book value American Express and Primerica would set on the Shearson operations and how much the purchase price would exceed that value.


Trade Center Blast Raises Crowding Questions
To the Editor:
While we New Yorkers are licking our wounds as a result of the World Trade Center tragedy, shouldn't we also look beyond it, in the interest of our great city?
There are two important lessons we should be able to draw from the blast.
The first is that constant striving for megaskyscrapers, where thousands of people are confined daily in one precarious spot, is simply foolish.
When communication can rival the speed of light, such concentration of people makes no sense except in land value and for special-interest profit. (On the pursuit of reaching up to the skies, one cannot escape remembering the Tower of Babel, and we know what happened to it.)


Review/Art; Fast Rise, Lasting Role Of a Gentle Giant
THE angelic-looking Max Ernst, who died in 1976 a day short of his 85th birthday, may have been the gentlest of the giants of 20th-century art.
The often compelling, sometimes revelatory exhibition of Ernst's early years at the Museum of Modern Art, the first major examination of the artist's work to be held in New York City in nearly 20 years, confirms the German-born Surrealist as an astoundingly inventive, even protean artist.
Beginning with two derivative yet beautifully colored Cubo-Futurist compositions and several examples of a touchingly sweet, emotionally dark Expressionism, the show follows Ernst's rapid development from 1912 to 1927 through 170 works in painting, drawing, prints and most of all collage.
A pioneer of Dada and Surrealism, Ernst helped divert Cubist collage, which was implictly abstract, into Dadaist territory in 1919, fusing unrelated images into recognizable yet hauntingly unfamiliar realities.
Inspired by the dreamscape that Giorgio de Chirico opened for exploration just before World War I, Ernst then began converting these collages into paintings that helped form the basis of Surrealism, the art movement that his friend Andre Breton erected on the ashes of Dada in Paris in 1924.
Without the monumental hybrid creatures of Ernst's 1921 paintings "Celebes" and "Ubu Imperator," without the mutant plants and jewel colors of his stratified collage landscapes or the reconstituted academic figuration of "The Tottering Woman," with its machine-clad 19th-century circus performer seen against a crystalline blue Northern Renaissance sky, the Surrealist work of Magritte, Dali and Tanguy is virtually unimaginable.


Police Supervisors Go It Alone As Solo Patrol Plan Takes Effect
The New York City Police Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, has ordered the deployment of a limited number of patrol cars occupied by one officer, rather than two, under a program that would eventually expand to at least half the city.
The plan, which affects sergeants and lieutenants who supervise officers on patrol, went into effect yesterday in 14 precincts.
Police departments in Chicago, Detroit, Houston, Los Angeles, Philadelphia and Washington practice such "solo supervisory patrols," as the plan calls them.


Serb Leader Urged to Lobby Bosnia Allies on Peace Plan
United Nations and European Community mediators today urged the president of Serbia to help convince the Serb nationalists in Bosnia to accept a peace plan for the war-torn republic, but there was no indication he was willing to do so.
Emerging from a 90-minute meeting with President Francois Mitterrand in the Elysee Palace, the Serbian leader, Slobodan Milosevic, told reporters, "We cannot say whether the peace accord should be adopted in its present form." He said this was up to the three factions who have been fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina for the last 11 months.


California Insurance Measure Is Paying Off (for Lawyers, Anyway)
More than four years after California voters passed a ballot measure that promised to slash rates for property and casualty insurance and return billions of dollars to consumers, a dozen or so law firms seem to be the main beneficiaries.
The measure, Proposition 103, which was put on the ballot as a result of the skyrocketing cost of automobile insurance, called for an immediate rollback of rates to 20 percent below their 1987 levels.


Mayor Dinkins Pleads to Keep Fare at $1.25


Wars of Balkans Defy Simple Analyses
To the Editor:
Karl E. Meyer, in "The Roots of Bosnia's Anguish" (Editorial Notebook, Feb. 28), approvingly cites Rebecca West's "Black Lamb and Gray Falcon." Dame Rebecca contended that, were it not for the Roman Catholic Church's intolerance to the neo-Manichean Bogomils, a heretical sect that had a considerable following in Bosnia, the Ottoman Turks would not have managed to gain a foothold in Europe for five centuries.
But the incursions of the Hungarian rulers to subjugate an emerging Bosnian state had little to do with its religious peculiarities and would likely have occurred anyway.
Moreover, the Bogomil ruler, Hrvoje Vukcic-Hrvatinic, responsible for inviting the Turks to help him repel the Hungarian ruler Sigmund, was on very friendly terms with the Catholics in and outside his realm.
A Catholic missal that the local Franciscans dedicated to him is one of Croatia's most revered cultural treasures.


Must Boys Always Be Boys?
THE arc of the current mini-series begins in a suburban basement.
High school football players are having their way with a retarded female classmate.
The arc ends in a prison cell.
The former heavyweight champion of the world is doing time for rape.
In the middle is the real story, an anecdotal litany of sexual assaults by high school, college and professional athletes, singly and in groups.
The evidence is mounting that athletes are disproportionately involved in exploitative, if not criminal, sexual acts.


NASA Is Scaling Back Space Station
The space agency said today that it had begun an extensive redesign of the proposed space station to make it simpler, smaller, easier to build and cheaper to operate.
Daniel S. Goldin, Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, said that the agency was under White House orders to redesign the station by June 1 and that the change marked the beginning of a new era for NASA.


Robert E. Davies, 73, Scientist and Educator
Robert E. Davies, a biochemist and faculty leader at the University of Pennsylvania, collapsed and died on Sunday while visiting Scotland.
He was 73 and lived in Philadelphia.
His family said the cause of death was a heart attack.


BOSNIA RECEIVING ONLY HALF OF AID
A top United Nations relief official warned today that only half the required aid has been getting through to needy people in Bosnia and Herzegovina in recent weeks because of the continued fighting.
But the relief official, Sadako Ogata, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, also told the Security Council that the international relief effort under way has prevented deaths from cold and starvation this winter from even approaching the grim forecasts of up to 300,000 that were made late last year.


Restaurants; In Morningside Heights, quality outrides many changes.
The Terrace restaurant, high above 119th Street at Columbia University in Morningside Heights, seemed a likely victim for the harsh recent recession.
It is a long cab ride from midtown Manhattan and is in a less than glamorous neighborhood, yet its prices are relatively steep.
The Terrace survived, though, and much credit is due to Nada Bernic, the owner, and her team.
The Terrace has seen many changes in the last decade.
Dusan Bernic, the chef and Mrs.
Bernic's husband, died in 1984, leaving the restaurant's future in doubt.
Since then, Mrs.
Bernic has recruited a succession of able young chefs who have managed to maintain the restaurant's quality.


RENO IS CONFIRMED IN TOP JUSTICE JOB
Janet Reno, who is expected to be sworn in on Friday as the nation's first female Attorney General, said today that one of her first tasks would be to rule on the future of William S. Sessions, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
"When I take office, this will be one of my first priorities in terms of looking at all the reports and making the best judgment I can based on all the information available," Ms.
Reno said today after visiting with President Clinton at the White House.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Named Rob Butcher assistant director of media relations and publicity.
National League
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Sent Ben Shelton, first baseman; Gary Cooper, third baseman; and John Morris, Keith Thomas and Andy Tomberlin, outfielders, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.


Market Place; Investors seeking bargains are loading up on S&amp;K's stock.
SINCE S&amp;K Famous Brands Inc., a retailer of tailored men's clothing, declared a 2-for-1 stock split on Jan. 15, the company's stock has risen almost 50 percent.
While the split may have helped a relatively obscure company gain attention, a handful of analysts are discovering it has other characteristics to commend it.
The company has virtually no debt, annual earnings growth of more than 20 percent and an uncluttered niche in the retail apparel industry.


Japan Blames U.S. Makers In Chip Feud
Japan's electronics industry is preparing data to show that American semiconductor companies failed to deliver tens of millions of dollars worth of computer chips ordered by Japanese companies last year, thereby contributing to the United States' failure to achieve a 20 percent share of the Japanese market as called for in a semiconductor trade agreement.
Japanese companies and government officials said that because of a recent boom in demand for computer chips in the United States, American suppliers have diverted some of their products away from Japan and to American customers, causing hardships for Japanese customers.


Military Industry Lobbies to Preserve Status Quo
While President Clinton unveiled his program today to retrain workers displaced by cuts in Pentagon spending, the nation's big military contractors were lobbying to keep their businesses intact.
The military industry welcomed President's Clinton's announcement that the Government would swiftly release $1.7 billion in money already appropriated by Congress to help retrain military workers and provide money to communities hurt by the closing of military bases.


Performance Art Opens An Anniversary Season
For five years the 651/Kings Majestic Corporation at the Brooklyn Academy of Music has put together imaginative programming to lure audiences, chiefly from Brooklyn, who might otherwise seldom see live theater.
The programs have ranged from concerts by performing artists who live and work in the borough to blockbuster shows like last year's "100 Years of Jazz and Blues." This weekend the 651 organization, which drew its name from the street address of the Majestic Theater, will present an event that in many ways summarizes its goals and achievements.
Tonight through Sunday, Anna Deavere Smith will open a three-month anniversary season for 651 with her acclaimed performance-art piece "Fires in the Mirror: Brooklyn, Crown Heights and Other Identities," which deals in part with black-Jewish tensions.
Performances presented by 651 tend to be followed by open discussions with audiences, and on Sunday, invited Jewish and black residents of Crown Heights will participate in a panel discussion moderated by Sheryl McCarthy, the Newsday columnist, and Charles Inniss, the vice president for urban affairs for Brooklyn Union Gas.


Ads with a competitive wrinkle can sometimes rankle a competitor.
MAYBE it's winter overstaying its welcome.
Or perhaps it's a natural outgrowth of one-upmanship in advertising.
Whatever the reason, it seems that advertisers have little tolerance lately for nose-tweaking by their competitors.
The Marriott, Hilton and Hyatt hotel chains filed suit Wednesday against Ramada International over ads for Ramada's Renaissance hotel chain, which show couples with the last names of Hilton, Marriott and Hyatt discussing why they stay at Renaissance.


Review/Photography; Flinty Perspectives On Urban Architecture
The German artist Thomas Struth casts a cold eye on urban architecture in his steely black-and-white photographs.
Like his teachers Bernhard and Hilla Becher, Mr.
Struth, who lives in Dusseldorf, uses a stark and rigorous style that underscores the seeming objectivity of his pictures.
In earlier works, Mr.
Struth recorded buildings and public spaces in cities ranging from Tokyo to New York to Rome; in his current show, he depicts similar scenes in cities of what was once East Germany, including Leipzig, Gotha, Weimar and Wittenberg.
Mr.
Struth's precise pictures have an almost archeological sense of detachment, allowing viewers to read the history and character of a building or street, and by extension of the people who live in it, from the details of its style and physical condition.
The buildings Mr.
Struth photographs are for the most part undistinguished, important not as examples of fine architecture but as cultural artifacts.


Art in Review
James Hyde
John Good Gallery  532 Broadway (at Spring Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow
If James Hyde's one-person show of painting looks more like a group show of sculpture, that seems to be the point.
The artist has stated that he wants to examine the individual elements that have made modern paintings paintings, and he does so by literally objectifying some of those components in three-dimensional form.


Sect Head Says He Will Let 3 Men Leave the Compound
For the first time in the 12-day standoff between hundreds of Federal agents and a heavily armed religious sect, the sect's leader has agreed to allow some of his male followers to surrender.
But by late tonight, there was no indication that any one had left the fortified compound, which was shrouded in a cold, rainy mist and surrounded by a small army of agents, Texas Rangers and tanks.


Jerome P. Dunlevy, Stockbroker, 59
Jerome P. Dunlevy, who headed a stock-trading and investment-banking firm, died on Monday at his home in Naples, Fla., at the age of 59.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


The Korean Peninsula Heats Up
North Korea has just announced that it is backing out of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
This follows its decision on Tuesday to put its army on alert in reaction to the Team Spirit exercises conducted by U.S. and South Korean forces.
Pyongyang is understandably provoked by the resumption of the exercises after a year's hiatus, but withdrawing from the nonproliferation treaty is an exceedingly unwise act that will arouse the worse suspicions about Pyongyang's nuclear intentions.
The North Koreans had sought talks with the U.S. to resolve differences.
The Clinton Administration could use such talks to urge Pyongyang to open up access to International Atomic Energy Agency inspectors.


Review/Fashion; Watchwords of the Week: Cool, Basic and Casual
In rapid succession, Giorgio Armani re-established the supremacy of the suit for those who may have been doubting it, and Fendi, with the help of its skilled technicians and the wizardry of its designer, Karl Lagerfeld, opened new frontiers for furs.
Gucci, which is better known for its shoes and handbags, made a surprisingly strong case for its ready-to-wear.
And there was hardly time to assimilate these well-presented messages before Gianfranco Ferre triumphantly closed the week of fall fashion shows today.
The cool professionalism of a master tailor like Armani is always a pleasure.
He did not bother to tinker with proportions or decorations.
Jackets just slid over the body in a gently fitted line, accompanied most often with easy, comfortable-looking trousers.
Colors were mild, with the emphasis on honey shades and light browns.
Traditional patterns like checks and herringbones had a pale subtlety.
Occasionally, a short vest with a rounded hem peeped from under a jacket.
A massive necklace was sometimes worn on the chest, but there was no other jewelry, not even earrings.
It was simply the apotheosis of the pants suit as the basic daytime look for the woman of today.
Doing What Works Well
The designer tried a few long, full skirts with his well-cut jackets, and they seemed to work well.
Then he gave the suit a dressier tone by adding a touch of metal to the material and a big printed silk shawl edged with fringe to the shoulders.
That was fine, too.
So were the suits with a gentle ruffle down the inside of the front closing.


Lands' End Inc. (N)
Investors chose to ignore weak fourth-quarter results at Lands' End and focused instead on the nearly 17 percent jump in profits for all of 1992.
Wall Street drove the mail-order retailer's stock price up even though Lands' End executives said they were unhappy with the company's fourth- quarter performance.
But it earned 6 cents a share more in the period than most analysts had anticipated.





London Market Halts Modernizing Drive
The London Stock Exchange abandoned development of a costly computerized trade-settlement system today, setting back London's efforts to remain the financial capital of Europe.
The exchange said it was terminating the project, called Taurus, because of persistent technical problems that were unlikely to be solved for years.
The decision led to the immediate resignation of the exchange's chief executive, Peter Rawlins, who said he would take responsibility for what the financial community here viewed as a calamity.


Reeves Is Trying to Assure Banks That He's Wanted
Coach Dan Reeves of the Giants said yesterday he has met with a distressed Carl Banks to tell him that "I have an interest in his remaining." Banks was upset by the minimum offer he received from the Giants.
Reeves disclosed that he spoke with the former Pro Bowl linebacker late Wednesday after Banks was concerned about his status as a "transition" player and was unhappy the Giants weren't serious about keeping him beyond a year.


INSIDE
Clinton Economic Plan Gains
The Senate budget panel voted 12 to 9 to endorse the President's economic package after defeating a series of Republican amendments.
Page A12.
Questions on Research Pact
A contract gives a foreign drug company unusual powers over research at a leading nonprofit laboratory, Federal officials say.
Page A12.
Reno to Act Soon on F.B.I.
Janet Reno was confirmed as Attorney General and said an early task would be to decide on the future of the besieged F.B.I.
Director.
Page A10.
Gunmen Kill 33 in Cambodia
Unidentified gunmen in Cambodia killed at least 33 Vietnamese and wounded 26 in a Khmer Rouge area, the United Nations said.
Page A3.


On Stage, and Off
New York to Get the Brass Ring
The trustees of the Rodgers and Hammerstein estates have cleared the way for the much-ballyhooed Royal National Theater production of "Carousel" in London to move to the United States, granting permission for its staging at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center.
Theodore Chapin, executive director of the Rodgers and Hammerstein organization, said that no firm agreement had yet been made to move the show, but that because of the enthusiasm of the musical's director, Nicholas Hytner, for the Beaumont, the trustees had given their approval.


A Nervous Washington
The Clinton Administration wants to strengthen President Yeltsin, but it also fears he may act like an autocrat to defend his position.
Page A6.


Becoming Reacquainted With the Stars of Spring
Trying to describe a flower show before it's really there is kind of like trying on a prom dress that's still in pins.
There's enough of a shape to get your hopes up (Mom might do a better job than you ever dreamed), but after all, it's just a lot of fluffy stuff until that zipper's in.
All I can say is, by yesterday morning, many of the exhibits of this year's New York Flower Show in Manhattan, sponsored by the Horticultural Society of New York, looked more in tune with nature and more sophisticated in their choice of plants than those of the recent past.


BBDO Chicago Management Shuffle
BBDO Worldwide said yesterday that it would restructure top management positions in its Chicago office, effective immediately.
Steve LaGattuta, 50, who until June was a vice chairman at W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Southfield, Mich., was named president and chief executive of BBDO Chicago.
He succeeds Eric Harkna, 52, who will become a senior vice president at BBDO Worldwide.
Mr.
Harkna, who will remain in Chicago, will be involved in multinational new business development and will assume the international responsibilities for the agency's Wm.
Wrigley Jr.
Company account.


Clinton Offers Plan to Help Military Plants to Convert
Using a factory that is converting from military to civilian goods as a backdrop, President Clinton today announced a plan to help such plants retool and to retrain displaced workers.
Mr.
Clinton's plan would combine new money with funds already available, and new ideas with approaches that have already been developed, on converting plants that supply the military to civilian uses.


Art in Review
'Works on Paper'
Seventh Regiment Armory  643 Park Avenue, at 66th Street  Admission: $10 (three-day pass, $20)  Through Sunday
The fifth annual edition of "Works on Paper," with more than 90 galleries and private dealers taking part, features a cheerily random and utterly diverse selection of prints, drawings, posters, photographs and the like.
Including works that range from Peter Arno cartoons to a Rembrandt etching, the show presents no weighty critical thesis, but instead serves up a series of visual delights, large and small.


The Ones You Never Saw in a Movie Theater
If you stumble across a recent video that you've never heard of, there's probably a good reason.
The words disaster, unreleasable and turkey come to mind.
Most films that bypass theaters, going straight to video or appearing on big screens for what amounts to a pit stop, deserve their fate.
A few warning signals can help you avoid those movies too terrible to be seen in public.
Be wary of any package that doesn't contain a single quotation from a critic; even a story about backgammon players in the Rockies could find someone who said "DAZZLING scenery!!!" Another telltale sign is the presence of aliens in the plot.
Aliens played by third-rate rock stars or martial-arts experts are doubly suspicious.
Trust me: such films exist.


Rival Groups in South Africa Call for an End to Violence


U.S. Backs Yeltsin but Fears He Might Oust Legislature
As it watches the unfolding political turmoil in Moscow, the Clinton Administration is caught between its desire to support President Boris N. Yeltsin and its concern that he might take authoritarian measures to stay in power.
In strong statements of support in recent days, President Clinton has portrayed Mr.
Yeltsin as the best hope for economic and political reform in Russia and has promised to "do what we can" to help him succeed.


Semiconductor's Income Rose 85% in 3d Quarter
Continuing its recovery, the National Semiconductor Corporation reported today that earnings for its third quarter were up 85 percent from a year ago, at the high end of Wall Street estimates.
The Santa Clara, Calif., chip maker also reported improvement in profit margins and a record level of new orders.
The news moved National's stock, which closed at $12.875, up $1.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.
National shares were one of the most heavily traded issues, with 2.4 million changing hands.


Profit Is Seen in Airline Junk Bonds
Some traders and portfolio managers said yesterday that they saw considerable potential for profit in the bonds of the nation's three major airlines, even though Standard &amp; Poor's had declared them junk bonds.
Prices on the bonds fell after S.&amp; P. lowered the rating on the debt of the AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines; the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, and Delta Air Lines Inc. to below investment grade -- the junk-bond level.


Prudential May Sell Its Reinsurance Unit
The Prudential Insurance Company of America said yesterday that it might sell its reinsurance group, Prudential Reinsurance, the nation's fifth-largest reinsurer.
The news came at a time of increasing investor interest in the industry.
As a result of the worst year ever of property-casualty losses, the availability of certain types of reinsurance has shrunk and property-casualty companies are paying steep premium increases.
Reinsurance is bought by insurance companies to spread their risk.


Clinic Gunman Shunned Social Contact
To his neighbors and recent associates in the anti-abortion movement, he was something of a mystery.
But Michael F. Griffin, the man who claims responsibility for the shooting death of a doctor outside an abortion clinic, has led an unstable life in recent years and made a habit of concealing his problems and feelings, those around him said.
Mr.
Griffin, 31, was ordered held without bond and charged with one count of murder today pending a full investigation into the shooting death on Wednesday of Dr.
David Gunn, a 47-year-old physician who performed abortions at two clinics here and several others in Alabama and Georgia.
The authorities said the killing was the first of its kind since abortion was legalized in the United States more than 20 years ago. 'None of Us Understand'
At an arraignment this morning before Judge William J. Green of Escambia County Court, Mr.
Griffin, a $14-an-hour chemical plant worker with no criminal record, showed little emotion.
He said he wanted "to keep my Bible as one of my legal documents," asked for a blanket and indicated that he hoped to help conduct his own defense when he went to trial.
Mr.
Griffin provided no explanation or details of the fatal attack on Dr.
Gunn.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.96
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.96
4.01
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.08
4.17
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.66
5.61
7.28
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.76
6.75
8.03
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.70
7.69
8.99
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.85
5.84
6.78
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Abroad at Home; Right To Life
The murder of a doctor in Pensacola, Fla., tells us the essential truth about most anti-abortion activists.
They are religious fanatics, who want to impose their version of God's word on the rest of us.
For them the end justifies any means, including violence.
Dr.
David Gunn was shot in the back three times during an anti-abortion demonstration at Pensacola Women's Medical Services.
The leader of the protest, John Burt, said the man charged with the killing, Michael Griffin, had been in church last Sunday:


What the Directors Wanted You to See
Directors' cuts of high-profile feature films, which are a video-disk staple, are making their way to videotape.
Directors' cuts of Ridley Scott's "Blade Runner" and James Cameron's "Abyss" will be available on videotape later this year.
Here is a look at two directors' cuts of hit feature films now available on videocassette.
"J. F. K.: DIRECTOR'S CUT," 206 minutes (Warner Home Video 12614).
Because it is essentially a collage of short scenes and snippets of news woven into a mock documentary, Oliver Stone's "J. F. K." lends itself more readily than conventional narrative films to absorbing more material without seeming distended.


CHRONICLE
The baton was passed from Yale to Harvard this week, but the occasion, one of exceptional unity, was no athletic event.
On Wednesday, 30 law, medical and undergraduate students at Yale concluded a weeklong fast in which they had taken nothing but juice or water to show support for the 264 Haitians being held at the United States Naval Base in Guantanamo, Cuba.
The Haitians, who have been seeking political asylum in the United States, are being detained at the base because they have tested positive for H.I.V. or are the children of those who have.
They have been fasting, too -- since Jan. 29.
"We decided that, in solidarity with them, we would do the same for a week," said ANDREW SHAPIRO, a first-year Yale law student who is the spokesman for the group.
"We built a barbed-wire encampment in the hallway of the law school and lived there on a rotating basis 24 hours a day."


'We're Just Devastated'
The man claiming responsibility for the slaying of an abortion provider has led an unstable life in recent years, relatives say.
Page A17.


Fallen Timber
Several paper and wood stocks, usually about as glamorous as a lumber mill, have gained more than a third since the fall.
Investors have been playing the cyclical theme and the near-doubling of lumber prices.
Yesterday, a slip in lumber prices and rating cuts by Merrill Lynch analyst Sherman Chao knocked down stocks like Louisiana-Pacific.


Knicks' Smith Making Most of a Soft Image
James Worthy thought the Knicks made a steal when they traded for Charles Smith.
He had no reason to change his mind from what he saw Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden.
Worthy, of course, hasn't seen the rest of Smith's enigmatic first season as a Knick.
As even Pat Riley admits, circumstances beyond Smith's control have contributed significantly to his inconsistent, and at times negligible production.
The 6-foot-10-inch forward has been asked to play small forward, a position he isn't ideally suited for, as Riley envisioned Smith tormenting smaller defenders on the low post, in the role the 6-9 Worthy played for him in Los Angeles.


After Bombing, New Scrutiny For Holes in Immigration Net
When Mohammed A. Salameh, one of the two main suspects in the bombing of the World Trade Center, entered the United States as a temporary foreign visitor in 1987, he quickly slipped through a Federal immigration bureaucracy that had no plan or hope of ever tracking him amid the nation's vast tide of illegal aliens.
He joined about 500,000 other visitors who drift from sight annually as their visas lapse.
They usually are never traced or thought of again until such a moment as now when startled, angry Americans begin questioning whether the United States immigration system presents a model of sanctuary or of porousness for the global throngs seeking entry.


Sports of The Sports; 'Holy Cow, Seaver!  They Made Me a Poet'
THE first twittering robin of spring arrived the other day, and made me eager for baseball, warm evenings with familiar voices chirping over the airwaves.
The mail brought me the spring catalogue of the Ecco Press, a classy little publishing house in Hopewell, N.J.
You do not read an Ecco catalogue; you
peruse
it.
There was the latest collection of Joyce Carol Oates short stories, and not a moment too soon.
There was Italo Calvino.
There was Joseph Conrad.
There was Dante.
And there was Phil Rizzuto.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the fatal shooting of a doctor outside an abortion clinic described his wounds incorrectly in some copies.
He was shot in the back, not in the chest.


S.&amp; P. Lowers Bond Ratings Of the 3 Big Airlines to Junk
Bonds of the nation's three largest airlines -- American, United and Delta -- were downgraded yesterday to junk-bond level.
While the downgrading to below-investment grade reflected the uncertain economic outlook for the carriers, industry executives and analysts said they doubted that it would have much effect on the companies, few of which will be borrowing large sums of money in the next several years.


Trade Center Blast Raises Crowding Questions; Firefighting Capacity
To the Editor:
It's unfortunate that sometimes it takes a tragedy to illuminate a pressing social problem.
The World Trade Center blast underlines the need to bring New York City's firefighting capacity up to strength.
New York's bravest responded to the disaster with their traditional professionalism.
The timely response by firefighting companies helped prevent an even bigger tragedy.
But the concentration of forces in Lower Manhattan effectively stripped many neighborhoods of all fire protection.
Fortunately, firefighters were not faced with two simultaneous disasters in different boroughs.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AAR CORP., Elk Grove, Ill., announced that its manufacturing unit in Cadillac, Mich., had been awarded contracts by the Air Force with an approximate value of $45 million, including an option for the manufacture, overhaul and repair of air cargo products.


Byrd's Landscape Is Faith and Fortitude
Here the rolling hills from east Oklahoma plunge into the plains, and the slate blue sky merges with the red clay earth on the western horizon.
The limitless vistas make all things seem possible.
A brisk March wind whipped around the Mustang High School Stadium field on a recent sunny afternoon.
The field once had three feet of topsoil covering the packed red clay, an effort to anchor the grass and cushion the impact from tackles.
Time, wind, erosion and winter have taken a toll on the field.


Reynolds Back for U.S.
The last time BUTCH REYNOLDS ran for the United States, he won a gold and a silver medal in the 1988 Seoul Olympics.
Now, after more than two years of controversy that led to a drug suspension, he will wear a USA uniform again in the the world indoor track and field championships, beginning this in Toronto's Skydome.
"This means much more to me than 1988," Reynolds said yesterday at a news conference.
"This is an honor, something I don't take for granted. I owe this to the people who have supported me. I owe it to myself. My grandfather just died. One of the last things he said to me was, 'Be sure to clear my name.' "


Hostetler, Jets Stir Up Crosstown Controversy
When the Giants re-signed Phil Simms last week and left the door open for Jeff Hostetler to leave, they solved their own quarterback controversy but may have created a similar one for the Jets.
The Jets have been looking for a veteran quarterback to compete with Browning Nagle and Ken O'Brien for the starting job.
And Marvin Demoff, Hostetler's agent, said yesterday that the Jets have had discussions with him about Hostetler, the former Giants starter who led the team to a victory in Super Bowl XXV.
Demoff would not talk about the nature of those discussions and would not say whether Hostetler would visit the Jets to talk with General Manager Dick Steinberg and Coach Bruce Coslet anytime soon.


For New York City and State, the Arts Are Bread and Butter
To the Editor:
Museums, music, dance and theater are merely frills in New York City.
Welfare, health care, education and other social needs are essential, and require vast sums of money.
So appropriations for the New York State Council on the Arts must again be cut.
Right?
Wrong!
We can only amass the resources for social purposes through our tax base.
To get those taxes we must have people living in, working in and visiting our city.


Seles Withdraws
MONICA SELES, the top-ranked player, withdrew from the Lipton Championships after 10 minutes of practice yesterday in Key Biscayne, Fla.
Seles has been afflicted with the flu for three weeks. (AP)





Historical Society Tries To Live by Subtraction
A plan to rescue the financially troubled New-York Historical Society from the brink of dissolution was embraced by the institution's trustees Wednesday, it was announced at a news conference at the society yesterday morning.
The plan entails real-estate development and a large selling off of artworks and scholarly materials.
A report presented by Wilbur L. Ross Jr., the chairman of a committee appointed by the society's trustees to advise them, calls for the selling of some $20 million worth of objects, the development of five lots on West 76th Street owned by the society, a reduced operating budget, sustained financial support from the trustees as well private and public sources, and an increase in earned income from sources like admissions and memberships.


Executive Changes
BANK OF AMERICA, San Francisco, named Timothy R. Bottoms group executive vice president and head of the American division.
HARPER COLLINS PUBLISHERS INC., New York, said Jack McKeon would join its adult trade group in the new position of vice president and deputy publisher.
He has been senior vice president and director of publishing in Simon &amp; Schuster's trade division.


Compaq Also To Sell Its PC's Direct
The Compaq Computer Corporation will announce plans today to begin selling its computers through a telephone sales and mail-order unit, a move that underlines the importance of direct marketing in the personal computer business.
Compaq joins I.B.M., Zenith Data Systems and other well-known computer makers that have turned to direct customer sales in recent months.
Roughly 20 percent of the PC's sold in the United States today are purchased by customers who typically browse through catalogues and order by calling "800" numbers.


Kevin Oldham, 32, Pianist Who Started Composing in Illness
Kevin Oldham, a pianist and composer who left his hospital bed to perform his own piano concerto with the Kansas City Symphony in January, died yesterday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Kansas City, Mo.
He was 32 and lived in Manhattan.
Karen Kushner, a friend, said the cause was AIDS.


Trade Center Blast Raises Crowding Questions; Special Exhaust System
To the Editor:
"Day of Terror, and Questions," your Feb. 28 editorial on the World Trade Center tragedy, cites the problem of smoke in stairwells in previous small fires in the towers and calls for a rigorous review of the issue, since the majority of casualties were caused by smoke inhalation.
It has been suggested, a news article the same day reports, that if air in the stairwells had been pressurized, the stairwells would not have acted like chimneys for the smoke.
It is a fallacy to rely on stairwell pressurization to clear smoke from an area.
The best that such a system can do is to try to prevent smoke from entering the stairwell, but in an evacuation such as that experienced at the World Trade Center, such a system would soon fail.


Judge Orders Better Care For Homeless With H.I.V.
A State Supreme Court judge has ruled that New York City must provide certain minimum standards in housing homeless people with H.I.V. who have symptoms of illness but do not yet have AIDS.
Advocates for the homeless say the decision will force the city to remove this group from the city's shelters.
Ruling on a lawsuit brought by the Coalition for the Homeless against the city and the state nearly five years ago, Judge Edward H. Lehner found that current city efforts to shield this population from tuberculosis and other infectious diseases do not go far enough.
He ordered the city to place this group in rooms with four or fewer people where beds are at least eight feet apart, and said the city must also provide them with quarters that have adequate ventilation and separate bathrooms and dining areas.


Two Men Arraigned in Death of Narcotics Detective


Pete Hamill's Dream Meets Gritty Tabloid Reality; Post's New Editor, Sentimental Lyricist of the Streets, Battles Prosaic Balance Sheets
Of course, Pete Hamill's answer would have something to do with the dreams newsmen talk about in bars.
The question came up the other day in his new office at The New York Post.
That is the newspaper where he started in the news business in 1960 and where he built a big name by capturing the lyrical sounds of the city's streets and the Irish bars of Brooklyn.


Funds Wired to Suspects Are Traced to Germany
The foreign funds wired over recent months into the New Jersey joint bank account of two arrested suspects in the World Trade Center bombing have been traced to Germany, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
Germany has one of the largest Islamic communities in Europe and has been used by an array of Middle East terrorist organizations as a base of operations, intelligence experts say.
But investigators said they were not sure where in Germany the $8,000 originated or whether it was provided to underwrite the Feb. 26 attack, which killed five people and wounded more than 1,000.


House, Like Senate, Votes To Ban H.I.V. Immigrants
The House followed the Senate today in voting to ban immigration into the United States by people infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
But the House vote, while overwhelming, came on a parliamentary device of no real authority, and it was not clear what the legislative outcome would be.
The 356-to-58 vote came on a motion to instruct conferees on a medical research bill to accept the ban the Senate voted last month.


The Spoken Word
POETRY VIDEOS, St.
Mark's Church in the Bowery, Second Avenue at 10th Street, East Village.
Videos of William S. Burroughs, Kathy Acker, Leonard Cohen, James Schuyler and others reading from their works.
Sponsored by the Poetry Project.
Tonight at 10:30.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 674-0910.
DISCUSSION ON HEALING, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
Bill Moyers discusses his latest book, "Healing and the Mind," and the PBS series of the same name.
Moderated by Charlie Rose.
Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Admission: $15.
Information: (212) 415-5450.
ART AT THE MET, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 81st Street.
Free with museum admission: $6, $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710
THE WHITNEY BIENNIAL, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"1993 Biennial Exhibition," by Margaret Sundell, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 and 3:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3676.
GALLERY TALKS, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
"American Paintings: The Lowenthal Collection," by Rita Gottfried, today at 2 P.M.; "Women in American Art," by Maribeth Flynn, tomorrow at 1 P.M.; "Alias Olympia: A Woman's Search for Manet's Notorious Model and Her Own Desire," an illustrated slide lecture by Eunice Lipton, tomorrow at 2 P.M.; "Color in Architecture: Islamic Tile Work in the Brooklyn Museum," by Marjan Adib, tomorrow at 2 P.M., and "West African Art," by Alice Whiteside, Sunday at 2 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $4; $2 for students; $1.50 for the elderly.
Information: (718) 638-5000.
ART LECTURE, Guggenheim Museum, 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street.
"Saturday Evening at the Guggenheim," a discussion of masterworks by Picasso, Brancusi and Klee, led by Cheryl Kempler.
Tomorrow at 6 P.M.
Admission: $30, which includes a post-lecture glass of wine at a nearby restaurant.
Sponsored by the 92nd Street Y Classes for Singles.
RADIO DISCUSSION, WNYC-AM (820).
A series of recorded interviews and discussions, sponsored by the New York Public Library and WNYC, continues with the second part of "The Power of the Word: An Evening of Black Women's Storytelling." Sunday at 4 P.M.
POETRY, Cornelia Street Cafe, 29 Cornelia Street, Greenwich Village.
Cheri Fein, M. L. Liebler and Barry Wallenstein read their poetry.
Sunday at 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 989-9319.


Image Becomes Real; Prosecution Witnesses Provide Jury Vivid Look at Rodney King's Beating
As a medical expert moved a black metal police baton toward a model of a human head today, the courtroom seemed to flinch at the memory of the pain described the day before by the man who received the blows, Rodney G. King.
As the expert, Dr.
Harry L. Smith, pointed to the blurry figure writhing under the batons on an enhanced portion of the videotape of the beating, Mr.
King could almost be heard, from his two days of testimony this week, saying, "What did I do to deserve that type of pain?"


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
International Lease Finance Corp., Beverly Hills, Calif., is offering through Merrill Lynch $100 million of 5 3/4 percent notes due in 1998 at 99.50 to yield 5.867 percent.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P.


Rubbernecking: Analyzing a Commuter Psychosis
IT has been three decades since Fred Feldman introduced the term "rubbernecking delay" to commuters, and he can see that a little progress has been made against this scourge.
Engineers have analyzed it.
The police have attacked it.
Economists have begun to reveal its costs to society -- about the same order of magnitude as the property damage from the bomb at the World Trade Center.
But so much remains unknown and unconquered.
At certain moments, such as when he is monitoring rush hour from the Transcom regional traffic headquarters here, Mr.
Feldman wonders if the situation is really any better than it was during his days in the WCBS Radio traffic helicopter.
He began in 1962 as the first traffic reporter in New York, and he did not like what he saw.


Chanticleer, a Cappella
Chanticleer, a male a cappella vocal ensemble directed by Joseph Jennings, will give concerts at Alice Tully Hall and Town Hall this weekend.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall, the group will sing spirituals, songs by Bill Evans, Stephen Sondheim, Irving Berlin, Ted Snyder, Steven Sametz and Allen Shearer, and religious works by the 15th-century composers Josquin, Agricola and Brumel.
Tickets are $22.
Information: (212) 721-6500.
On Sunday at 2 P.M. at Town Hall (123 West 43d Street), the ensemble will sing works by Byrd, Tallis and Agricola, German part songs and barbershop and folk songs.
Tickets are $5, $6 and $7.50.
Information: (212) 586-4680.


Diner's Journal
A Deal at the High End
Call it a prix fixe menu, menu du jour, pre-theater or a late supper, they all amount to the same thing: reduced-price meals to lure budget-conscious diners.
And alert consumers can dine quite well for less by tracking them.
One of the latest players in this gastronomic "Let's Make a Deal" is Chanterelle, the refined, highly personalized French restaurant at 2 Harrison Street in TriBeCa.
With a prix fixe dinner at $68 and a tasting menu at $87, Chanterelle does not get many casual walk-ins from nearby office buildings.
The owners, Karen and David Waltuck, now offer what they call a market menu for $40 each night.
The three-course dinner, different daily, is determined by what is obtained from food suppliers.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8  DEPUTIES CUT YELTSIN'S POWER
The Communist-dominated Congress in Moscow voted overwhelmingly to put sharp curbs on Boris Yeltsin's powers and to cancel a referendum he had hoped would give him a popular mandate for accelerating economic change.
A1  A PARADOX FOR THE WHITE HOUSE
Watching the political turmoil unfold in Moscow, the Clinton Administration is caught between its desire to support Boris Yeltsin and its concern that he might take authoritarian measures to stay in power.
A6
Japan invited Russia to economic talks to help Boris Yeltsin.
A6  NORTH KOREA PULLS OUT OF PACT
North Korea, in a defiant move against international pressure to inspect its suspected nuclear weapons development program, says it is withdrawing from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
A1  33 VIETNAMESE SLAIN IN CAMBODIA
At least 33 Vietnamese were killed and 26 were wounded by unidentified gunmen in Cambodia, the United Nations said.
An official said the massacre bore all the characteristics of earlier Khmer Rouge killings of Vietnamese civilians.A3  RABIN SET TO MEET CLINTON
Israel's Prime Minister departed for the United States and his first meeting with President Clinton, which Israeli officials hope will settle questions about how deeply the new Administration intends to involve itself in the Middle East peace talks.
A3  U.S.
NAMES EMBARGO VIOLATORS
As part of a new effort to tighten the United Nations economic embargo on Yugoslavia, the Clinton Administration has begun to identify publicly foreign companies that are helping evade the trade restrictions.
A8
In Paris, Serbia's leader was urged to pressure Bosnian Serbs.  A8
The U.N. said fighting in Bosnia was hindering relief deliveries.
A8  ITALIAN ENERGY CHIEFS ARRESTED
Italy's state energy conglomerate was rocked by a new wave of arrests that threw the country's third largest industrial group into chaos and intensified an increasingly vitriolic debate over the fate of political and business leaders.
A6  Mogadishu Journal: G.I.'s hit the beach for R &amp; R in Somalia.
A4  National A10-17  ASPIN LENDS CALIFORNIA A HAND
Giving some help to California, an economically depressed and politically crucial state, the Defense Secretary has decided to spare two military installations that were on the armed services' list of those that should close.
A1
Clinton announced a plan to aid displaced military workers.  A14
Contractors are lobbying to keep existing military business.  A14
A Senate panel cleared a bill for Clinton's economic plan.  A12
NASA has begun a redesign to make the space station smaller.  A12
The House rebuffed Clinton on AIDS immigration policy.  A11  BEHIND BULLETPROOF WINDOWS
Abortion rights advocates view the slaying of a Florida abortion provider not as an isolated incident but as a kind of inevitable culmination of at least a decade of blockades, firebombings, chemical attacks and nighttime gunfire.
A1
The Florida gunman has led an unstable life in recent years.
A17  A CONCESSION FROM KORESH
The authorities said that three male adults had asked to leave the Branch Davidians' besieged compound near Waco, Tex., and that the sect's leader, David Koresh, had agreed to let them do so.
A10  RENO TO ACT QUICKLY ON F.B.I.
Janet Reno won Senate confirmation as Attorney General and said one of her first tasks would be to decide whether to recommend to the President that William S. Sessions remain Director of the F.B.I.
A10  RESEARCH PACT UNDER FIRE
The nation's largest nonprofit biomedical laboratory has granted a foreign drug company unusual powers over the conduct of federally financed research under a 10-year, $300 million contract, Government health officials said.
A16  SCIENTIFIC FINDING ON LESBIANISM
Researchers said genes might play as strong a role in shaping female sexual orientation as they appear to do in dictating the sexuality of gay men.
A11  'IT IS NOW FLESH AND BLOOD'
News analysis: Offering testimony damaging to the defense, a medical expert's appearance in court underscored the way Rodney G. King's own appearance had changed the dynamics of the Federal civil rights trial of four Los Angeles police officers.
A10  Law Page B16  Hate-speech opponents and anti-pornography feminists are allied.
At the Bar: The battles over a much-disputed book.
A new publication for small-firm lawyers.
What ever happened to California's insurance rollback?
Metro Digest B1  CASE CLOSED ON WILLOWBROOK
Willowbrook, for decades a warehouse for the mentally retarded, is no longer a state school, virtually all the surviving residents live in group homes, and after 18 years court supervision has ended.
A1  SUSPECT AND IMMIGRATION
When Mohammed A. Salameh, a suspect in the bombing of the World Trade Center, entered the United States, he quickly slipped through the immigration bureaucracy.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-30  Tricks of the video hunt.
C1  Stalking the flower show.
C3  Plan to save historical society.
C3  Enticing Brooklyn audiences.
C16  Evaluating laser-disk movies.
C30  For Children C19  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  "The Root." C13  Film: "Ethan Frome." C8  "CB4." C13  "A Far-Off Place." C15  Music: Sounds Around Town C15  Dance: A Cunningham romp.
C10  Restaurants C24  Art: Max Ernst, gentle giant.
C1  The Art Market C18  Greek sculpture at Met C20  Art in Review C28  Thomas Struth's photos.
C20  Word and Image: Critic's Notebook C1  TV Weekend B14  Celibacy among priests.
B14  Obituaries A19  C. Northcote Parkinson, British historian and writer.
Kevin Oldham, a pianist and composer.
Fashion B14  Watchwords of the week: cool, basic and casual.
Sports B7-13  Baseball: Torborg defends Bonilla.
B11  Yanks' Stankiewicz faces uncertainty.
B11  Basketball: B.C., Georgetown win in Big East tourney.
B7  Nets upend Warriors.
B13  Knicks' Smith gets vote of confidence.
B13  Maryland defeats N.C.
State.
B9  Columns: Lipsyte on morality of male athletes.
B7  On College Basketball B9  Vecsey on Phil Rizzuto.
B11  Figure Skating: Canadians dominating world championships.
B10  Football: Dennis Byrd returns to roots in Oklahoma.
B7  Jets talking to Hostetler.
B7  Reeves wants Banks to stay with Giants.B10  Hockey: Rangers beat Blackhawks.
B9  Horse Racing: Her name is Eliza.
B9  Sports People B10  Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials  The death of Dr.
Gunn.
Will Janet Reno run Justice?
The Korean peninsula heats up.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: The Syrian sanctuary.
Anthony Lewis: Right to life.
Anne Fausto-Sterling: How many sexes are there?


On My Mind; The Syrian Sanctuary
Despite the deaths in the World Trade Center bombing and the blood of the wounded, neither the American press, public nor Government has yet focused on the basic nature of terrorism in and from the Middle East.
The full story of how the bombing was inspired, organized and paid for may not be told in court, for years, if ever.
We still do not know the truth about the 1988 bombing of Pan Am 103.


Critic's Notebook; For Gay Writers, Sad Stories
"DR. RIEUX resolved to compile this chronicle, so that he should not be one of those who hold their peace but should bear witness in favor of those plague-stricken people, so that some memorial of the injustice and outrage done them might endure; and to state quite simply what we learn in a time of pestilence: that there are more things to admire in men than to despise."
This passage from Albert Camus's novel "The Plague" is quoted as an epigraph to Paul A. Sergios's affecting new memoir, "One Boy at War." It sums up at least one of the impulses behind the outpouring of books on the subject of AIDS: a desire to testify, to pay witness, to document the horrible toll of this disease, to memorialize the dead and the dying, to try to fight despair through the protest afforded by language.


Abortion Clinics Preparing for More Violence
The low-rise suburban landscape that is the setting of most abortion clinics is an unlikely backdrop for martial metaphors and discussions of how to block bullets.
But in one small city after another, abortion providers said today that they saw the fatal shooting of their colleague, Dr.
David Gunn, on Wednesday as the inevitable result of a moral battle that long ago turned physical.
If abortion opponents see the shooting as an "isolated incident" and the work of a "nutcake," abortion rights advocates -- both feminists and the obstetricians who perform 1.6 million abortions each year in the United States -- see it as the culmination of a decade or more of blockades, fire bombings, chemical attacks and nighttime gunfire.


Review/Theater; The Underside of Auto Mechanics
As performed by a sharp-edged quartet of actors under the direction of Matthew Penn, "The Root" is a play with urban bite.
But beneath the surface reality -- the seedy garage setting, the earthy talk -- this is an artificial plant.
As Gary Richards manipulates his characters through a contrived plot, the play finds no fresh life of its own.
Despite a Mamet-like aura, it is far from "American Buffalo." First produced at the George Street Playhouse in New Brunswick, N.J., "The Root" opened last night as a guest production at the Atlantic Theater in Chelsea.
In a failed family-owned service station in Brooklyn, a mechanic named Vinny (Joseph Siravo) struggles to regain his good name, which he has done his best to lose.
Instead of pumping gas and fixing flats as his father did, he strips stolen cars and sells the spare parts.
His partners in petty crime are a renegade policeman (Jude Ciccolella) and a thief and drug dealer (Giancarlo Esposito).


Big Day for Ex-Residents Of Center for the Retarded
For decades, Willowbrook State School on Staten Island was a barren warehouse for more than 5,000 mentally retarded people, a place where children lay naked and untended on the floors of locked wards, where the air stank of urine and echoed with the moans and cries of residents.
Willie Mae Goodman's 4-year-old daughter was in Building 14.
"She wasn't clean," Mrs.
Goodman recalled this week.
"You could smell her. Her little toes would be so chafed I had to pull them apart. I had to cut her hair short it was so matted." A Permanent Requirement
The institution came to symbolize everything that was wrong with the care of the mentally retarded, prompting a lawsuit and extensive reform of the way the retarded were treated in the state.


Sounds Around Town
Haitian Ceremonies
La Troupe Makandal, the Gershwin Theater at Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, Brooklyn College, Campus Road west of Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush (718) 951-4500.
This Haitian music-and-dance troupe led by Frisner Augustin, a master drummer, specializes in ceremonial drumming, chanting and dancing involved in voodoo rites.
It also performs processional music associated with Holy Week.
The troupe was founded in 1973 in Port-au-Prince and regrouped in New York in 1981.
Its performances have done much to preserve and perpetuate traditional Haitian music and dance.
Show time is tomorrow at 8 P.M., and tickets are $10.


Georgetown And B.C. Stay Alive Another Day
Boston College and Georgetown, teams whose chances were slim and none for reaching the national tournament, extended their respective seasons last night with opening-round victories in the Big East tournament.
The Eagles lost a 12-point lead and were forced to overtime before defeating Villanova, 74-70, in the second second game of a doubleheader at Madison Square Garden.
In the first game, Georgetown trampled Miami, 67-40.


Money Fund Assets Drop
The total assets of the nation's 625 retail money market mutual funds decreased $203.2 million, to $391.23 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.


The Death of Dr. Gunn
On Wednesday morning a physician named David Gunn emerged from his car and walked toward the back door of the Pensacola Women's Medical Services clinic.
He was shot in the back, and killed, by Michael F. Griffin -- one of the lawless army of vandals that has roamed this country for over a decade attempting to deny women their constitutionally protected right to abortion.
This murder was the latest escalation in a crescendo of violence by anti-abortion activists.
In the name of "life," the anti-abortion army has bombed or set fire to more than 100 clinics over the past 15 years, invaded more than 300 and vandalized more than 400.
Last month in Corpus Christi, Tex., its arsonists leveled a clinic and three nearby buildings.
It has stalked medical personnel, used their photographs on "Wanted for Murder" posters, forced physicians to wear bulletproof vests and work behind steel shutters.
It has also driven many doctors out of their abortion practice.


Marriott Alters Plan To Split Up
The Marriott Corporation, acting to placate bondholders angry over its plan to split into two companies, said yesterday that it had agreed to issue new bonds at higher interest rates and to shift some debt between the two new companies.
The original plan to split, announced in October, angered bondholders and brought lawsuits because virtually all of Marriott's nearly $3 billion in debt would have been left with the new real estate company, rather than the profitable management company.


Health Chief Assails Deal Between U.S. Research Lab and Swiss Company
The nation's largest nonprofit biomedical laboratory has granted a foreign drug company unusual powers over the conduct of federally financed research under a 10-year $300 million contract, Federal health officials said today.
At a Congressional hearing, the director of the National Institutes of Health, Dr.
Bernadine Healy, assailed the contract between the laboratory, the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif., and the Swiss-based Sandoz Pharmaceuticals Corporation.


Comex Gets Its Second Takeover Bid
The Commodity Exchange Inc., whose fortunes have been in decline for the last several years, has received its second takeover proposal in the last six weeks.
The latest offer came late Wednesday from the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange, which unsuccessfully attempted to merge with the Comex last year.


No Verdict in Assault Case
The jury in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial deliberated for a fifth day today without reaching a verdict.
Judge R. Benjamin Cohen excused the jurors about an hour earlier than usual after a juror who underwent minor eye surgery on Wednesday said he was not feeling well.
Deliberations are to resume at 9 A.M.
Friday.
The deliberations today lasted about five hours.
Since getting the case last Thursday, the jury has deliberated about 18 hours.
They are discussing the fate of four former high school football players charged with sexually assaulting a mildly retarded schoolmate on March 1, 1989.


Foes of Pornography and Bigotry Join Forces
Treading close to what critics consider the land of the thought police, some legal scholars are joining together to fight against images they believe should never be produced and words they believe should never be spoken.
They are feminist opponents of pornography and scholars of hate speech who, after years of pursuing their work alone and often with frustration, have joined forces in a search for a legal framework to strengthen both causes.


Sounds Around Town
Heath and His Own
Jimmy Heath Orchestra, Colden Center for the Performing Arts, 65-30 Kissena Boulevard, Flushing, Queens, (718) 544-2996.
Jimmy Heath qualifies as one of America's least-known composers, somebody whose orchestral work has long been unjustly overlooked.
He's well enough known as a great be-bop saxophonist, a cohort of John Coltrane and others; his big-band pieces, rich and clever and laden with modern harmonies, deserve better.
This show is a rare chance to hear his work played by some of jazz's best musicians, including Jerome Richards and Antonio Hart on reeds; Jon Faddis, Donald Byrd and Virgil Jones on trumpets; Slide Hampton and Benny Powell on trombone; Mulgrew Miller on piano; Ben Brown on bass, and Lewis Nash on drums.
The show is tonight at 8.
Tickets are $15.


Brady Speaks Out for Florio's Gun Ban
With his opponents on the ropes, Gov.
Jim Florio pressed his campaign against assault firearms today.
Speaking from the Governor's office, James S. Brady, the White House press secretary who was paralyzed in 1981 by a bullet intended for Ronald Reagan, urged New Jersey to retain its ban on such weapons and called for Congress to impose a national ban.
And the Democratic State Commitee announced a direct-mail campaign aimed at Republican legislators who voted to repeal the ban, while the National Rifle Association, which is working for Mr.
Florio's defeat, began broadcasting radio commercials accusing him of "defending a phony political gun ban."


Dayton Hudson Corp. (N)
Thanks to healthy sales and tight expense controls, the Dayton Hudson Corporation's profits rose 30 percent in the fourth quarter.
Sales in stores open at least one year, which analysts consider a better barometer of a retail company's performance than total sales figures, were up 6 percent in the fourth quarter and 4 percent for the year.


Retail Sales Up Slightly As Jobless Claims Rise
Fresh signs of slackened economic growth emerged today as the Government reported that retail sales rose a modest three-tenths of 1 percent in February and that new claims for jobless benefits climbed again in the week ended Feb. 27.
Sales were held back by a 2.2 percent drop in sales by automotive dealers, and there might have been no gain at all, analysts said, without price increases in building materials and some other items.
The price of lumber soared 90 percent from early October to the end of February, reflecting increased demand brought on by the economic recovery and environmental battles that have sharply curtailed supplies from Federal lands.
Apparent Contradiction
The 25,000 rise in jobless claims, to 376,000, was the third in a row and something of a surprise in light of last Friday's report of substantial job growth for February.
That earlier report on employment conditions was conducted during the week ended Feb. 13.


Mum May Be the Word for Bonilla
The manager met with his multimillionaire right fielder near first base before today's game, the Mets' public relations man also present and involved.
It was a strange sort of triple play.
There followed talk of double standards and earplugs, clubhouse politics and the question of leadership.
After the game, the right fielder stormed through a parking lot, threatening a seasonlong boycott of the news media.
Baseball was back, and so was Bobby Bonilla.


Police Allege Teacher Hit 2d Graders
A substitute teacher was arraigned on assault charges last night after second-grade students in a Brooklyn elementary school told their parents that he had hit them with his hands and with a pointer, the police said yesterday.
Ibrahim S. Sabe, 53, of 706 Woodward Avenue in Ridgewood, Queens, was arrested and charged on Wednesday with assault at Public School 384 in Bushwick, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Edelle James.


As Casinos Lure Bingo Players, Charities Cry Foul
The triumphant cry of "Bingo!" is being heard these days in unfamiliar surroundings -- inside many of this city's gambling casinos.
And that is bad news for charitable and nonprofit organizations across the state that have depended on 65,000 bingo games each year to raise an estimated $35 million -- money that bought equipment for volunteer fire departments or sent children to summer camps.


Review/Film; African Violence in Tale for Children
Children who are eager to see "Trail Mix-Up," the latest Roger Rabbit cartoon, may have second thoughts about "A Far-Off Place," the full-length African adventure that makes up the rest of the bill.
Those second thoughts may just manifest themselves in the middle of the night, like thoughts about Bambi's mother.
"A Far-Off Place" begins with peaceful glimpses of animal herds, including a picturesque group of elephants.
Within about a minute of the film's opening, most of the elephants have been slaughtered by poachers.
A baby elephant hovers near its lifeless mother.
The baby looks bewildered.
The poachers saw off tusks.


For Children
So, Sue Me' The Performing Arts Center State University College Purchase, N.Y. (914) 251-6200 Recommended ages: 5 and up Tomorrow and Sunday
In this original children's comedy, six construction workers, without saying a thing, prove how calamity-filled and noisy their jobs can be.
The hourlong play may be without dialogue, but the sounds, of a buzz saw, jackhammer and other tools, provide just the right amount of conversation.


RABIN TO DISCUSS U.S. ROLE IN TALKS
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin headed tonight for the United States and his first meeting with President Clinton, which Israeli officials hope will settle questions here about how deeply the new Administration intends to involve itself in the Middle East peace talks.
Recent statements by Secretary of State Warren Christopher that Washington wants to be "a full partner" in the negotiations are regarded by Israeli policy makers as potentially a self-contained good news-bad news story.


U.S. Names Trade Violators to Pressure Belgrade
As part of a new effort to tighten the United Nations economic embargo on Yugoslavia, the Clinton Administration has begun to identify publicly foreign companies that are helping Belgrade to evade the trade restrictions.
Other parts of the effort include offering patrol boats to Romania and Bulgaria for use in enforcing the embargo on the Danube, a major artery for trade in Eastern Europe, and sending teams of Treasury and State Department officials to work with European allies on cracking down on Serbian financial transactions and imports.


Study Suggests Genes Sway Lesbians' Sexual Orientation
After long neglecting lesbians in their widely reported and acridly debated studies of the biology of homosexuality, researchers now say that genes may play as strong a role in shaping female sexual orientation as they appear to do in dictating the sexuality of gay men.
Surveying a group of 147 gay women who have identical twin sisters, nonidentical twins or adopted sisters, scientists have found that the identical twins of lesbians are at least three times as likely to be lesbians themselves as are the fraternal female twins or the adopted sisters.


Family Calls Engineer Devout Man Of Tradition
Despite his eight years in America, Nidal A. Ayyad, the 25-year-old chemical engineer arrested this week in the World Trade Center bombing, remained a traditionalist whose December marriage to a woman from the Middle East was arranged by his mother, relatives said.
Mr.
Ayyad's brother, Abdul Hamid, said their mother, Fatima, met the teen-ager, named Reema, at a copier store while on a trip to Jordan last year.
She showed a picture of the young woman to her son in New Jersey, the relatives said, and he liked it and went to Jordan to meet her.
There they became engaged.


Wars of Balkans Defy Simple Analyses; Who Bogomil Was
To the Editor:
Contrary to what Karl E. Meyer states (Editorial Notebook, Feb. 28), the medieval Christian heretics known as Bogomils did not derive their name "from old Slavonic for 'God have mercy.' " It is from their sect's founder, the 10th-century Bulgarian priest Bogomil, whose name translates as "pleasing to God" (from "Bog," God, and "mil," pleasing).
LOUIS JAY HERMAN New York, March 3, 1993


Two by Dallapiccola
The Dessoff Choirs will perform two major works by the 20th-century Italian composer Luigi Dallapiccola tomorrow at 8 P.M. at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
The works are "Canti di Prigionia" (three poems by famous political prisoners: Mary, Queen of Scots; Boethius, the Roman philosopher and statesman; Savonarola, the Italian religious reformer burned at the stake for heresy) and "Cori di Michelangelo Buonarroti il Giovane" (lighthearted marital laments by Michelangelo's nephew).
Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 935-2551.


Job Screening For Day Care May Be Ended
Nine years ago, spurred by public anguish over a series of national day-care scandals, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the State Legislature enacted a law requiring the state to screen the names of prospective child-care workers against computerized child-abuse records.
Now Mr.
Cuomo, in an effort to cut $1 million from his $32 billion budget, has stunned advocates of children's rights by quietly proposing to rescind the law.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  IMMIGRATION MISSED BOMBING SUSPECT
When Mohammed A. Salameh, one of the two main suspects in the bombing of the World Trade Center, entered the United States as a temporary foreign visitor in 1987, he slipped through a Federal immigration bureaucracy that had no plan or hope of ever tracking him amid the nation's vast tide of illegal aliens.
A1.
FOREIGN FUNDS TRACED TO GERMANY
The foreign funds wired over recent months into the New Jersey joint bank account of two arrested suspects in the bombing have been traced to Germany, law enforcement officials said.
B5.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The hard-charging General Motors executive responsible for trimming costs in the auto maker's supplier network will leave.
He is expected to take a top post at Volkswagen.  [ Page D1. ]
Bonds of the largest airlines -- American, United and Delta -- were downgraded to below investment grade.  [ D1. ]  Traders see considerable profit potential in the airline bonds.  [ D14. ]


No Headline
"I work in four layers of bullet-proof windows. Death threats are so common they are not remarkable. I went to a pro-choice meeting in Denver recently, and as I walked through the picket line, someone said, 'You should die."' -- DR.
WARREN HERN, --  medical director of the Boulder Abortion Clinic.  [ A17:4. ]


Canadian Team Mixes Some More Gold With Ice
Flags with big red maple leafs flapped everywhere.
Down jackets were left open to the cold night air.
Consonants were pronounced hard, and loud.
Little Canada, a contingent of loyal supporters, sprang today from Sports Hall here, where Kurt Browning and Elvis Stojko continued their country's early dominance at the world figure skating championships.


Dow Falls by 21.34 as Profits Are Taken
After bidding stocks up to record levels for three straight days, investors stepped back yesterday and cashed in some of their gains.
A decline of 21.34 points in the Dow Jones industrial average, to 3,457.00, brought more shrugs than grimaces, however, from those who follow the market for a living.
Why panic, after all, when a paper or auto stock whose value has jumpedby a third or a half since October fell a point or two?
In fact, some of the market's best recent performers, especially the industrial heavyweights, were yesterday's losers.
The Nasdaq market, more sluggish of late, managed a slight gain.


Review/Dance; A Sociable Gambol: 'Touchbase'
Merce Cunningham's second premiere of the season is a regular romp, a piece of serious choreography with sprightly trappings.
In "Touchbase," as the new work is called, everyone onstage seems to be on vacation.
The entire atmosphere suggests an English resort of the imagination.
Perhaps the association comes to mind simply because "Touchbase" was first performed last year in London by the Rambert Dance Company, a British troupe, and because the work's designer is Mark Lancaster, the British artist and former Cunningham artistic adviser who now lives in England again.


Seeking More Rubles
VITALY SMIRNOV is on the prowl for money.
The president of the Russian Olympic Committee has an unspecifed amount of cash from Reebok and wants billions of rubles more.
Soviet apparatchiks never learned how to make a buck.
"They got money from the Government, but they earned nothing," Smirnov said yesterday at a Russian Tea Room reception.
"All those years, we had an Olympic emblem. Never used it for commercial purposes. Was property of Supreme Soviet."


The Art Market
Saatchi's Clean Sweep
Charles Saatchi's art-buying habits are similar to an eating disorder: he binges; then he purges.
Last week the British advertising magnate went on a shopping spree.
The day before an exhibition opened at the Anderson O'Day Gallery in West London, Mr.
Saatchi bought out the entire show, five abstract paintings by an unknown 32-year-old British artist named Simon Callery.
The works were priced at $:4,000 and $:5,000 each, and Prue O'Day, an owner of the gallery, said Mr.
Saatchi spent $:20,000, or about $29,000.
Mr.
Saatchi first saw Mr.
Callery's work a month before, at a new artist's space near King's Cross in London called Cubitt Street Studios, where he bought an abstract landscape painting.
Such sprees are nothing new for Mr.
Saatchi.
But just as fast as he buys many works by a single artist, he has been known to sell them, sending prices on a rapid roller-coaster ride.
This fickle behavior is a subject of great interest to gallery owners, artists, auction-house experts and collectors, who keep close tabs on Mr.
Saatchi's dealings because he has been known to inflate an artist's reputation and then deflate it in short order, all single-handed.
For example, in the 1980's Mr.
Saatchi bought, in bulk, the work of the Italian artist Sandro Chia, and then, shortly after, he sold the work and Mr.
Chia's prices tumbled.
They have never quite recovered.


Why Workers Put Off Claims for Injuries
To the Editor:
"As Plants Close, Injury Claims Rise" (Business Day, Feb. 22) reports the considerable cost to employers of workers' compensation claims filed after plants close.
You overlook a crucial fact: workers often wait to file because they cannot afford to live off the paltry benefits.
In New York State, for example, the maximum benefit for a total disability (for example, paralysis, advanced lung-disease) is two-thirds of a worker's average weekly wage, up to $400 a week, or $20,800 annually.
But only 2 percent of compensation claims are for total disabilities -- the rest are for partial disabilities, for which workers generally receive significantly less money.


CHRONICLE
When plans for the all-star "Music for Life" concert on Sunday, a benefit for the Gay Men's Health Crisis, first began to jell, a bell went off in JOAN TISCH'S mind, she said, and it had to do with JAMES WOLFENSOHN, former chairman of Carnegie Hall.
"I remembered that he was involved with fighting AIDS very early on, and I realized that the concert is in Carnegie Hall, so the occasion simply cried out for honors for the Wolfensohns," she said.
"It seemed such a perfect fit that everyone said 'Yes, absolutely.' "


Stankiewicz Is Pushing A Boulder Uphill Again
The anxiety has left Andy Stankiewicz's eyes because there is finally some certainty, some order to his life as a baseball player.
After six agonizing years crawling through the Yankee farm system, Stankiewicz bounded into the Bronx last April and never left.
He is a proven major leaguer.
But Stankiewicz's telling eyes turn grim when he ponders what will happen this April.
The certainty he brought to his life with inspiring play last summer has deteriorated into the uncertainty caused by the jumble of six middle infielders tangling for two positions.
Certainty as a major leaguer, uncertainty as a Yankee: It is Stankiewicz's new story.


Balkan Update
Konjevic Valley, Bosnia  Serbian forces fired artillery yesterday into a crowd of Muslim women and children who hoped to be evacuated from eastern Bosnia.
Several deaths were reported.
United Nations
Civilian and military leaders of Bosnia's Serbs said they plan to resume peace negotiations at the United Nations on Monday.
The head of the Muslim-led Government has not said when he will return.
Sarajevo, Bosnia
In the first war crimes prosecution in Bosnia, two militiamen went on trial, one charged with 12 rapes and 32 slayings, and the other charged with 2 rapes and 5 killings.


Partial and Secret Verdict in Glen Ridge
In a day of bizarre twists, the jury in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial reached a verdict on five of nine charges against four former football players charged with assaulting a retarded schoolmate four years ago.
The verdict is a secret, however, because the jury chose not to formally return a partial decision.
But it was widely suspected that the jury had agreed to convict the four defendants, possibly on the most serious charges of assaulting the young woman with a bat and a broom handle and forcing her to perform fellatio.


Corrections
The Our Towns column yesterday, about rubbernecking, referred incorrectly to Fred Feldman, a former traffic reporter.
He worked for radio station WOR, not WCBS.


St. Etienne Journal; A *** Kitchen Brings Honor to Depressed Loire
Surrounded by slag heaps and ignored by the guidebooks, this industrial town has long been about as far from the French tourism and gastronomic circuit as it is possible to be.
Indeed, St.
Etienne has had an image problem.
First its coal industry collapsed.
Then the steel industry went.
Later the country's largest mail order business, Manufrance, went bankrupt.
Finally even its legendary soccer team was eclipsed by the likes of Marseilles and Monaco.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about a 1990 census report on the number of people who moved to other states referred incorrectly to the effect of a population shift on California.
California lost more residents to other states than New York did over the last decade, but it still attracted more new residents than it lost.


Making Sure You Take All of Your Exemptions
SOME taxpayers fail to claim all the $2,300 exemptions to which they are entitled for dependents, tax professionals say.
For a couple with taxable income of $90,000, another exemption would lower their tax bill by $713 -- a sizable chunk of change to pay needlessly.
Frequently the exemption is missed when several family members support an elderly or infirm relative.
"A client may say, 'Gee, I don't think I gave more than half because my brother and sister also gave,' " said Stuart Kessler, partner in the New York accounting firm Goldstein, Golub, Kessler &amp; Company.


Violets' Season Ends A Long Way From Home
New York University's basketball season, one of the Violets' best, came to end in double overtime tonight.
In a sectional match of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division III tournament, N.Y.U. lost to Eastern Connecticut State, 78-73, after a commendable comeback.
The Violets trailed by as many as 11 points in the first half and managed to go ahead for awhile early in the second half.
The score was tied, 54-54, at the end of regulation time and 63-63 after one overtime.


Unaccustomed Role for Clinton at Sea
As the first President in half a century who never served in the military, Bill Clinton has some catching up to do.
So today he squeezed into a green flight jacket and flew to this aircraft carrier 70 miles off the coast from Norfolk, Va., where he rolled out a snappy salute, practiced talking like a sailor and carefully avoided delicate subjects like his plan to let homosexuals serve in the military.


Jackson Increases the Pressure
Faced with a chilly reception to his offer to help develop a comprehensive, community-based program to increase minority employment and business oportunities in major league baseball, the Rev.
JESSE L. JACKSON turned up the heat yesterday, circulating a 10-point proposal he said would be used to judge the unilateral plan baseball is expected to issue before opening day.


3 at Sloan's Held in Fraud With Coupons
The three principal owners of the Sloan's Supermarkets chain were arrested yesterday on charges of obtaining more than $3 million in a scheme to redeem manufacturers' coupons that did not come from customers who were buying groceries.
Federal prosecutors said the owners systematically received the coupons in bulk from someone for 40 percent of their face value.
The unnamed person was described in the charges as someone who had become a confidential informant.
The complaint said the person had paid people to clip the coupons from newspapers and circulars.


Observer; The Banking Hangover
Personal News Item: The bank announces new charges of $72 a year for checking-account "maintenance," plus 15 cents for each check drawn, plus 8 cents for each check deposited.
For now, customers may continue to deposit cash without being charged.
Dried tears were clearly evident on my bank statement.
I was saddened to think of my banker weeping.
He had been a fine banker in the old days.
I shall never forget the day in 1986 when he did his utmost to lend me $8 million.


Floyd's Kid Isn't Boxing in Dad's Shadow
The ladies from the square-dancing class waited patiently until Tracy Patterson had finished his shadow boxing the other day.
He needed the large mirrors in the dance studio to watch himself throw jabs and hooks, but they wanted him out.
Soon.
This was no way to treat a champion, but Patterson has endured worse in his boxing career.
Small annoyances are part of it.


What to Know in Shopping for a Lawyer
To the Editor:
"Bar Groups Are Happy to Find You a Lawyer" (Your Money pages, Feb. 27) provides helpful advice, but suggests that bar association referral services are not needed by those who "travel in legal circles." Last year, 3,516 of the clients we referred were lawyers or people recommended to us by lawyers.
Many calls from lawyers were requests for a particular expertise.


N.Y.R.A. Shrinks the Winner's Shares
In a move aimed at cutting costs and sending a message to state legislators, the New York Racing Association is swinging its budget ax for the second time in a month, cutting purses by 2 percent over all and eliminating the $500,000 N.Y.R.A.
Mile from next fall's calendar.
"New York just cannot continue to exist under the present structure and rules," Jerry Lawrence, executive vice president of the association, said today from Aqueduct race track in New York.
"Other states have gotten the benefit of a reduction in taxes. And nobody else competes for business within its own state with off-track betting the way we do. We hope the Legislature will see fit to make some changes between now and 1994 that will make us more competitive."


Yeltsin, Defying Congress, Says the Referendum Is On
After a final rebuff by a hostile Congress of People's Deputies, President Boris N. Yeltsin stalked out of the Grand Kremlin Palace today and said he would call a nationwide referendum on his own to decide who should rule Russia.
Mr.
Yeltsin threw down his challenge after the 1,041-member Congress -- the country's highest legislative body, which has become the bulwark of opposition to change -- adopted a resolution undercutting the President's authority and making him vulnerable to threats of impeachment.
"I came to the Congress hoping that the spirit of concord would prevail here in spite of everything," the President said in a brief, unemotional speech.
"Despite everything, the Congress has turned toward still greater confrontation."


Religion Notes
Stereotyping of Muslims
Protestant, Jewish, Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox groups warned in separate statements this week against stereotyping Muslims because of the arrest of three Muslims in connection with the bombing of the World Trade Center.


CARTER ANNOUNCES VACCINATION PLAN
Former President Jimmy Carter today undertook a campaign to immunize thousands of preschool children here within the next six weeks.
Mr.
Carter said at a news conference that volunteers from the Atlanta Project, the program he created a year and a half ago to attack virtually every poverty-related problem of the inner city, would flood into 20 impoverished neighborhoods on the weekend of April 17-18 in an effort to visit more than 200,000 families whose children may need vaccinations against a variety of illnesses, including polio, measles, mumps, whooping cough and rubella.


2 More Sect Members Leave Besieged Texas Compound
A 19-year-old Australian man and a mother eager to be reunited with her four children, both members of the heavily armed cult that has been holed up nearly two weeks in the besieged compound near here, surrendered separately today to Federal agents.
The two sect members were the first allowed to leave in a week, and the Australian, identified as Oliver Gyarfas Jr., was the first man to voluntarily leave since the standoff began 13 days ago, when four Federal agents and at least two cult members were killed in a shootout.


Schubert-Piano Symposium
A free symposium exploring the piano music of Schubert will take place on March 21 from 1 to 9 P.M. at the 92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, in Manhattan.
The symposium, "Schubert and the Piano," is part of the Y's 1993 Schubertiade and will be led by its artistic director, Joseph Horowitz.
Among the topics to be discussed are "Schubert After Schnabel," 1:30 P.M.; "Schubert and the Fortepiano," 2:45 P.M.; "The Schubert Duets," 4 P.M., and "Social Contexts of Schubert's Piano Music," 7 P.M.
Participants include Leon Botstein, music director of the American Symphony Orchestra and the president of Bard College, the fortepianist Steven Lubin, the duo-pianists Richard and John Contiguglia and Ruth Solie, of Smith College.
Information: (212) 415-5440.


Investing; Few Financial Advisers Qualify as Unbiased
ALL the important things seemed to check out when Tom and Midge Bailey picked someone to oversee their retirement nest egg in 1984.
There was the assuring pedigree of "certified financial planner" in the adviser's background, the soothing Securities and Exchange Commission registration, the professional sounding "Personal Financial Planning Inc." on the letterhead.
This was no commission-hungry broker, the Baileys thought.
This was someone who would have their best interests at heart.
But by the time the Baileys filed an arbitration claim against their investment adviser six years later, their nest egg of $240,000 in cash and stock had dwindled to nearly nothing in the limited partnerships the adviser had bought for them.


CHRONICLE
ISAAC TIGRETT, a founder of the Hard Rock Cafe chain, is known for collecting memorabilia of rock stars and groups, but now he is parting with two decades' worth of objects, photos, posters and scores.
On Monday night, he will auction off his entire personal collection at Butterfield &amp; Butterfield, an auction house in Los Angeles and San Francisco that estimates the collection's worth at more than $150,000.


Bond Rally Stalls on Inflation Gain
After pushing interest rates to historic lows, the remarkable Treasury bond market rally ran into the wall yesterday, stalling the move to even lower rates for now.
The higher-than-expected increase in inflation in the Producer Price Index in February helped set off waves of selling in Treasury securities.
Producer prices jumped four-tenths of 1 percent.
Inflation, which erodes the fixed returns from bonds, is the worst news for traders and investors.


Salvadoran Official, Under U.N. Scrutiny Over Rights, Resigns
El Salvador's Defense Minister resigned today, three days before the release of a United Nations-sponsored report on widespread human rights abuses committed during the recently ended 12-year civil war.
The resignation of the Defense Minister, Gen.
Rene Emilio Ponce, is the first in what the United Nations has said should be a final purge of military commanders who were implicated in human rights abuses during the war.
The purge would clear the way for the full implementation of the Salvadoran peace agreement reached last year.


Village Woos Train to Prosperity
Peggy Whalen anticipates using the proposed new rail service to this pastoral hamlet to ferry her Cub Scout pack to New York City on excursions to places like the Statue of Liberty.
Ralph Vinchiarello envisions a "golf train," something he likens to an old-fashioned ski train, which would transport golfers from Westchester County and beyond to Wassaic's new 18-hole course at the foot of the Berkshires.


No Headline
There was blood everywhere and people were rushing to get out. -- M. R. MAYYA, the executive director of the Bombay Stock Exchange.  [ 1:6. ]


RESULTS
N.B.A.
A Full Deck: 52 Points for Bulls' Jordan  Bulls 123, Hornets 100: Michael Jordan and his ailing feet came to the rescue of the Chicago Bulls again last night, scoring 52 points for the home fans.
It was the 32d game that Jordan scored 50 or more points in his career.


INSIDE
Killing at Brooklyn Court
A parole officer fatally shot his estranged wife at Brooklyn Family Court, the police said.
Page 23.
Shearson Sold for $1 Billion
American Express is selling its Shearson brokerage subsidiary to Primerica for $1 billion.
Page 35.
Likely Victory for British Air
British Airways appears likely to get United States approval to buy a 19.9 percent stake in USAir.
Page 35.


Easy for St. John's, a Little Harder for the Hall; Hoyas Come to Rumble, But Pirates Still Survive
Even when nothing's at stake -- no trophies to win, no crown to defend -- Georgetown plays hard.
So the question surrounding yesterday's quarterfinal matchup against Seton Hall was obvious: If Georgetown plays frantically as a matter of course, how would the Hoyas play in a desperate situation?
Desperately, of course.


U.S. Turns Up the Heat on Trade
Raising the temperature in two trade disputes, the nation's top trade official today strongly criticized the Japanese Government's stance on a computer chips agreement and canceled trans-Atlantic talks aimed at heading off American trade sanctions.
The European Community and the Japanese Embassy here responded indignantly.
The language used today by all three sides was remarkably brusque and irritable, testimony to a growing tension in trade relations provoked by President Clinton's new and more confrontational approach to international negotiations.


Time Warner Board Faces An Overhaul
Gerald M. Levin, who became chairman of Time Warner Inc. three months ago, will propose four new directors at next week's board meeting as part of an attempt to rebuild the board and put his stamp on the company, according to several executives with knowledge of the appointments.
Separately, Mr.
Levin, in his first public appearance as chairman, told the International Radio and Television Society in New York on Thursday that he would never sell Time Warner's magazine division, a move that had been rumored.


Trade Center Blast Prompts Kahane Case Review
The New York City police have reopened their investigation of the assassination of Rabbi Meir Kahane, both to see if evidence that may have been overlooked shows that the shooting was part of a conspiracy and to see if it provides new leads in the investigation of the World Trade Center bombing, a top police official said yesterday.
The move came amid a widening investigation into the search for more suspects and motives in the Feb. 26 bombing and a growing interest by authorities in the man who was tried for the assassination, El Sayyid A. Nosair.


How to Speed Refinancing: Get Your Information Ready
Call a mortgage lender in these days of frenzied refinancings and you are likely to get nothing but an automated voice promising a callback.
If the callback comes, it may be four or five days later, maybe even a week.
Meanwhile, you sit there biting your nails and wondering if you missed the market and rates have started moving upward again.
What can homeowners seeking cheaper loans do?
Write a socko resume, as if they were packaging themselves for a potential employer, and fax it to the lender.
The resume should list every bit of information the lender needs.
Do that, say lenders and mortgage experts, and your application may move to the top of the pile.


Arbitrators Plan Raise for New York Firefighters
New York City's firefighters would receive a 4.5 percent raise, their first pay increase since 1989, in exchange for working more hours each year and performing a wider variety of tasks, under a contract proposed by an independent panel yesterday.
The contract is not likely to set a precedent for other unions, because it is retroactive, running only from July 1, 1990, to Sept. 30, 1991.
From that date, the city would have to negotiate further contracts with the firefighters, as with many other unions.


Prosecutor Account Disputed by Officer At Trial on Beating
A prosecution witness in the Federal civil rights trial of four officers charged in the beating of Rodney G. King today denied a Government contention that the officers displayed Mr.
King as a bloodied trophy at a station house after his arrest.
The turnaround arose in the testimony of Officer Daniel Gonzales of the Los Angeles police, who was called by prosecutors in the case against the four officers: Sgt.
Stacey C. Koon, Officers Laurence M. Powell and Theodore J. Briseno and former Officer Timothy E. Wind.
The four were acquitted of state assault charges a year ago.


On Having a Car Stolen Repeatedly in New York
To the Editor:
"New York, Car Theft Capital of the World" (Op-Ed, March 2) by Lucy Danziger may have rung true for many New Yorkers, but I can attest that sometimes New York's finest are just that.


A Painful Price For Exuberance
Miami of Ohio Coach Joby Wright is expected to undergo surgery Monday to repair a tendon in his right knee he tore when he got too demonstrative during his team's 63-50 victory over Bowling Green in the Mid-American Conference tournament on Thursday night.
Wright fell midway through the second half and spent the rest of the game on the bench with an ice pack on his knee.
A hospital examination today confirmed the injury.


Primerica Will Buy Shearson for $1 Billion
The American Express Company said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its Shearson brokerage subsidiary to Primerica, the New York financial company that already owns Smith Barney, Harris Upham, a smaller securities firm, for $1 billion plus a share of future profits.
The sale, after 12 years of rocky marriage, is the latest in a series of moves by American Express to raise cash and to allow it to concentrate on rebuilding the profits of its charge card business.
The sale, which is to be completed in three or four months, is one of the first major actions by American Express's new chairman, Harvey Golub, who readily entertained the offer from Sanford I. Weill, chairman of Primerica, an old friend.
Smith Barney Shearson
The new firm will be called Smith Barney Shearson, and will be headed by Frank Zarb, president of Smith Barney.
Although he said he expected to find cost-cutting opportunities totaling $100 million to $200 million within a few years, Mr.
Zarb declined to estimate how many employees would be cut as a result of the merger.
But he said cuts would not come from the ranks of the brokers who manage customer accounts and who generate an average of about $300,000 of revenues a year.


Let's All Be Health Care Insiders
One day after a judge ruled that the President's Task Force on Health Care Reform must open some but not all of its meetings to the public, Hillary Rodham Clinton, who heads the task force, said she was pleased.
"The judge really gave a stamp of approval to the work that's already gone on and is planned to go on," she said.
The First Lady, who is a lawyer, knows that courts don't really bless what they uphold.
And you don't have to be a lawyer to know that declaring something legal doesn't make it wise.
Health care reform will fail unless it wins the support of consumers and the confidence of medical professionals.
Confidence and support do not thrive behind closed doors.


Wang Zhen, Chinese Hard-Liner Decried by Intellectuals, Dies at 85
Vice President Wang Zhen, a general who rose through the Communist ranks to become one of China's most powerful leaders and among the hardest of the hard-liners, died this afternoon of an unspecified ailment, the official New China News Agency announced today.
He was 85 and had been unwell for more than a year.
Mr.
Wang, who had only a third-grade education, has been a scourge of writers and free-thinkers for the last 50 years, and Chinese intellectuals detested few people among the Communist leadership as Mr.
Wang.


2 Left Feet Nearly Do In One Right Arm
Dwight Gooden said he peered hard at the X-ray and was unsure of the specifics.
He was well aware, though, that the picture was of his left foot, and that he was staring at the future of his 1993 season.
The words he heard were vastly more clear than the X-ray.
"No break," Dr. Ron Grober said out loud. "No fracture."


Hillary Clinton Health Panel Hears the People, Invitation Only
Stepping up the White House's campaign for vast changes in the nation's health-care system, Hillary Rodham Clinton listened to testimony today from several dozen Floridians invited to share medical horror stories, complaints and ideas on how things could work better.
The daylong event, the first of four organized by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation in support of the White House effort, was called "Conversations on Health: A Dialogue With the American People," a title suggesting its essential political point.


Giants Offer Banks a Two-Year Deal
The Giants have shown CARL BANKS they care by offering him a two-year deal with an option for a third.
Banks, the former Pro Bowl outside linebacker had been annoyed when he was named the club's transition player and then offered only a one-year contract.
That offer was for about $1.4 million.
As a transition player, he remains free to negotiate with other clubs, but the Giants retain the right to match any offer.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about credit card fraud referred incorrectly in some copies to the Queens District Attorney.
He is Richard A. Brown.


Corrections
A Media Business article in Business Day on Monday about Harold Evans, president and publisher of the Random House Trade Publishing Group, misidentified the British newspaper from which he resigned as editor after a dispute with Rupert Murdoch.
It was The Times of London.
Mr.
Evans previously edited The Sunday Times of London.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CAMBREX CORP., Rutherford, N.J., a chemical company, purchased the fiber-optic coating business of JI caseCorp., for an undisclosed amount GRAND METROPOLITAN P.L.C.
London, received approval from the Italian antitrust authorities for the acquisition of 100 percent of BIFSRL, which owns 50 percent of Buton, an Italian brandy maker, for $53.3 million.


Evan R. Collins, 81, Transformer Of Small College to SUNY Albany
Evan R. Collins, who transformed a small teachers college into a major university as the founding president of the State University of New York at Albany, died yesterday at his home in Marblehead, Mass.
He was 81.
The cause of death was Parkinson's disease, his family said.


Abe Hirschfeld: A Winner In Land If Not in Politics
Abraham Hirschfeld, who appears set to assume ownership of The New York Post, has no more experience running a newspaper than Steven Hoffenberg did when he stepped forward two months ago.
But he does have deeper pockets and a higher profile.
Mr.
Hirschfeld, who amassed a fortune by building garages and added to it with a successful health-club business, is best known in New York as a perennial candidate for public office.


CHRONICLE
They may not be in power these days, but Republican party stalwarts in Washington have not disappeared into social limbo.
Red balloons were flying outside the home of PENNE and FRITZ KORTH in the Kalorama section on Thursday night to celebrate the start of a new firm, Firestone &amp; Korth Ltd., that will put together conferences, meetings and social gatherings.
It was just a few weeks ago that Mrs.
Korth, long a fixture on the capital's party scene, bid farewell to Mauritius, the Indian Ocean nation where she served four years as Ambassador in the Bush Administration.
Now she and LAURIE FIRESTONE, social secretary in the Bush White House, have joined forces in business.


Data on 1992 Show Japan In Longest Postwar Slump
For the first time in the postwar era, Japan's domestic economy shrank for three consecutive quarters last year as the recession bit into corporate and consumer spending, the Government announced today.
The Economic Planning Agency said that the gross national product grew at an anemic annualized rate of five-tenths of a percent in the fourth quarter last year, for a total growth rate in 1992 of 1.5 percent.
That was Japan's slowest rate of expansion since 1972, and it would have been much worse but for rising exports and heavy Government spending.


U.S. Support for Yeltsin
A senior official said Washington would not object "if Yeltsin suspends an anti-democratic Parliament," but would react strongly if he resorted to military force to keep power.
Page 4.


Easy for St. John's, a Little Harder for the Hall; Tough Redmen Trample B.C. In Second Half
In March, more than any other time in Brian Mahoney's first season as head basketball coach at St.
John's, his coaching philosophy seems a master plan for tournament success.
Involve your substitutes.
Seek options to choose from when things go wrong.
Find fresh legs for the tournament grind.
Except that was not his purpose.


Security Plan for Courts Is Imperfect
In New York City's archipelago of courthouses -- where hatreds, revenge and a thousand untold passions seethe below the surface of criminal cases, bitter divorces, custody fights and myriad other human dramas -- security is tight, but not foolproof, as yesterday's shootings in Brooklyn Family Court show.
Court administration officials said the city's 2,200 armed, uniformed court officers, using metal detectors at entrances of most but not all of the city's courthouses, confiscated the vast majority of 31 guns and 3,300 knives, razors, tear gas bombs and other weapons seized in courthouses in the state in 1992.


Ivan Wentworth-Rohr, Psychologist and Psychoanalyst, 74
Dr.
Ivan Wentworth-Rohr, a New York psychologist and psychoanalyst associated with Pace University and St.
Vincent's Hospital, died on Wednesday at the hospital in Manhattan.
A resident of Manhattan, he was 74.
The cause was a heart attack or stroke, his family said.


Long Hours for Doctors Harm Everyone
To the Editor:
I was disappointed with your report that the effects are unclear in the strict limits New York State has placed on working hours of medical residents (news article, Feb. 23).
Routinely working 110 hours a week, as most interns must, is not in anyone's best interest.
It results in errors, it detrimentally affects the doctor-patient relationship, and it damages the lives of the interns and residents who emerge from this process with alarmingly high rates of divorce and substance dependency.


Rodney C. Gott, 81, Former A.M.F. Chief And Board Member
Rodney C. Gott, the retired chairman of the A.M.F. company, died on Thursday at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y., at the age of 81.
He resided in nearby Bedford.
The cause of death was multiple myeloma, his family said.


Investing in Adjustable-Rate Mortgages
Adjustable-rate mortgage funds have exploded -- from only 4 at the end of 1990 to 52 today with a value of $21.9 billion.
These funds were designed to produce better yields than money market funds but with more stable share prices than Ginnie Mae funds.
While Ginnie Mae funds own pools of fixed-rate mortgages, A.R.M. funds hold adjustable-rate paper.
The theory is that because rates on the underlying mortgages vary with market rates, fewer homeowners will refinance, thus eliminating some of the prepayment risk that causes prices of Ginnie Mae funds to bounce around.


METRO DIGEST
BOMBING INQUIRY REOPENS KAHANE CASE
Amid a widening investigation into the search for more suspects and motives in the bombing of the World Trade Center, the New York City police have reopened their investigation of the assassination of Rabbi Meir Kahane, a top police official said.
Page 1.


West Knew of North Korea Nuclear Development; A North Korean Warning
North Korea warned today through its Ambassador to China that it would adopt a "strong defensive countermeasure" if Western countries imposed sanctions after its announcement this morning that it will withdraw from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
The action seems likely to create a split between North Korea and China, which this evening issued a statement that was implicitly critical of its former ally.


The Fight to Lead Russia; Lacking a Keystone of Legitimacy, Yeltsin And Foes Wage a Struggle With Few Rules
The problem in following Russia's power struggle is that the terms are so misleadingly familiar: President, Congress, legislators, Constitution, martial law.
They give the impression abroad that President Boris N. Yeltsin and a throng of ham-fisted apparatchiks are battling over some existing powers and offices in the name of competing viewpoints.


Review/Film; Did Extraterrestrials Dabble In the Business of Loggers?
The ads for "Fire in the Sky," which opened here yesterday, proclaim that it's "based on the true story." That means that it's based on the true story of five Arizona loggers who say that they saw a flying saucer one night in 1975 and that one of them, Travis Walton, was taken aboard for five days.
With more hope than conviction, the Paramount publicity material says, "Controversy still surrounds the incident."
"Fire in the Sky" is mostly about the terrible way the loggers are treated by their friends and members of the police and the print and television media during the five days their pal is gone.
The loggers are even accused of murdering the man.
To prove their truthfulness, they take lie detector tests, the results of which are said to be inconclusive.
When the missing man shows up in the middle of the night, dehydrated and chilled, at a remote service station, he says he doesn't remember what happened.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  EXPLOSIONS DEVASTATE BOMBAY  An estimated 200 people were killed and more than 1,100 injured when a series of bombs exploded in Bombay, devastating the stock exchange, Air India headquarters, two hotels and several Government offices.
No group has taken responsibility.  1  THE PEOPLE OR THE CONSTITUTION?
The complex struggle in Moscow between the President and the Congress can be distilled to a simple question: Is it the people's mandate or the Constitution that determines who rules Russia and how?
But the Soviet-era Constitution is studded with inconsistencies.  1  YELTSIN VOWS TO CALL A VOTE  After being undermined once more by the Congress of People's Deputies, President Boris N. Yeltsin said he would call a nationwide referendum on his own to decide who should rule Russia.  4  U.S.
OPPOSES FORCE IN RUSSIA  The Administration would not oppose Russia's President if he suspended Parliament or abolished the Constitution in a battle with the opposition, but military might is not a weapon Washington would support, a senior official said.  4  SALVADOR DEFENSE MINISTER QUITS  El Salvador's Defense Minister resigned days before the release of a report on human rights abuses during the civil war.
Gen.
Rene Emilio Ponce did not link his resignation directly to the report, but defended the army's war record.  1  ARMS VIOLATIONS EXPOSED  Weeks before North Korea abruptly withdrew from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, inspectors exposed the country's effort to conceal how much nuclear-bomb fuel the country has already produced.  3  U.N.
HELP SOUGHT WITH PYONGYANG  The United States asked allies today to agree to seek Security Council help in compelling North Korea to honor its commitment to open nuclear installations to inspectors.
The event, by invitation only, was one of a number planned by the White House in an effort to demonstrate that the health care overhaul being developed by Mrs.
The trustees' executive committee asked George C. Wolfe, the playwright and director of "Jelly's Last Jam," to succeed her, with the new title of producer.  1  Seeking Hitler's love letters.  16  Music: "Ariadne auf Naxos." 11  Boulez teaches and leads.  11  Dance: "Bloom's Wake." 11  Sports 28-32  Baseball: Gooden gets positive report on foot.  29  Basketball: St.
John's beats Boston College.  29  Seton Hall survives Georgetown.  29  N.Y.U. defeated in Division III tournament.  30  Knicks beat Bullets.  31  Boxing: Tracy Patterson no longer in father's shadow.  31  Column: Anderson on baseball.  29  Figure Skating: Kerrigan leads in world championships.  29  Obituaries 10  Wang Zhen, a hard-liner in Chinese Communist Party.
Rodney C. Gott, retired chairman of the A.M.F. company.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  Base closings start the shift.
Mr.
Yeltsin, surrounded again.
Let's all be health care insiders.
Letters  Russell Baker: The banking hangover.
Warren Hern: Hunted by the right, forgotten by the left.
Cynthia Arnson: Unburying El Salvador's skeletons.
Fred Cohen: The tabloid press abuses children.
Gene Russianoff: City Hall in your living room.


Allegheny Ludlum Planning A Swap to Acquire Athlone
The Allegheny Ludlum Corporation, the nation's largest producer of stainless steel, said yesterday that it planned to acquire Athlone Industries, a smaller maker of specialty metals, in a stock swap valued at $107 million.
Steel industry analysts say the deal will broaden Allegheny's product line even as rivals, like Armco Inc., are also bolstering their roles in the more lucrative specialty markets with similar deals.


DEATH OF DOCTOR REFUELS A DEBATE
Even as the family of the doctor who was shot to death on Wednesday outside a new abortion clinic here, prepared to bury him in Tennessee, both sides in the struggle over abortion in Pensacola were preparing today for the next round of a confrontation that has been going on for more than a decade.
"Nothing is really going to change," said Linda Taggart, the nurse who runs The Ladies Center, an older clinic here where the doctor, David Gunn, had been scheduled to work today.


Youth's Foreign Affairs And Next Thalia Show
MATTERS are definitely improving.
Spring will get here and there has now come news that the Thalia movie theater on West 95th Street is to reopen after being entombed for the last five years.
I recognize that nostalgia is very personal and that no one likes to learn that things were really great before they arrived on the scene, but there are still some memories worth indulging.
In this corner the old Thalia remains a more poignant field of dreams for wallowing in than either Ebbets Field or the Polo Grounds.
Lessons learned there through the 50's and into the 60's have far outlasted principles of trigonometry, French grammar and the periodic table, and other such details upon which I then thought my future depended.


TBWA to Become an Omnicon Agency Network
Ending several months of speculation, the Omnicom Group, the world's fourth-largest advertising company, said yesterday that TBWA International would become its third agency network, complementing its two giant networks, DDB Needham Worldwide and BBDO Worldwide.
The deal is expected to be completed before summer with an exchange of shares worth approximately $100 million, according to sources familiar with the agreement.


Clinton Cabinet Finally Complete


George Patterson, 81; Headed Power System
George V. Patterson, who rose from a meter reader to head the nation's largest investor-owned producer of electric power, died on Thursday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 81 and resided in nearby New Providence.
He died of complications after surgery for an aneurysm, his family said.


Shakespeare Festival Dismisses Papp's Heir
JoAnne Akalaitis, Joseph Papp's hand-picked successor as head of the New York Shakespeare Festival, has been asked to resign by the executive committee of the Festival's board.
The action effectively ends her troubled 20-month reign as artistic director of one of the nation's most important nonprofit cultural institutions and its flagship, the Public Theater.
The 11-member committee has offered Ms.
Akalaitis's post, with a new title of producer, to George C. Wolfe, the director and playwright who is best known for writing and staging the Broadway musical "Jelly's Last Jam." Committee members said that the actor Kevin Kline would also join the management team, though his proposed role was not specified.


Bridge
Superior contracts can often survive inferior play, but inferior contracts desperately need superior play.
An example of the latter state of affairs is the diagramed deal, played a week ago in Grand National Swiss Teams in Hempstead, L.I.
North and South were Fred Chang of Flushing, Queens, and Win Allegaert of Astoria, Queens, members of one of the teams that advanced to the subsequent knockout playoffs.
As he pointed out later, South should have plunged into three no-trump at his second turn, since his partner's failure to make a negative double of one heart made a spade fit improbable.
He intended to follow two spades with three no-trump, but was thwarted by circumstances and landed in five diamonds.


Teachers Are Held in Rape and Attack in 2 Cases
A teacher at a Brooklyn elementary school has been charged with raping a 12-year-old student who went to his home for tutoring, the police said.
In a separate incident, a teacher at a Bronx intermediate school was arrested yesterday on charges that he pushed a student off her chair and then kicked her.


Review/Dance; 'Blooms Wake' May Be at the Joyce, but Is It Joycean?
Things are not always what they seem.
Take the Joyce Theater and Eliot Feld's "Blooms Wake," which received its premiere there on Wednesday night during a performance by Feld Ballets/NY.
The Joyce was named not for the Irish novelist James Joyce but for the daughter of LuEsther T. Mertz, the philanthropist who was a principal benefactor of the theater and Mr.
Feld's company.
And the ballet has no direct connection with James Joyce's "Finnegans Wake" or with Leopold and Molly Bloom of his "Ulysses."


Q &amp; A
Correcting Credit Errors
How can an error in a credit bureau report be corrected?
FERNANDO OREJUELA, Elmhurst, Queens
By law, credit bureaus are required to verify any information in a credit report that is disputed by a consumer.
"Write to the credit bureau which sent the report, note the error and be as specific as possible," said D. Barry Connelly, executive vice president of Associated Credit Bureaus.
"If the item concerns the person's charge account information, the bureau will contact the credit grantor."
Credit grantors, not credit bureaus, are responsible for verifying whether the information in a file is in error or not.
If it is in error, the data have to be corrected, although this may take time, and you will be sent a new report with the changes.
If the dispute cannot be resolved, you can write a statement of up to 100 words explaining your position, which must be included in your credit report.


Langway Won't Play Rest of Season
Defenseman ROD LANGWAY, 35, announced today that he will not play for Washington for the rest of the season.
He cited limited playing time behind younger players.
Team officials said Langway's status for next season will be reviewed this summer. (AP)


200 Killed as Bombings Sweep Bombay
More than 200 people were killed and about 1,100 were wounded today as a series of powerful explosions thundered across the financial capital of India, spreading terror and panic in a city still shaken from riots between Hindus and Muslims in December and January.
The first of 13 blasts went off at 1:25 P.M. at the 29-story Bombay Stock Exchange, where the lower floors were destroyed and an estimated 50 people were killed, many of them traders, stock brokers and people crowded around food stands and tea stalls.
Explosion at Air-India Building
About two hours later, the city was further rocked by explosions at the skyscraper that houses the headquarters of Air-India, and at Government offices, a passport office, an airline office, banks, movie theaters, cars and two hotels.


West Knew of North Korea Nuclear Development
Several weeks ago, international inspectors showed North Korean officials American surveillance photographs and chemical evidence laying bare an elaborate effort to deceive the inspectors about how much nuclear-bomb fuel the country has produced.
That was their last encounter before North Korea's surprise announcement today that it would become the first country to pull out of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.


Van Slyke and Mitchell Suffer Injuries
Pittsburgh center fielder ANDY VAN SLYKE will undergo arthroscopic surgery for cartilage damage in his right knee today in Pittsburgh and will be out two to three weeks.
He may be ready for the season opener on April 6 against San Diego in Pittsburgh.
KEVIN MITCHELL of Cincinnati will be sidelined for four to six days because of a fractured bone in his left foot. (AP)


Divorce Case Has Deadly Ending at Courthouse
A state parole officer shot and killed his estranged wife in a waiting room at Brooklyn Family Court yesterday just before the start of a custody hearing, the police said.
The woman, a Federal parole and probation officer, was shot once in the head with her husband's .38-caliber service revolver, which he carried into the courthouse, despite months of warnings to the state that she was in danger and that he should not have a gun, officials said.


Producer Prices Rise 0.4%; Biggest Increase in 2 Years
Producer prices spurted four-tenths of 1 percent in February, the biggest jump in more than two years, the Labor Department reported yesterday.
The report took investors by surprise and rattled the bond and stock markets.
Financial markets watch the Producer Price Index -- which covers only the prices of domestically made goods, and excludes services and imports -- for clues to broader inflation trends and likely moves by the Federal Reserve.


India Must Put the Old Hates Aside to Survive; Fundamentalist Peril
To the Editor:
"India at the Edge" (editorial, Feb. 24) raises legitimate concerns about the impact of Hindu fundamentalism on the world's largest democracy.
The Bharatiya Janata Party's attempt to turn India into a Hindu state, if it succeeded, would backfire.


U.S. to Back Yeltsin if He Suspends Congress
In a strong signal of support for President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, a senior Administration official said today that Washington would not oppose a move by Mr.
Yeltsin to suspend his Parliament or abolish the Soviet-era Constitution to put down his political opposition.
But the official said the United States would react strongly if Mr.
Yeltsin resorted to military force to keep power in the face of action by the Congress of People's Deputies that could strip him of much of his authority.
Confidence About Yeltsin
The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the Clinton Administration did not believe that Mr.
Yeltsin would do any of these things, despite his threats to abolish the congress and impose military rule.


Building a Wall Street Empire, Again
They call it Primerica Inc., but Weill Enterprises would be more descriptive.
With Wall Street's other corporations now run by a bunch of anonymous suits -- goodbye, John Gutfreund; so long, Jim Robinson -- Sandy Weill's portly profile has loomed up as the investment world's most prominent empire builder.
He has arrived there not by the route of 1980's excess, but by 1990's economizing, at least in matters corporate.
His specialty has been taking the least glamorous financial businesses -- insurance, consumer finance, mass-market brokerage -- and running them like industrial plants, making all the necessary cutbacks and layoffs, and then some.


Review/Opera; Playing With the Comic and Mythic
The kind of pleasure provided by the Metropolitan Opera's new production of Richard Strauss's "Ariadne auf Naxos" on Thursday night was precisely the kind of pleasure the work is intended to give: the thrill of beauty encased in irony, of sincerity at the edge of self-consciousness.
It is fashionable to scorn the Met for misjudgments and miscastings, but this strongly conceived production displayed the best of the Met's musical and dramatic imagination.
The previous Met production of "Ariadne," which was 26 years old when last done in 1988 (it can be seen on Deutsche Grammophon laser disks), was a straightforward, blunt staging of this peculiar opera.
Elijah Moshinsky's beautiful new production goes closer to the spirit of the piece, in which a rich gentleman requests that two contrasting entertainments be performed simultaneously: a comic commedia dell'arte romp and a tragic opera based on the Greek myth of Ariadne.


Mr. Yeltsin, Surrounded Again
Nineteen months ago, old-guard Communists tried to halt political and economic reform in what was then the Soviet Union by surrounding Boris Yeltsin with tanks.
Now the old guard in Russia's Congress seeks to achieve the same objective by hemming in President Yeltsin with constitutional restraints that would leave him a figurehead.
Despite years of political upheaval, Russia's Soviet-era Constitution still survives.
By insisting on strict enforcement of that now-obsolescent document, Congress declares itself, not the President, the ruling authority.


On the Trail of Hitler's Love Letters
On Jan. 15, investigators converged on a bleak unpainted stucco hacienda at the fringe of the desert here to acquire what they hoped would be one of the biggest publishing discoveries to come out of World War II: several hundred letters exchanged by Adolf Hitler and his mistress, Eva Braun.
Historians have long suspected that many letters between Hitler and his mistress of more than 12 years still exist.


Enigmatic Japanese Writer Remembered
To the Editor:
Your report from Tokyo on the strange alliance of right and left to save the Imperial Army Headquarters (Feb. 17), unfortunately adds to the distortion of the writer Yukio Mishima's image.
You attempt to link Mishima's suicide with infamous political events that took place during and after World War II, apparently to create the impression that Japanese military fanatics were driven to reckless and bloody acts even as recently as 1970.
The record must be set right.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Sent Kenny Felder, outfielder, and Bobby Hughes, catcher, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Placed Alex Blackwell, forward, on the injured list.
Activated Doug Christie, guard-forward.
Football  National Football League
HOUSTON OILERS -- Re-signed Eugene Seale, linebacker, to a three-year contract.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Leonard Griffin, defensive end, to three one-year contracts.
Hockey  National Hockey League
HARTFORD WHALERS -- Sent Robert Petrovicky, center, to the Springfield Indians of the American Hockey League.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Re-signed Larry Murphy and Kjell Samuelsson, defensemen, to multiyear contracts.
College
NCAA -- Named Pamela Hixon chair of the field hockey committee; Anthony J. DiGiorgio to the Div.
I-AAA presidents commission to review student-athlete welfare, access and equity and Jack Poland to the women's soccer committee.
ARMY -- Named John Bonamego assistant football coach.
BROCKPORT STATE -- Named Rocco Salomone defensive coordinator.
LA SALLE -- Named Chares Torpey men's and women's track and cross-country coach.
WORCESTER POLY -- Named Kevin Morris football coach.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
American Express is selling its Shearson brokerage unit to Primerica, the financial company run by Sandy Weill, a prominent empire builder in a business that is dominated by a bunch of anonymous suits.  [ Page 35. ]
In a raw courtroom battle, Abraham Hirschfeld, a multimillionaire developer and perennial political candidate, beat out Steven Hoffenberg for the right to buy the ailing New York Post.  [ 1. ]


Kerrigan Doesn't Look Back at Star Rising Behind Her
If she had stopped to peek over her shoulder today, Nancy Kerrigan might have been petrified.
There, skating a technical program directly after her at the world figure skating championships, was a 15-year-old athlete of formidable presence.
Kerrigan did not turn around to watch Oksana Baiul of Ukraine.
She looked straight ahead, talking into the television camera during her post-program interview.
Kerrigan missed a great show, the indisputable birth of a star.
But Kerrigan survived the occasion, to lead Baiul and Surya Bonaly of France going into the long program on Saturday, which counts for two-thirds of the final result.


After Bombing, Garages Adding Security
Two weeks after terrorists detonated a 1,000-pound bomb in the underground parking garage of the World Trade Center, the managers of underground garages around the city and the country are taking new precautions.
Pull into the parking garage at Rockefeller Center these days and a security guard or a lot attendant will ask you to open the trunk so he can look inside.
At the Watergate hotel and office complex in Washington, guards will note your license number.
At the Embarcadero Center in San Francisco, management has quietly eliminated parking spaces near sensitive equipment and taken other steps that it is keeping secret.


USAir Link To British Air Looks Likely
Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena has recommended approval of British Airways P.L.C.'s plan to buy a 19.9 percent stake in USAir Group Inc., aviation specialists said today.
The White House has not made a final decision on the deal, they said, but was believed to be leaning toward approval.


Billy Owens Holds Court On Coleman and the Nets
Billy Owens and Derrick Coleman have more in common than having been teammates at Syracuse University.
They are close friends who are among the most talented young players in the National Basketball Association.
Future superstars.
And something else: Neither is afraid to speak his mind.
The difference is that one player, Owens, is with a team going nowhere this season.
Coleman is one of the leaders on a team with unlimited potential.
In winning their fourth straight game Thursday night, a 103-91 victory over Golden State, the Nets showed no mercy for the Warriors, who were undermanned because of a rash of injuries.


Racing Is Off At Aqueduct
Officials at Aqueduct decided yesterday to postpone the racing program today because of the approaching winter storm.
The track will be closed today, and the races will instead be run on Monday, including the Bay Shore Stakes for 3-year-old colts.
The races originally scheduled for Monday will be eliminated.


Arab-Israeli Violence Intensifies
An Israeli soldier was found shot to death and a Jewish woman in the Gaza Strip was fatally stabbed by Arabs today, the fifth and sixth Israelis to be killed this month in a spurt of violence that has shaken Israel and its occupied territories.
Israeli troops shot and killed a teen-ager today in the West Bank town of Hebron, the fifth Palestinian killed by Israelis in the last 10 days.
The attacks on Israelis have provoked retaliatory assaults on Arabs by Jewish settlers in the territories and aggressive responses by Israeli motorists and soldiers to Arab stone-throwing.
Concerned that the violence is spinning out of control, army officers warned settlers against further vigilante action against Palestinians, and the police announced that they would increase roadblocks and spot-checks of Arabs in Israel.
Meanwhile, the Israeli national police urged the tens of thousands of Israelis who are licensed to carry guns to carry them at all times for self-protection.


And Finally, Republican Is Declared a Councilman
Andrew S. Eristoff, a Republican and a 30-year-old lawyer, was declared the winner yesterday of a special election to represent the East Side of Manhattan on the New York City Council.
When he is sworn in, Mr.
Eristoff, who has taken a leave as legislative counsel to State Senator Roy M. Goodman, will become the sixth Republican on the 51-member Council.


Base Closings Start the Shift
The Pentagon's official list of 165 base closings and reductions, released yesterday, will spark intense opposition from politicians and hard-hit communities.
Indeed, senators railed against the list even before it was released.
Senator Alfonse D'Amato said not in his (Staten Island) backyard, but the Pentagon didn't listen.
Senator Dianne Feinstein of California pleaded that her state's economy shouldn't be forced to absorb more blows.
Defense Secretary Aspin did spare two California installations -- McClellan Air Force Base near Sacramento and the Monterey Presidio -- but the state will still be socked with the loss of about 30,000 jobs.


Project Announced to Curb Beach Erosion
As another major storm approached, Cuomo administration officials today announced an agreement with the Army Corps of Engineers for an emergency project to plug two breaches on the Westhampton barrier island.
The project is expected to cost as much as $12 million and take several months to complete.
As the project was being announced, trucks were dumping sand to shore up a rock jetty that helps protect undamaged beaches to the east.


U.S. Seeking U.N. Pressure to Compel North Korea to Honor Treaty
Expressing alarm at North Korean defiance, the United States sought allied agreement today on a plan to enlist the United Nations Security Council in compelling Pyongyang to honor its commitment to open nuclear installations to inspectors.
Within hours after North Korea said it was pulling out of an international treaty requiring those inspections, the State Department called on Pyongyang to withdraw that announcement immediately.
But United States officials, who suspect North Korea of hiding evidence of its efforts to build nuclear weapons, expressed little optimism that it would back down voluntarily.


Russian Sprinter Tests Positive
LYUDMILA NAROZHILENKO of Russia, the 1991 world indoor champion in the women's 60-meter hurdles, tested positive for a banned substance in Toronto and faces a four-year suspension, a source said.
The illegal substance was unknown, but it was learned that the positive test occurred Feb. 13 at Lievin, France, where Narozhilenko equaled her world record of 7.69 seconds.


Sports of The Times; Not Just A Pretty Voice
BASEBALL'S public-address announcers often project the personality of their teams.
Bob Sheppard's elegant enunciation enhances Yankee Stadium's history.
Sherm Feller's staccato reflects Fenway Park's disappointments.
In other eras, Pat Piper's growl defined Wrigley Field's frustration.
John Ramsey's resonance gilded Dodger Stadium's success.
And when Ebbets Field was alive, Tex Rickard was as ungrammatical as some of the spectators.
Told by an umpire to remind fans not to drape their jackets over the railing above the left-field wall, his Brooklyn voice blared:


SECOND PURCHASER GETS OPPORTUNITY AT NEW YORK POST
In a raw courtroom battle yesterday, Abraham Hirschfeld, a multimillionaire developer and perennial political candidate, beat out Steven Hoffenberg for the right to buy the ailing New York Post.
Mr.
Hirschfeld, an unpredictable public figure who entered the complex Post drama just weeks ago ostensibly as Mr.
Hoffenberg's partner, was chosen by a bankruptcy judge as the more financially able to acquire the newspaper.


Critic's Notebook; Boulez as Conductors' Conductor
Many words were spoken during Pierre Boulez's two days of conducting workshops at Carnegie Hall this week, but "beauty," "greatness," "transcendent" and "immortal" were not among them.
By word and example, Mr.
Boulez demonstrated to four young conductors and an audience of auditors that music is more honored by attention to its letter than by spiritual cheerleading.
In his treatise "I Am a Conductor," Charles Munch described his job as priesthood.
Mr.
Boulez, on the other hand, is a scientist of beautiful things.
To make music beautiful, he suggests, know first how it is made and second how to sweep away all confusion between musician and listener.


How to Get Ready For Retirement: Save, Save, Save
They took early retirement last year and now split their time between their comfortable home on the southwest Florida coast and cruising on their spacious boat.
He is 60, she is 55.
Did they do it through inherited wealth?
A megabucks career in investment banking?
A lottery ticket?
None of the above.
The experience of this couple, who agreed to discuss their finances if their names were not published, is simply an object lesson in the rewards of a disciplined savings program.
He had a second career after the military in state government and she had her own practice as a clinical social worker in the Washington area.


Bracing For a Blizzard


Theodore Pearson, 89, New York Bar Officer
Theodore Pearson, a lawyer and former officer of the City Bar Association in New York, died on Thursday at the Isabella Geriatric Center in Manhattan.
A resident of West Redding, Conn., he was 89.
Death was caused by complications resulting from a stroke that he suffered in September, his family said.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
3.00
3.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.95
4.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.07
3.05
4.21
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.77
5.66
7.40
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.86
6.76
8.06
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.82
7.70
8.93
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.91
5.85
6.79
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Defense Chief Lists 31 Big Bases For Closing, and Outcry Is Swift
The Clinton Administration today issued its plan to shut scores of military posts, ports and airfields, and lawmakers with bases in their districts lost no time in expressing outrage.
Defense Secretary Les Aspin, contending that base closings have not kept pace with recent troop reductions, recommended shutting 31 big military installations and shrinking or consolidating 134 other depots and smaller operations.


Harold Cleveland; U.S. Economist, 76, Aided Marshall Plan
Harold van Buren Cleveland, an international economist and author, died on Thursday at the American Hospital in Paris.
He was 76 and had homes in Paris and Manhattan.
He suffered a cerebral stroke a week earlier, said his brother, Harlan.


Answers to 'I Wonder if It's Worth Anything'
It was a day when reality ran into curiosity.
People who had long wondered whether that dusty painting, discarded piece of jewelry or misplaced objets d'art might be of value were able to find out yesterday at the annual Christie's event at which professional appraisers offered their services for free. (Jack Manning/The New York Times)


3 Officers in Elite Unit Are Arrested in Drug Case
Two New York City police officers and a New York State Police investigator have been arrested on charges that they sold almost $25,000 worth of heroin to an informant during a three-month sting operation, Federal and local law-enforcement officials announced yesterday.
The arrested officers, all members of the New York Drug Enforcement Task Force, the state's elite narcotics unit, are suspected of stealing the drugs during one of their investigations, the officials said yesterday.
Law-enforcement officials said the officers gave four ounces of the drug to a man they believed was a dealer and asked him to sell it for them.
They declined to say where the officers got the drug.


Care for Women Is Lacking, Hospital Corporation Admits
New York City's public hospitals do not provide women with fast, thorough health care, city officials conceded today, and said that changes in the hospital system are already under way to address the problems.
An internal review by the Health and Hospitals Corporation, which runs the city's 11 municipal hospitals and 6 diagnostic and treatment centers, found waits of as long as two months for prenatal care and six months for routine exams.
In addition, women are not being tested often enough for cervical cancer.


Serbian Shells Hit Muslims, Killing 20, Reports Say
Serbian forces fired artillery today into a crowd of Muslim women and children who had gathered near two British armored personnel carriers in hopes of gaining safe passage from a besieged eastern Bosnian enclave, United Nations officials and ham radio operators said.
"There are quite a few dead, and six children under 5 were seriously injured, two with their legs blown off," said Maj.
Martin Waters, speaking from the Vitez command post of the British Army battalion serving in the United Nations military aid-escort operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Stocks Sink on Worries On Inflation and Russia
Stock prices fell sharply yesterday for the second straight session as investors used signs of higher inflation and rising political instability in Russia as a reason to take profits after the market's recent surge.
The selling began early: computer-driven program trades were executed soon after the Labor Department reported that producer prices posted their biggest monthly increase in more than two years in February.


4 Easy Quarters Give The Knicks 5 in a Row
It was only a matter of time until good things happened for the Knicks tonight.
The facts were simple.
They were much deeper, much more physical and much better than the Washington Bullets.
And as the game progressed, the difference between the two teams became obvious.
Leading throughout the second half, New York cruised to its fifth consecutive victory, 109-98, at the Capital Centre.
The Knicks (41-18) have won 16 of their last 19 games, they have the best record in the Eastern Conference, and they have the second-best record in the National Basketball Association, behind the Phoenix Suns.


How They Do It; A Real Estate Investor's Adjustment: Her Fixer-Upper Becomes a B &amp; B


Region Braces For Onslaught of Blizzard
Expecting a winter storm to pound the New York region today, the authorities prepared for a blizzard posing a particular threat to areas of high elevation as well as to coastal communities.
By early this morning, snow and heavy winds had begun to batter Alabama, Georgia and Florida.
The storm is expected to begin a devastating swing along the Eastern seaboard early today.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the closing of Willowbrook State School misidentified the college that has taken over the campus.
It is the College of Staten Island, a senior college that is part of the City University of New York.


Child-Care Screening to Continue
In a reversal, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo announced today that he would preserve the state's law requiring screening of prospective child-care workers, foster parents and adoptive parents against computerized child-abuse records.
Mr.
Cuomo had sought to rescind the law to save $1 million and help balance his $32 billion budget.


India Must Put the Old Hates Aside to Survive
To the Editor:
In "India's Days of Rage" (Op-Ed, Feb. 27), Vibhuti Patel touchingly expresses her sorrow at the latest and most vicious communal riots in India.
The juxtaposition of her family's close brush with the ugly religious fanaticism (a better term than fundamentalism in this case) and her distance from it as a United States resident may not be typical.
But many of us who have made our homes in this country are affected by the same sense of loss of our dream for a genuinely secular India.
What is even more painful is that not all Indians there or abroad share our distress.


Corrections
An obituary by The Associated Press on Thursday and in some copies on Wednesday about the band leader Bob Crosby misstated his age.
He was 79, not 80.


To Be Irish, Gay and on the Outside, Once Again
The news from home in Ireland has been startling for Brendan Fay: Gay men and lesbians will be marching in at least four St.
Patrick's Day parades there this year, inspired by their embattled and far less successful brothers and sisters in New York City.
"Even in Drogheda, my hometown," Mr.
Fay said, savoring the idea of a homosexual contingent parading for the first time on the narrow streets that he emigrated from because of the community oppression he sensed in Ireland over his homosexuality.


Wolfe's Selection Is Greeted With Praise
The choice of George C. Wolfe to run the New York Shakespeare Festival got an enthusiastic reception yesterday.
Tony Kushner, the author of "Angels in America," which Mr.
Wolfe will direct on Broadway, called him "the premier theater artist of my generation." He added, "If anyone could fill Joseph Papp's shoes, he can."


Attorney General Weighs Greater Federal Role in Abortion Rights
Janet Reno, who was sworn in today as Attorney General, said she would direct Justice Department lawyers to determine whether Federal laws could be used to prevent protesters from interfering with women seeking abortions.
Ms.
Reno, who supports abortion rights, also said she would investigate whether the department could join the inquiry into the case of an abortion opponent accused of killing a doctor outside an abortion clinic in Pensacola, Fla.


Review/Music; Machine Wins Tug of War With Composer
Under auspices of the S.E.M.
Ensemble, the legendary experimental musician and composer David Tudor gave a solo performance last Saturday night at Willow Place Auditorium in Brooklyn Heights.
While Mr.
Tudor is still best known for his astounding performances of avant-garde piano and conceptual music in the 1950's and 60's, particularly his collaborations with John Cage, in recent years he has largely given up the piano and devoted himself to electronic composition.
His major contribution as a composer has been an ever-evolving technique of electronic-music performance.
On Saturday night, Mr.
Tudor introduced a new electronic system designed especially for him: the Neural Network Audio Synthesizer, a fearsomely complex apparatus that processes analog signals through something called a "neural network chip." The composer had available a variety of pre-taped segments, which he modified by the flicking of cryptic switches.
As the second half-hour segment went on, it became apparent that all was not well; Mr.
Tudor looked frustrated, and made fewer interventions toward the end.
Afterward he said: "I'd better stop; all of my inputs are down, and I don't have the slightest idea where the sounds are coming from." The machine had taken over from the composer.


India Must Put the Old Hates Aside to Survive; Hindus Want Change
To the Editor:
In "India at the Edge" (editorial, Feb. 24), you endorse India's ruling Congress Party, a party that dismissed four democratically elected state governments, espouses socialism, supports Communism, refused to recognize Israel for 40 years, imposed authoritarian rule in an emergency, courts Yasir Arafat to secure Muslim votes and was the first government in the world to ban Salman Rushdie's "Satanic Verses" to please its Muslim minority.


Cost of Military Cuts at Bases in New York Region Is Put at Over $1 Billion
The Pentagon's plan to close or shrink military bases will eliminate 12,790 military and civilian jobs in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut and could cost the region more than $1 billion in lost wages, contracts and other benefits, economists and government officials said yesterday.
In relation to the region's civilian work force of 12.7 million, the proposed cuts are small.
But that is scant consolation for an area that has lost 995,000 civilian jobs in the last four years, and that still faces big job cuts at companies ranging from banks to weapons producers.


Martha Hester, Philip Stafford
Dr. and Mrs.
James M. Hester of New York have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Martha Alison Hester and Philip Overton Stafford, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Overton E. Stafford of Richmond.
Ms.
Hester is the general manager of the Cleaver Company, a retail and catering concern in New York.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father, the former president of New York University and of the New York Botanical Garden, was the first rector of the United Nations University in Tokyo.
He is the president of the Harry Frank Guggenheim Foundation in New York.


Sabrina Sherman, Robert Harteveldt
Dr. and Mrs.
Spencer E. Sherman of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Sabrina Lynn Sherman to Robert London Harteveldt, a son of Ginger Gomprecht of Baltimore and the late Henry H. Harteveldt Jr.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sherman is a teacher at the Madison Presbyterian Day School in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her father is an associate professor of ophthalmology at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine and an attending ophthalmologist surgeon at the Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat Hospital and Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.


National Service Proposal Exploits the Poor; A New Bureaucracy
To the Editor:
Re President Clinton's "National Service -- Now" (Op-Ed, Feb. 28): We at Nellie Mae, the largest nonprofit provider of Federal student loan funds nationally, are very supportive of the President's plans for a national service program as one option for repaying student loans.


Computers Gaining In Positional Play
COMPUTERS are better at concrete tactical analysis, where their high-speed calculation counts most heavily, than at judging positional factors, which often border on the intangible.
Yet improved software is making them more at home in positional games.
The game between I.B.M.'s Deep Blue computer and the Danish grandmaster Lars Bo Hansen was an impressive example of a computer's positional play.
It was part of a Feb. 24-28 match between the computer and the Danish national team in Copenhagen.
The humans lost, 3-1.


Documentaries and the Oscars: No Cinderellas at the Ball
It's almost Spring and, in what has become a tribal ritual, accusations are again flying about the Oscar nominees for best documentary feature film.
To bypass complaints next year, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences has agreed to reform some of its procedures, but critics still take exception to the way the organization handles the selection process.
It has come to be expected that, when the documentary nominees are announced in February, the list will exclude at least one conspicuous film; indeed, some well-known movies that haven't been nominated in past years include "Shoah" (1986), a nine-and-a-half-hour film about the Holocaust; Errol Morris's "Thin Blue Line" (1988), a stylized true-crime tale of a convicted murderer in Texas, and Michael Moore's "Roger and Me" (1989), about hard times in Flint, Mich.


Tech Notes; For Those Lost at Sea, a Beacon to Rescuers
If the five skiers who were lost in Colorado last month had had an Epirb -- an emergency position indicating radio beacon -- they could have been located in a matter of minutes.
But the catch for lost skiers, backpackers and other wanderers is that at present the locating device can be used only at sea.
The reason is that it operates in conjunction with a global satellite system that uses the 406.025 megahertz frequency designated for distress signals, and the Federal Communications Commission has not approved use of the signal over land for fear of saturating the frequency.


Endangered Linoleum Alert!
Are things getting off on the wrong foot at Martha Stewart's new offices?
On March 5, Martha Stewart Living, Ms.
Stewart's bimonthly magazine, moved from the Time &amp; Life Building to 20 West 43d Street, which also houses The New Yorker.
Because she is concerned that the green linoleum floor in her new digs could become scuffed, she asked her staff not to wear shoes with black soles.


World Markets; Turning Up Roses in Tokyo
IF one looked only at the Tokyo stock market, it almost seemed as if Japan's bubble economy had returned.
The market broke out of its doldrums and climbed for six consecutive days, including a stunning 5 percent rise on Monday.
The Nikkei average of 225 selected stocks closed on Friday at 18,037.52, or 7.6 percent above the close on March 4; it was the index's first finish above 18,000 since September.
On two days during the rise, trading volume reached 800 million shares, several times the recent average.


The Executive Life; A Gadget With Status Written All Over It
IN the land of the big screen, the latest sensation is the littlest screen: a featherweight "notebook" computer -- Apple's Powerbook, if possible -- for showing off one's business savvy, job dedication and techno-knowhow, or just for showing off.
"It's another gadget," said Melissa Bachrach, executive vice president at Michael Jackson's Nation Films, "to make us into 'better' executives."


Data Update
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Jan. 93
Dec. 92
Jan. 92
New York
1,652
1,889
1,661
New Jersey
514
1,094
1,323
Connecticut
367
639
502
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.57
7.72
9.10
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.96
5.03
6.13
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.48
7.59
8.91
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.80
4.87
5.99
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.46
7.56
9.01
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.50
4.59
6.00
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.64
7.77
9.16
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.44
5.55
6.49
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.30
3.31
4.55
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.49
7.49
8.02
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Cynthia Erman, David Stern
Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Erman of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Cynthia Dee Erman to David Alan Stern, the son of Richard F. Stern of New York and Sandra Stern of Scarsdale, N.Y.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Erman, 27, is a manager at the Equitable Life Assurance Society in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Johns Hopkins University, and she received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father, a retired banquet manager of the Plaza Hotel in New York, is a commercial real-estate agent in Fort Lee, N.J.
Her mother is a special-education teacher at the Community School, a special-education school in Teaneck, N.J.


MARCH 7-13: Base Closings; Opening Shot in a New War Over Military Cutbacks
That clatter up on Capitol Hill last week was from a lot of political china dropping: military bases.
All told, under a new Pentagon plan, 31 major bases would be closed and 134 smaller installations shrunk or consolidated.
Defense Secretary Les Aspin says the closings are necessary as the Administration scales back the post-cold war military.
The closings are supposed to save $3.1 billion a year by the year 2000.


Black Francis? Frank Black? It's Still Charles Thompson
For the good of alternative rock, the songwriter and band leader Charles Thompson should change his name more often.
He called himself Black Francis in 1988 when his group, the Pixies, became the rage of Boston's college radio stations.
With snappy melody fragments buried in cool, nimble hard rock, the Pixies sometimes suggested a demolition-derby model of the Cars and turned into campus darlings across the country, though not destined for sales in the millions.
If anyone in avant-rock circles cared about coherent storytelling, however, the Pixies would have drawn fire for Black Francis's willfully obscure or trifling song lyrics.
Enigmatic titles like "Bird Dream of the Olympus Mons" and amorphous refrains like "If man is five/ Then the devil is six" got a free ride on abrasive chords and clustered drumbeats.
Ever since hard-core punk obliterated articulation and a mumbling Michael Stipe of R.E.M. triumphed with mood over meaning a decade ago, it has been gauche to demand that a song yield more than an evocative phrase or two.
All that's really needed are anxious riffs that stroke and slap as artfully as the Pixies'.
The hard truth is that tunes with stories and characters stand a better chance of avoiding the trash bin of fads.


Seeking the New Halston
Designs bearing the Halston name may parade down runways once again.
Halston Borghese Inc., which holds the Halston licenses for perfume and other items, has plans for a line of women's clothing.
"We are in the process of talking to people," about designing the line, said Michael Marten, president of Halston Borghese, adding, "It's very challenging to find somebody who can wear those shoes."


Sky Beauty Returns, But Finishes Second
Sky Beauty, who may be the East's answer to the reigning filly Eliza, ended a six-month sabbatical today and went back to the races as a 3-year-old in search of the honors that eluded her at 2.
But for the first time in her career, she was outrun by another horse when Ogden Phipps's Dispute went wire to wire to win the $200,000 Bonnie Miss Stakes by three-quarters of a length.
But shed no tears for Sky Beauty.
Before her time off, she had started five races and finished first in all five, although she was disqualified for interference and placed third in the Spinaway Stakes at Saratoga last August.
Her only real loss came at the polls: In the Eclipse Award voting for best juvenile filly, she ran second to Eliza, who had won the Breeders' Cup Juvenile Fillies while Sky Beauty was resting a wrenched ankle.
Two Turns for the First Time
So, this was the return for the filly widely considered the best in the business.
And she lived up to her billing, going a mile and one-sixteenth for the first time, taking two turns for the first time.


At the Brink of Reform, Italy Can't Seem to Avoid Being Italy
ITALY these days seems rather like that cliche of the fire department: the tormented soul in the high-rise pondering the leap from the inferno to the safety net spread below.
Down there, the crowd -- outsiders with little to lose but much to enjoy from the spectacle -- shouts "Jump!" From above, though, the view stirs fear and the instinct to go back where it may yet still be safer.
Driven by mushrooming scandal, recession and political turmoil, Italy is on the window ledge.
As much as the pressures build for a leap into far-reaching change, so too are countervailing pressures growing to stay with the known, the familiar, the comfortable.
The country's political and economic structure may be tottering, but those inside still have a lot to lose.


National Service Proposal Exploits the Poor
To the Editor:
President Clinton's call for "National Service -- Now" (Op-Ed, Feb. 28) appears to stem from noble intentions, but it is eminently unfair.
In exchange for Federal Government loans enabling students to attend college, Mr.
Clinton would have them serve as teachers, police officers, nurses or social workers for one or two years at low wages.


Some Good Reasons for Sauteing and Stir-Frying
IT was Barbara Tropp's new "China Moon Cookbook" (Workman, 1992) that started me stir-frying and sauteing again.
Recently, unless I'd been cooking something special on the weekend, after work I've tended to make simple pastas or grilled dishes.
But after looking at the recipes in her book, I set off for Chinatown in Manhattan, to get the ingredients and try some of the excellent recipes.
They tend to be rather complex, using oils and pastes and other ingredients that are either hard to find outside Chinatown or have to be homemade from another recipe in the book.
It is worth the trouble, though, for the flavors are unexpected and extraordinary.
Having said this, the recipe for pork with Chinese egg noodles with spinach and asparagus is a simplified version, and it works especially well as a one-dish supper.


How Serbia's Czar Holds Fast to Power
ISOLATION, lawlessness and brain drain plague Serbia today, along with inflation, unemployment and a United Nations economic embargo.
It would be enough to topple political leaders practically anywhere.
But not here.
President Slobodan Milosevic, a Communist who metamorphosed into a nationalist, shows no signs of losing his grip on power.


Only Scratching The Surface
To the Editor:
As a previous Grammy nominee, I applaud James R. Oestreich's critical assessment of the awards process of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Science  [ "Classical Grammys Sing the Blues," Feb. 21 ] .
Yet his appraisal only scratches the surface of the academy's biases in the other categories.


Bosnia War Crime Trial Hears Serb's Confession
Borislav Herak, a 21-year-old Serbian nationalist fighter, took the witness stand at his trial here today and said that he killed and raped dozens of Muslims in Serbian "ethnic cleansing" offensives across Bosnia and Herzegovina last year.
Mr.
Herak, a former Sarajevo textile worker, is accused of 35 killings and 16 rapes.
He attracted wide attention in November with his confession to an odyssey of brutality that he said had begun when he left the Bosnian capital in May to join the Serbian forces besieging the city.


Off the Tracks
Scenes of New York, as imagined by Red Grooms.
A preview at Grand Central Terminal, March 10.


Additional Services For the Disabled
As the executive director of an agency serving 1,200 children and adults with disabilities, I was pleased to see The New York Times concerning itself with the state of medical and dental services for this population  [ "Clinics Try to Close Gaps in Health Care for Disabled," Feb. 21 ] .
While it is important to draw public attention to difficulties experienced by persons with disabilities in obtaining medical care, it would be equally helpful to balance the equation with a fuller description of what is available.
For instance we have been operating a treatment and rehabilitation center, with an Article 28 license, for many years.
With the opening of our Max and Clara Fortunoff Outpatient Rehabilitation Center last year we have even expanded our services to include evening and Saturday hours.


RECORD BRIEF
Richard Strauss: 'Don Quixote,' 'Don Juan,' 'Till Eulenspiegel'
Steven Isserlis, cello ("Quixote"); Minnesota Orchestra conducted by Edo de Waart.
Virgin Classics VC 7 59234 2; CD.


Apartment House With a Live-in Tutorial
Little is outwardly remarkable about the white stucco apartment building in South Central Los Angeles called EEXCEL Apartments.
Yet this modest three-story building has quickly become one of the most widely observed and discussed experiments in both housing and education in recent years.
The $4-million, 46-unit apartment house opened four months ago in the predominantly Hispanic and black neighborhood not far from areas ravaged by the civil unrest last spring.
Its name is an acronym for Educational Excellence for Children with Environmental Limitations, and it could be described as a sanctuary for education in an urban setting that offers children few other incentives for learning.


Senate Judiciary and a Woman Hit It Off
President Clinton's tangled search for an Attorney General ended last week with the confirmation of Janet Reno as the first woman in the post.
At the White House and the Senate Judiciary Committee, her quick confirmation elicited what Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the panel's chairman, called "a collective sigh of relief." Ms.
Reno glided through the process without the sort of embarrassing furor that attended the committee's hearings on Clarence Thomas's appointment to the Supreme Court or on Zoe Baird's failed nomination for Attorney General.
Both episodes raised different questions about the sensitivity that American women could expect from men in Washington.


The Twin Towers: Sifting Through Mideast Politics In Ashes of World Trade Center -- The Suspects; Sharing Little But Heritage
The two suspects are close friends but have led strikingly different lives and shared little except for their religion and Palestinian heritage, those close to the two men said.
Mr.
Ayyad, a college-educated engineer, lived with his pregnant wife, mother and brothers in Maplewood, N.J., a suburb dotted with maple trees and single-family homes.
He held a steady job and helped his family assiduously, friends and relatives said.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 21 about the Mai Po bird preserve in Hong Kong misstated the top price for the three-day Hong Kong part of a trip to Hong Kong, western China and Tibet offered by Kingbird Tours.
It is $556.


Stepping Into the Role of 'Gay Everyman'
"IT'S the toughest role on Broadway," said Eric Paeper, describing his 90-minute one-man turn in "The Night Larry Kramer Kissed Me," a play in which a young man makes his way through New York's gay subculture and finds reason to hope.


Works of Two Automatist Painters in Shows in Katonah
ON view here, at the Village Library, 26 Bedford Road, and at the Station Gallery, 43 Katonah Avenue, are exhibitions by Charles Schucker and William McGee, automatists both but poles apart in every other respect.
Visiting Mr.
Schucker's show at the library is a nostalgic experience because it hangs in the premises occupied by the Katonah Gallery before it moved up to Route 22 and museumhood.
To contemplate his art, however, is akin to standing in the path of an onrushing train.
For one thing, there are the colors: firehouse red, an occasional cerise, chrome yellow and plenty of Kelly green, together with blues from ultramarine to Prussian -- all deployed on apparently unprimed duck.


WHAT'S DOING IN Antwerp
In Antwerp, the scaffolding that has obstructed the view of the glorious Gothic cathedral for a generation has finally come down.
The Bourla Theater, newly refurbished, stands ready to resume its role as the center of the city's cultural life, resplendent in purple and gold as it was 150 years ago.
The Central Station has been restored to its turn-of-the-century Belle Epoque glory.
Antwerp's year as Cultural Capital of Europe has begun, and its planners have wisely invested in restoration projects that are close to the heart of the populace.
Antwerp lies on a bend of the River Scheldt, about 50 miles from the sea.
Emperor Charles V made Antwerp Europe's principal port, and the old city around the cathedral and Grote Markt (Main Square) is well preserved, containing splendid Baroque mansions, guild halls and churches.
This is mainly a pedestrian area, and gets very lively at night.


Preludes to a Kiss Have Aftermath, Too
ANYONE who saw either the popular Broadway production or the less-successful film adaptation of "Prelude to a Kiss" should in no way be discouraged from seeing the current version of the play, which is having its Long Island premiere at Theater Three in Port Jefferson.
The director, Bradlee Bing, has taken the play, a Tony nominee in 1990, and marked it with his own creative stamp.
Craig Lucas's work is still the same whimsical tale of true love tested, but where more professional productions enhanced the script's fairy-tale aura, the Theater Three version adds a dimension by presenting ordinary people who happen to trip over a magical bump in their lives' paths.


Documentaries and the Oscars: No Cinderellas at the Ball
It's almost Spring and, in what has become a tribal ritual, accusations are again flying about the Oscar nominees for best documentary feature film.
To bypass complaints next year, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences has agreed to reform some of its procedures, but critics still take exception to the way the organization handles the selection process.
It has come to be expected that, when the documentary nominees are announced in February, the list will exclude at least one conspicuous film; indeed, some well-known movies that haven't been nominated in past years include "Shoah" (1986), a nine-and-a-half-hour film about the Holocaust; Errol Morris's "Thin Blue Line" (1988), a stylized true-crime tale of a convicted murderer in Texas, and Michael Moore's "Roger and Me" (1989), about hard times in Flint, Mich.


Looking Back


Wall Street; Weill's $53 Billion of Lagging Assets
FOR $1 billion in cash and securities, Sanford I. Weill of the Primerica Corporation gets 9,000 or so Shearson brokers, 394 Shearson offices and a snazzy Manhattan building.
He also gets 49 Shearson-brand mutual funds.
And that may be too much for even the acquisitive Mr.
Weill to process without indigestion.


In Defense of Orr In F.B.I. Inquiry
To the Sports Editor:
Joe Lapointe's column ("Eagleson, Stopped in F.B.I. Net, Blames It on Orr's Shots," The Times, Feb. 28) contains serious unfounded inferences.


Arkansas Men Keep On Track
Erick Walder led the University of Arkansas' men's track team to its 10th straight N.C.A.A. indoor track championship, adding a victory in the triple jump today to his long jump victory Friday night.
His winning triple jump, 55 feet 3 3/4 inches, was his best jump of the year by an inch.
Arkansas' 66 points more than doubled second-place Clemson's 30.
Arkansas' only other winner was Niall Bruton, who outkicked Andy Keith of Providence in the mile, 4:00.05 to 4:00.27.


BEST SELLERS: March 14, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
31
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
3
THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The fourth and concluding volume in a series about a fantasy land.
3
3
7
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $23.) The case of a woman journalist charged with killing an eminent novelist: was it self-defense or murder?
4
4
6
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a psychopathic serial killer in Washington.
5
1
NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) In Victorian-era Minnesota, a servant hopes to win an heiress's heart by helping her family win a yacht race.
6
5
28
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
7
6
8
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
8
8
4
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) A series of fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a young clerk in a Swiss patent office.
9
10
36
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
10
12
16
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
11
11
22
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
12
7
7
CLOSE COMBAT, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) In the sixth volume of the series "The Corps," there are new challenges for the Marines all over the Pacific in World War II.
13 *
1
TO GREEN ANGEL TOWER, by Tad Williams. (DAW, $25.) The third and concluding volume in the fantasy series "Memory, Sorrow and Thorn."
14
9
7
DEVIL'S WALTZ, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware investigates the strange series of illnesses that befalls a small child. (LP)
15
16
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
4
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians, scientists, therapists and patients about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
2
1
26
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
3
31
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales.
4
4
17
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
5
6
2
OFFICIAL AND CONFIDENTIAL, by Anthony Summers. (Putnam, $25.95.) The life of J. Edgar Hoover, head of the F.B.I. from 1924 to 1972.
6
5
39
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
7
9
25
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
8
8
13
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) Spirituality in everyday life.
9
5
THE WIVES OF HENRY VIII, by Antonia Fraser. (Knopf, $25.) The lives of the King's six spouses.
10 *
10
3
MARLENE DIETRICH, by Maria Riva. (Knopf, $27.50.) The legendary actress as remembered by her daughter.
11
7
4
AROUND THE CRAGGED HILL, by George F. Kennan. (Norton, $22.95.) Philosophical meditations on the world and its future.
12
11
6
MAKING THE MUMMIES DANCE, by Thomas Hoving. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The reminiscences of the former director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
13 *
22
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general.
14 *
7
LIBERATION MANAGEMENT, by Tom Peters. (Knopf, $27.50.) How American industry is reorganizing to deal with changing times.
15
13
2
TURNING POINT, by Jimmy Carter. (Times Books/Random House, $22.) The 39th President recalls his first political race.
16 *
12
8
NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
53
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $15.95.) Sexual advice for married couples.
2
2
35
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf by a legendary teacher.
3
3
3
COOKING WITH REGIS &amp; KATHIE LEE, by Regis Philbin and Kathie Lee Gifford with Barbara Albright. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips on cooking and more than 150 recipes from the talk show hosts.
4
7
EXCESS BAGGAGE, by Judith Sills. (Viking, $21.) A psychologist's counsel about conquering character traits that make one's life harder.
5
4
53
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
OPERATION SHYLOCK: A Confession, by Philip Roth. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A character named Philip Roth confronts another character named Philip Roth, and at least one of them is full of impermissible thoughts in this deeply serious, farcical novel.
THE FOURTEEN SISTERS OF EMILIO MONTEZ O'BRIEN, by Oscar Hijuelos. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) A capacious, marvelously complicated novel that is Mr.
Hijuelos's paean to femininity and to family life as it is actually lived.
THE AYE-AYE AND I: A Rescue Mission in Madagascar, by Gerald Durrell. (Arcade, $22.95.) Mr.
Durrell's 24th book, written in support of grave efforts to save a rare mammal and its environment, is nevertheless a sharply detailed romp in an enchanted landscape of unique flora and fauna.
ANNA: A Daughter's Life, by William Loizeaux. (Arcade, $19.95.) This memorial to the author's daughter, who died in infancy, tracks the process of becoming a parent and of bereavement with an honesty that has no fear of pathos or embarrassment.
FIRST, DO NO HARM, by Lisa Belkin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A reporter for The New York Times conveys a series of wrenching medical and ethical decisions and the people who make them.
ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA, by John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) The last of four volumes on American geology and the practitioners of plate tectonics explores the construction of California out of traveling rocks from all over the world in the last 100 million years, as well as its probable dissolution.
JAPANESE BY SPRING, by Ishmael Reed. (Atheneum, $20.) A funny, explosive novel about political jockeying in the university; it spares no one who has ever sought power or had an opinion.


Johnny One-Note on Health Care
To the Editor:
As a pioneering First Lady, Mrs.
Clinton has raised a lot of hopes among millions.
Thus, it is distressing to find a business-as-usual attitude permeating health care reform.
With Judith Feder coordinating initiatives at Health and Human Services, and Mrs.
Clinton in charge, are we seeing tokenism yet again?


Results Plus
SKIING Pace Beats Street Kate Pace of Canada captured her first World Cup downhill of the season yesterday, beating Picabo Street of Sun Valley, Idaho, by 26 one-hundredths of a second on the Hafjell Olympic course in Lillehammer, Norway.
Pace, who won the downhill title at last month's world Alpine ski championships in Japan, had a time of 1 minute 50.60 seconds on the 3,000-meter course.
Street, 21, started first in the race and finished on the podium for the first time in a World Cup race.
Carole Montillet of France had a career-best third place showing as the result of a 1:51.22 clocking, and Warwara Zelenskaya of Russia, who topped the first day's training here, was fourth in 1:51.37. (AP)


Jacqueline Strauss And M. H. Knoll
Jacqueline Strauss, a stockbroker, and Michael Howard Knoll, a financial-futures product manager, both at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York, were married last evening in Garden City, L.I.
Rabbi Abraham Eckstein officiated at the Garden City Hotel.


Simply Stated Italian and French Menu
CIBO, a restaurant in Branford that is a block from the beach, is proof that small -- as in space and menu -- can indeed be beautiful.
The restaurant has moved into a building formerly occupied by an Italian restaurant called Serino's (which departed for downtown New Haven and later closed).
Robert Johnson, Cibo's owner-chef, was Serino's chef (in both locations), which may be what led him back to Branford.
The dining room, which seats 35, makes the most of low-ceiling, limited space: a lacquered wood floor, wide windows with blinds and scalloped maroon valances, and sconces like tiny carriage lamps that cast a soft, romantic light.


SAVE OUR ZOO
I don't know why William Safire seems to have a chip on his shoulder about the Wildlife Conservation Society's board.
Strikes me they have done a pretty good job of preserving and nurturing this great New York institution for 97 years.
But that's his problem.
Mine is to set the record straight.


Godzilla (Clomp!) Bestrides The Ages
There's a big guy who lives with us, and when I say big I'm not kidding.
Height: 262 feet.
Weight: 50,000 tons.
Speed: 40 m.p.h. on land, 45 knots in water.
Foot size: 50 feet 6 inches.
It's the little details, like those six inches, that you've got to love.
His tail length is 354 feet, and his age is "2 million plus." Yes, he is Godzilla. (Were there any other possibilities?) And he is an endless source of interest for the 3-year-old of the household, who sees Godzilla in his dreams.
When he asked one day whether Godzilla had made God, we knew this obsession was serious.
The only thing we didn't know was why.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  CLINTON DEFENDS STAND ON RUSSIA


Let Starks Sit For 'Flagrant' Foul
To the Sports Editor:
Some may find it vulgar, even uncivilized to suggest that an "eye for an eye" be meted out as punishment for a crime.
But John Starks's flagrant foul on Kenny Anderson in the Knick-Net game on Feb. 28 provides an ideal laboratory instance in which to base a solution for this problem.


CLOSING THE FILES
I looked at the photographs of the 17 Soviet citizens that Joseph Stalin's terror police, the K.G.B., summarily shot to death because they were accused of being "counterrevolutionaries" and wondered how anyone could be as cruel as Stalin was (Endpaper/ Workbook: "Closing the Files," Feb. 21).
I thought about Hitler, Saddam Hussein, death squads in Argentina, etc.
And I thought how precious and how fragile democracy and human rights really are.


POSTINGS: International Studies Center; A Variation on Victoriana for Yale
The program called for a new home for Yale University's Center for International and Area Studies, a clearinghouse for hundreds of faculty members, students and visiting scholars -- in other words, a major institutional structure.
But the context was the gracious old residential neighborhood of Hillhouse Avenue in New Haven.
The answer devised by Edward Larrabee Barnes/John M. Y. Lee, Architects of Manhattan is a three-story building clad in a light salmon-colored brick, framed by bands of rusticated limestone.
At each corner will be suites for individual study groups; Africa, for example, in one corner, Asia in another.
What will draw members of these separate groups together are the common areas at the center of the building, particularly the lounge, with its large arched windows, which Mr.
Barnes likened to the parlor floor in an old house.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
BAD TIMES, GOOD FRIENDS
A Personal Memoir.
By Ilse-Margret Vogel. 239 pp.
San Diego:  Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $16.95. (Ages 14 and up)


Albany Hearings on TV: Should Oprah Beware?
Can't get enough of those Congressional hearings and American Enterprise Institute panel discussions on C-Span?
New York State has just the thing.
For those Sunday morning early risers who like to watch a good fight over Medicaid policy while downing that first cup of java, get ready for Cable-New York.
Starting April 4 at 8 A.M., viewers will be treated to five hours of taped coverage of legislative hearings and gubernatorial oration from the Capitol in Albany.
State government will be brought right into your living room.
Parental discretion advised.


Iguacu Falls
To the Editor: The recent articles on the Iguacu Falls and travel in Brazil ("Rediscovering Rio, With Your Eyes Open," Jan. 3) were interesting and informative.


New Deal for Grossman
Defensive end BURT GROSSMAN has renegotiated his 1993 salary and signed a two-year contract extension that will keep him with the San Diego Chargers through 1995.
The deal is worth $3 million, he said.


Where Parents Are Learning To Be Parents
They are all mothers who worry.
They worry about sending their children out to play, because too often drug warlords are exchanging bullets.
They worry about raising their sons in communities where men are an endangered species.
They worry about children who grow up believing that, because their skins are dark, they can be rappers or basketball players, but not much more.


In the Region: Connecticut; Recent Sales
Canton, Conn.  $130,000
53 Gildersleeve Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 43-year-old cape cod; hardwood floors, aluminum siding, needs work, 0.66 acre; taxes $2,548.
Stamford, Conn.  $325,000
33 Redmont Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 26-year-old colonial; large family room, new roof, skylights, 0.5 acre; taxes $4,273.
Wallingford, Conn.  $231,500
264 Highland Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; trilevel deck, 2-car attached garage, skylights, 0.66 acre; taxes $3,394.
Lewisboro, N.Y.  $140,500
226 Lakeside Drive  1-bedroom, 1-bath, duplex condominium; fireplace, deck, dining room, loft, storage room; common charges $206, taxes $3,066.
Harrison N.Y.  $1.45 million
5 Flagler Drive  5-bedroom, 7 1/2-bath, 9-year-old contemporary; den, game room, wet bar, wine cellar, whirlpool, 1.2 acres; taxes $21,815.
Port Chester, N.Y.  $280,000
60 Sylvan Road  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 37-year-old split-level ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $5,823.
OTHER AREAS Baiting Hollow, L.I.  $115,000
97 Sound Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement, 2-car garage, 0.5 acres; taxes $3,200.
Coram, L.I.  $125,000
51 Thomas Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 2-car garage; taxes $4,800.
Barnegat, N.J.  $225,000
123 Clifton Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 5-year-old contemporary; bayfront, large deck, fireplace; taxes $5,018.


Giants Aide Retires
ED CROKE, the director of media services for the New York Giants for the last 20 years, has retired at age 61 after 28 years with the club.
For the 10 years before he joined the Giants, Croke covered the team for the Gannett Westchester newspapers.
The team has not named a successor.


Saberhagen Considers Offer By Mets Only a Starting Point
The numbers have been exchanged, and so now the rhetoric is going back and forth, too.
The Mets called their contract extension offer to Bret Saberhagen "a good one." Saberhagen called the offer "a starting point, but not a good starting point." The countdown to the season suddenly sounds louder.


Karen J. Cuiffo, Nathaniel Booker
Mr. and Mrs.
Frank W. Cuiffo of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Joy Cuiffo to Nathaniel Taylor Booker, a son of Jean Booker of Pittsburgh and the late Russell E. Booker.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Cuiffo, 25, is the assistant editor of Travel Host of South Florida, a magazine in Fort Lauderdale.
She graduated from Colby College and received a master's degree in English literature from Simmons College.
Her father is the managing partner of the New York law firm of Carro, Spanbock, Kaster &amp; Cuiffo.


For Sharpton, Jail Is an Honor He Could Do Without
Jail time, regarded by many in the civil-rights movement as an occupational hazard, if not a badge of honor, has landed on the Rev.
Al Sharpton at an awkward time.
Much of the disruption is personal.
Mr.
Sharpton said breakfast is his special time with daughters Domenique, 6 years old, and Ashley, 5; he hasn't been able to share it with them since his jailing on March 5.
He said he could lose between $10,000 and $13,000 in income from perhaps 35 speaking engagements that had been scheduled this month.


Mountaineers Needn't Look Too Far North
When it comes to serious mountaineering, most of us think of the Himalayas, the Alps or some other far-off climbing mecca.
But the White Mountains of New Hampshire is a climbing spot that commands the respect of climbers everywhere and is a great place to learn mountaineering basics.
During the summer, these hills are dotted with hikers and rock climbers who bravely hang from their fingernails as they slowly climb vertical rock faces.
But it is the winter that is the most marvelous time in these mountains as ice climbers gather in search of frozen "blue water" and mountaineers come to climb the main attraction: Mount Washington.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93 -- Early Warnings, Then Snow, Leave a Stillness Over 3 States; Connecticut: Overwhelming The Video Store
Across Connecticut today, predictions of snow up to three feet shut down entire communities by noon as a state of emergency was declared and the Long Island Sound shoreline braced for severe floods at high tide.
The police in Wallingford said that a man was killed yesterday afternoon when his snowmobile veered out of control, striking a telephone pole.
They did not identify him.


How One Man's Enthusiasm Enriched the Folk-Art Realm
Folk art in America means more than it used to, thanks in part to Robert Bishop's restless eye.
While scholars have yet to fully assess his impact on the world of painters, quilters and whittlers, the appraisal has begun in "Bob Bishop: A Life in American Folk Art," an exhibition at the Museum of American Folk Art, through Sept. 12.
Bishop, a Broadway dancer who became an author, dealer, collector and educator, was named director of the folk-art museum in 1977, a post he held until his death at age 53 in 1991.
The show's overview of his controversial role in enlarging the scope of folk art -- to also encompass realistic carvings like carousel horses, and extending its period beyond World War I to the late 20th century -- is presented in the freewheeling, uncritical style Bishop favored.


STREET GUNS
My husband and I searched your "consumer guide" to handguns for even a breath of irony and found none ("Street Guns," by David C. Anderson, Feb. 14).
We're trying to get our sons, ages 10 and 15, to read the newspaper.
So Sunday I found myself hiding your magazine, slipping it in between the newspaper sections so our boys wouldn't be attracted by the cover to grab it up for private perusal in their rooms.


Corrections
Picture captions last Sunday with an article about Shearson Lehman Brothers and Merrill Lynch were reversed.
Richard Fuld, co-president of Shearson, was at the right; J. Tomilson Hill, also co-president, was at the left.


MOB TOWN
Kelly befriends people he describes in generally unsavory terms, who take him into the clubs and restaurants of the "real" Baghdad.
He seems to be using these characters to get a story, one that I have heard many times in the past 20 years from my husband's family living in Baghdad.
We need to ask, how do circumstances now compare with those prior even to Saddam's war with Iran?
Was there ever any way for women in Baghdad to protect themselves from the regime, except by offering their bodies as a price for their survival?


Andretti Tests His Limits On International Circuit
Michael Andretti's Formula One career formally begins today, and his first season figures to be very educational.
For one thing, he may be learning about his new McLaren Ford MP4/8 even as the season's first race, the South African Grand Prix,, unfolds.
Recent testing of the car in Silverstone, England, was hampered, he said, when the car's exotic electronic systems acted up.


Confronting Violence Within Jewish Families
ALTHOUGH family violence is known to cut across social and economic lines, some groups seem to think they are immune.
That, said Rabbi Gerald C. Skolnik of the Forest Hills Jewish Center in Queens, is the case with the Jewish community, which "holds on with special tightness to its myths of specialness."
Yet, he said, domestic demons lurk in Jewish homes, too, and they must be battled openly.


Clare Huchet Bishop, 94, Author of Popular Books for Children
Claire Huchet Bishop, an author of popular children's books and a leading opponent of anti-Semitism, died on Thursday at her home in Paris at the age of 94.
She had resided in Manhattan for about 50 years.
The cause of death was a hemorrhage of the aorta, said Mira Felner, a friend.


Janice Leventon, Brett H. Brown
Florence Leventon of Merrick, L.I., has announced the engagement of her daughter Janice Leslie Leventon to Brett Howard Brown, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Brown of Boca Raton, Fla.
Ms.
Leventon is also the daughter of the late Nathan Leventon.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Leventon, 31, is the vice president of merchandising for the Encore division of Yves Saint Laurent in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the State University at Albany.
Her father was a lawyer in New York.


Mutual Funds; Counting Down to April 15
WHY are so many tax-free bond fund investors receiving year-end statements reporting taxable gains and income in 1992?
Answers to this and other reader questions about taxes and fund investing may help as April 15 approaches.
Question: I bought shares in a tax-free bond fund last year and I just received a Form 1099-DIV that shows I earned taxable capital gains and income.
How can that be?


The Relentless Cult of Novelty
To the Editor:
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn proves himself (again) to be the right person to ask questions about artistic freedom and how it's being used.
He effortlessly commands the contemporary arts vocabulary.
He convincingly shows that our pursuit of novelty fails the value test.
He finds much of what we call art embarrassing, but his rather traditional thinking becomes more radical, more challenging than the content of our most daring SoHo galleries.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: The South; Fierce Winter Snowstorm And Tornadoes Hit South
Southerners know a lot about bad weather, subject as they are to periodic lashings by hurricanes and tornadoes.
But nothing in modern memory equaled the bad winter storm that pummeled and paralyzed the South over the weekend before moving on to thrash the Mid-Atlantic states and New England.
At least 25 deaths in the South were attributed to the storm, including 14 in Florida.
Millions of people were left shivering in the cold when power lines went down.


Mutual Funds; New-Fund Magic at Fidelity
SOME Fidelity investors seem to like risks.
Knowing almost nothing about the latest Fidelity entry, the Millennium Fund, they sank $72 million into it on its debut in January.
They won.
The fund shot up nearly 6 percent in its first month.
But such behavior is typical of new Fidelity growth funds, according to a study by Fidelity Insight, an independent investment newsletter based in Wellesley, Mass.


Foreign Affairs; How To Help Russia
President Clinton has fashioned a no-lose policy to go the extra mile in aid and showmanship to "save" President Yeltsin and democracy in Russia.
If it succeeds, he becomes Saint Bill.
If it fails, somebody else has to take the blame -- Congress or the allies for not coughing up enough aid, or George Bush for doing practically nothing or the big bad Russians themselves.
No President could resist such a policy.
Politically, it's foolproof.
No one will ever be able to tar him with losing Russia.
Strategically, it's probably his best shot.
He knows that Western efforts can help only at the margins.
But sometimes great historical scales are tipped by a single act of courage or one vote or a seemingly futile outstretched hand.


BENEFITS
Jackie Robinson Legacy
MONDAY -- Bill Cosby will be the host of a 20th-anniversary celebration for the Jackie Robinson Foundation, which this year is helping pay the tuitions of 115 young men and women attending 51 colleges and universities.
The black-tie evening, which starts with cocktails at 6 P.M. at the Waldorf-Astoria, will include an auction of sports memorabilia.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 290-8600.
Evening of Dvorak
MONDAY -- The 200-voice Oratorio Society of New York will perform Dvorak's dramatic oratorio "St. Ludmila" at an 8 P.M. performance at Carnegie Hall.
The performance, followed by a reception, will help raise funds for the placing of a statue of the Czech composer in Stuyvesant Square Park, near where he lived for four years a century ago.
Tickets, $50 and $40, with $10 additional for the reception, from (212) 475-2850.
Lar Lubovitch Celebration
MONDAY -- The Lar Lubovitch Dance Company will celebrate its 25th anniversary at Town Hall with friends including the Mark Morris Dance Group, the Paul Taylor Dance Company, the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, Betty Buckley, Savion Glover and Andrea Marcovicci.
Performance at 8 P.M.
Tickets, $50 and $35, from (212) 307-7171.
End of Winter Party
MONDAY -- A "Winter Meltdown Party" for young professionals, to benefit the Jewish Guild for the Blind, will be held at Villa Lulu, 235 Park Avenue, at 19th Street.
From 7 to 11 P.M. there will be a cash bar, dancing and boccie games.
Tickets, $35, at the door.
Information: (212) 769-6239.
Calling All Volunteers
TUESDAY -- The New Leadership Group of the United Hospital Fund will hold a gallery reception at the Drawing Center, 35 Wooster Street, between Broome and Grand streets, to raise funds for a campaign to recruit volunteers for hospitals and nursing homes.
Starting at 6 P.M., there will be wine, hors d'oeuvres, a raffle and jazz.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 645-2500, ext. 400.
For the Cocteau Theater
WEDNESDAY -- Now in its 22d season of presenting American and foreign classical plays, the Jean Cocteau Repertory of the Bouwerie Lane Theater on the Bowery will hold an uptown benefit for the company.
From 5 to 7:30 P.M., there will be a buffet reception at the 1271 Club of the Time &amp; Life Building, on the Avenue of the Americas at 50th Street.
Afterward, guests will see the 8 P.M. performance of "The Goodbye Girl" at the Marquis Theater.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 677-0060.
AIDS Musical Benefit
THURSDAY -- The Manhattan Center for Living, which provides nonmedical support services for 2,600 people with AIDS, cancer and other life-threatening illnesses will hold a benefit at Club 53 in the New York Hilton.
Dinner, at 6 P.M., will be followed by a musical review, "Back to Bacharach and David," with the music of Burt Bacharach and the lyrics of Hal David.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 242-7700.
Art Auction for P.S. 41
FRIDAY -- Wine, hors d'oeuvres and an auction of works by more than 100 contemporary American artists will start at 6 P.M. at the Art Directors Club, 250 Park Avenue South, at 20th Street.
The auction will benefit art and music programs at Public School 41 on 11th Street at Avenue of the Americas.
Tickets, $7, at the door.
Patrelle Opening Night
FRIDAY -- Dances Patrelle will mark its opening night and fifth anniversary with a benefit performance of the company's "Romeo and Juliet" at the Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street.
Performance at 7:30 P.M., with a reception following.
Tickets, $65, from (718) 802-0187.
Aiding a Long Tradition
SATURDAY -- For more than 75 years, the Kips Bay Boys' and Girls' Club has provided a range of services at its Bronx clubhouse.
A black-tie benefit for the organization will be held at the Racquet and Tennis Club, 370 Park Avenue, at 53d Street, starting with cocktails at 8 P.M.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 893-8600.
Space for Artists
SATURDAY -- White Columns, at 154 Christopher Street, near Greenwich Street, provides gallery space for as-yet-unrecognized artists to show their works.
A benefit cocktail party along with an auction of more than 120 works by well-known contemporary artists will be held there from 7 to 10 P.M.
Tickets, $100 or $150 a couple, from (212) 924-4212.
Promoting Black Journalists
MARCH 21 -- The Dance Theater of Harlem will perform "Giselle," one of its signature works, along with "Dougla," choreographed and designed by Geoffrey Holder, at a benefit at the New York State Theater for the Stephen H. Gayle Memorial Scholarship Fund.
The fund, named after the managing editor of Black Enterprise magazine, who died of a heart attack at 34, is administered by the New York Association of Black Journalists and provides scholarships for black high school seniors and college students who want to become journalists.
Reception at 6 P.M., performance at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $75 for reception and performance, $50 for performance alone, from (718) 522-4425.
New Operatic Talent
MARCH 21 -- Five finalists of the Metropolitan Opera National Council's eastern region auditions will sing at a benefit concert for the program, which provides study grants for new talent.
The 8:30 P.M. concert, followed by a reception, will be held at Caspary Auditorium of Rockefeller University on York Avenue at 66th Street.
Black tie.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 866-7323.
A Home Away from Home
MARCH 21 -- To ease the financial burden of out-of-town families visiting relatives with AIDS in New York, Miracle House on West 43d Street provides apartments at a modest cost.
To benefit the residence, "An Evening of Improvisational Music, Movement and Art" will be held at the Weill Recital Hall at Carnegie Hall.
A champagne reception follows the 8:30 P.M. performance.
Tickets, $75 or $150 for performance and reception, $45 for the concert alone, from (212) 206-0444, ext. 229.


Malcolm Morley, Keeping Painting Alive
Malcolm Morley has the rare distinction of having fathered not one but two movements in contemporary painting: Photo Realism and Neo-Expressionism.
Not bad for a man who never held a paintbrush until he was a teen-ager in prison and took an art class to get time out of his cell.
The art historian Robert Rosenblum considers Mr.
Morley "a volcano of psychic energy and imagination, an id that just sort of burst out of its frame." He is a painter's painter and a maverick who does not fit tidily into categories; consequently, his public reputation has never quite caught up with the art world's esteem.
Mr.
Morley says he "played underground" much longer than he needed to.
"I got elected. I didn't run for office. I don't believe that artists should run for the office of artist. They should be elected -- or go home."


Westchester Guide
CLAIRE BLOOM AT SUNY
Claire Bloom will give a dramatic reading of "The Turn of the Screw" by Henry James at 8 P.M.
Friday in Theater D of the Performing Arts Center of the State University of New York at Purchase.


Hope S. Nichols, David J. Prockop
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Nichols 3d of Katonah, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Hope Sharp Nichols to David John Prockop, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Darwin Prockop of Philadelphia.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Nichols, 25, graduated from Radcliffe College, where she is a development officer.
Her father is a vice president at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.


At Work; More Than Labor Amity at A.T.&amp; T.
WHEN A.T.&amp; T. and its unions settled their differences and signed a contract last year, the talk afterward was of mutual interests, shared goals and cooperation in service of defeating a common enemy, global competition.
Conspicuously absent was the rowdy take-it-easy-but-take-it language associated in the public's imagination with collective bargaining.
There was amity, but of a sort that tends to fade.
Except this year, it didn't.
Last week, 1,000 members of the A.T.&amp; T. work force, roughly divided between management and two A.T.&amp; T. unions, the Communications Workers of America and the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, gathered at a conference center in the New Jersey wilderness.
The object: to prepare for the "Workplace of the Future," a company-union initiative instigated by a clause in the 1992 contract calling for labor participation in business strategy decisions.


In Paperback Too
To the Editor:
The review of "American Populism: A Social History, 1877-1898," by Robert C. McMath Jr. (In Short, Feb. 21), mentions only that it was published in hardcover by Hill &amp; Wang for $30.
We at Hill &amp; Wang would like to note that this book was simultaneously published in paperback for $10.95.
ELIZABETH SHREVE New York


Steven T. Kargman, Ruth E. Horowitz
Ruth Ellen Horowitz, a vice president in the equity capital group at Lehman Brothers, the investment bank, was married last evening to Steven Todd Kargman, an associate at the law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, both in New York.
Rabbi Mordechai Waxman performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Great Neck, L.I.
Mrs.
Kargman, 31, graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gedale B. Horowitz of Great Neck.
The bride's father is a senior managing director of Salomon Brothers, the New York investment bank, and an executive vice president of Salomon Inc., its parent company.


Miss Edelbrock, William V. Fogg
June wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Edelbrock of Scottsbluff, Neb., for their daughter Anna-Karin Edelbrock and William Viles Fogg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Blaine V. Fogg of New York.
Miss Edelbrock, 27, is an assistant editor at Woman's Day magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Nebraska .
Her father is a retired building contractor in Scottsbluff.
Her mother, Katherine Edelbrock, teaches the sixth grade at the Bluffs Middle School in Scottsbluff.


The Last Days of Castro's Cuba
My flight to Cuba checks in at 5:30 A.M. at an obscure desk marked Haiti Transair at Miami International, downstairs and away from the other ticket counters.
It's a three-hour wait for a 30-minute charter flight.
Because the 44-pound weight limit on baggage doesn't include medicine, all about me are people holding clear plastic bags filled with antibiotics, aspirin, vitamins, milk of magnesia and first-aid supplies.
I feel I'm about to go on a disaster-relief mission.
On the plane, the elderly couple sitting next to me come from Matanzas, a city 63 miles east of Havana.
They have been visiting family in Tampa and have brought on board so many plastic bags that they have to struggle to close the overhead bin.
They have been in Florida for two months and they want to go home.


Patterson Keeps Title by Decision
The first time Tracy Patterson defended his World Boxing Council superbantamweight championship, he wound up with a draw.
Yesterday, in his second defense, he wound up in a brawl.
Patterson retained his 122-pound title with a unanimous decision over Jesse Benavides at Marist College's McCann Recreation Center at Poughkeepsie, N.Y., but he had to rally for the 12-round victory.


Q and A
Cable TV Installation Question: My co-op is being rewired with fiber optic cable.
The board of directors will let the wire be brought into each apartment only through the kitchen dumbwaiter shaft.
The cable is currently brought in through a window, the entry point closest to the TV set.
To use the dumbwaiter, the installer would have to drill at least four holes in the walls.


March Medicine: The Injured Try to Play
They were not supposed to look so good -- not in March, not when basketball games were going on.
But there they were earlier this month, watching from the benches in their sweaters and slacks or suits and ties.
Now, however, Grant Hill of Duke, Alan Henderson of Indiana and Charlie Ward of Florida State are the three most prominent college players trying to return from injuries as the conclusion of the season bears down.
The expected success of those players' teams in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, which begins Thursday afternoon, will depend in part on a complex series of decisions and responses by doctors, trainers, coaches, the injured athletes and the substitutes who suddenly received a chance earlier this season.


New &amp; Noteworthy
REINVENTING GOVERNMENT: How the Entrepreneurial Spirit Is Transforming the Public Sector, by David Osborne and Ted Gaebler. (Plume, $13.) The authors argue for returning government power to citizens by increasing private initiatives and minimizing bureaucracy.
Their thinking has clearly had an effect: last year our reviewer, Martin Tolchin, called "Reinventing Government" a "lively, creative and important book that has already found its way onto the night stands of Presidential candidates like Bill Clinton."
OUTERBRIDGE REACH, by Robert Stone. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Like many momentous journeys, the voyage at the center of this novel is both brave and foolhardy: Owen Browne, a middle-aged advertising copywriter for a yacht manufacturer, agrees to help promote his company's products by becoming a solo contestant in a round-the-world race.
Both his life and his marriage are ultimately at stake.
"Robert Stone's blend of heroic aspiration and mordantly deflationary irony results in something like tragicomedy -- maybe even something like Shakespeare, our best tragic comedian," William H. Pritchard said here last year.
"But whatever you call it, 'Outerbridge Reach' seems to me a triumph -- a beautifully and painstakingly composed piece of literary art."


Director Wants Long Pants
The film is based on a 1900 short story by Arthur Schnitzler.
The director is Martin von Haselberg, a performance artist who, with Brian Routh, makes up the Kipper Kids.
Yet, "Blind Geronimo and His Brother," Mr. von Haselberg's 30-minute film, which he made last year while a student at the American Film Institute, has been getting a warm reception in Hollywood.
The movie -- a touching fable about two Tyrolean brothers, one of whom was blinded by the other as a child -- has been screened at Disney, Fox, MGM, TriStar and Paramount.
It will probably be shown at film festivals.


Russia 'Democrats' Losing Ground to 'Communists'
President Boris N. Yeltsin was not the only one to leave the Congress of People's Deputies in disgust this week.
Today, Viktor P. Mironov, a 43-year-old deputy who took office three years ago on the first wave of Russian democracy, went up to a microphone and announced that he was handing in his mandate as a deputy to protest the "return of the Communist dictatorship."
"Enough is enough," he said later outside the coatroom of the Grand Kremlin Palace, explaining his solitary walkout.
"I don't want to be an extra in this spectacle, with 700 Communists running the show. For all intents and purposes, this Congress was a coup d'etat."


Golan Settlers' Hopes for Future Fade
Twenty-five years ago, young and brimming with adventure, Ruth Baruch decided to change her life and move to this brand-new kibbutz, founded soon after Israel captured the Golan Heights from Syria in the 1967 war.
"It was kind of a mission," she said.
"Life is hard here. But it's very beautiful. We love it. For us it's home."


MARCH 7-13: Rodney King Testifies; From Grainy Video Image To Flesh and Blood
He was whisked each morning into a parking garage in the embrace of a Federal marshal in a bullet-proof vest.
He disappeared at the end of the day into the secrecy in which he has spent the past two years.
On the witness stand for a day and a half, Rodney G. King, the most famous recluse in Los Angeles today, broke a long silence with a gripping account of his fear and pain during the videotaped police beating now infamous around the world.


Syracuse Going Nowhere, Except Big East Final
And now for this weather observation from Jim Boeheim, the Syracuse University basketball coach: "People, it's a little snow," he said.
"Don't ever move to Syracuse. You people are unbelievable."
He can make jokes now.
Let the other coaches and teams worry about where March, and fate, will take them.
An awkward and sometimes difficult season at Syracuse is ending simply, if prematurely.
While others wait for this evening to learn their seeds and opponents in the national collegiate tournament, the Orangemen can play for themselves and one another.


POSTINGS: Establishing Guidelines; The Redevelopment Of City-Owned Sites
In the hope of shaping future redevelopment in 24 areas where New York City owns large amounts of vacant land or condemned and foreclosed buildings, the City Planning Department is developing guidelines for the disposition of these properties.
The first eight plans cover Long Pond/Butler Manor and West Poillon Woods on Staten Island; south central Harlem; northern Bathgate, Highbridge and Crotona Park East-Crotona Park South in the Bronx; East New York/New Lots in Brooklyn and Edgemere, Queens.


Hands Off My Social Security
To the Editor:
Social Security is an insurance policy and a solemn contract between government and the people, one to be broken only at the peril of the elected officials who break it.


SAVE OUR ZOO
I am a guide at what was formerly the Central Park Zoo.
William Safire's comments on the change in nomenclature of our metropolitan-area zoos reflect my feelings and those of most of my colleagues (On Language: "Save Our Zoo From Language Predators," Feb. 21).
The change smacks of elitist concern about image.
We have been asked for ideas to change our title from zoo guide to something more in keeping with our new "park." I really prefer my present title; it's short and to the point.
Many of us feel that terms like "docent" or "friend" seem snobbish.


An Enterprise Zone for the Imagination
Some say that Eric Owen Moss comes out of Frank Gehry.
Others insist that Mr.
Moss's true architectural forebear is the Venetian modernist Carlo Scarpa.
Actually, the work of this young California architect springs right out of modern life.
And the most penetrating angle into his work comes from the Harvard economist (now Labor Secretary) Robert Reich and his concept of the "symbolic analyst."
As Mr.
Reich describes them in his book "The Work of Nations," symbolic analysts are the elite of the nation's work force, the professionals best poised to profit from the information economy.
"Symbolic analysts solve, identify and broker problems by manipulating symbols," Mr.
Reich writes.
"They simplify reality into abstract images that can be rearranged, juggled, experimented with, communicated to other specialists and then, eventually, transformed back into reality. The manipulations are done with analytic tools, sharpened by experience."


No Headline
I have some white boots; they look like astronaut boots.
I'll wear those to the church and carry my heels.
Everyone's saying this is a day I will never truly forget.
CATHY PRENDERGAST, before her blizzard-bound wedding in Westchester County.  [ 37:1. ]


Radio Hula: Gidget Goes SoHo
THE last time Hawaiiana was really hot in New York was just after World War II.
Grass skirts and ukuleles had special meaning for G.I.'s who had been stationed in the islands or who had passed through on their way to or from the Far East.
There was a popular band leader in the city named Johnny Pineapple.
Hula dancing was a nightclub staple, and Hawaiian iconography inspired lamps and wall hangings of kitschy magnificence.
Well, aloha.
Hawaiiana is hip again.
An exotic store in SoHo, Radio Hula, is thriving on the sale of everything Hawaiian, from island music and Kona coffee to leis and hula lessons.
Entering the store, with its yellow and brown decor and sweet aroma, is like walking into a field of pineapples.


Clinton Defends Backing Yeltsin As Elected Chief
President Clinton today rejected criticism that his policy toward Russia was too dependent on the survival of Boris N. Yeltsin, but he declined to say how he would react if the Russian President moved to suspend Parliament or resorted to military force.
In his most detailed comments on the beleaguered Russian leader, Mr.
Clinton also asserted that the Group of Seven major industrialized nations should play a more aggressive role in helping Mr.
Yeltsin.
He said countries with a stake in the future of Russia had given him "an inadequate response to date."


Throwing Curve At Constitution
To the Sports Editor:
All this talk about the restructure of baseball is nonsense.


Jennings Finds Nice Dreams Finish 3d
Lynn Jennings had a great dream.
In one year, she would win world track and field championships indoors and outdoors plus the world cross-country title outdoors.
It may happen, but not this year.
Tonight, in the world indoor championships, Yvonne Murray, a 28-year-old Briton, won the women's 3,000-meter title.
The 32-year-old Jennings, from Newmarket, N.H., took the bronze medal, as she did in the Olympic 10,000 meters last year.


In Westport, 'Merchant of Venice'
Following a no-frills revue earlier this season, aptly called "No Frills," the Fairfield County Stage Company in Westport is giving in to no-frills Shakespeare.
It is inaptly called "The Merchant of Venice."
One understands that Christopher Cull, the director but not the master of the conceit, was looking to make Shakespeare "getable," especially to students in the Fairfield County middle and high schools that are participating in the theater company's educational outreach program.


Johnny One-Note on Health Care
To the Editor:
Regarding "Hillary Clinton's Potent Brain Trust on Health Reform" (Feb. 28), the membership of the Jackson Hole Group is a real eye-opener.
I think many people believed this group to be an objective, broad-based collection of health care "reform" experts.


A Yonkers School Earns a Blue Ribbon
JOANNE CHIVINSKI held a bright blue and yellow sack in each hand as she knelt on the classroom rug.
"O.K., here goes," she said to the children pressed around her.
Tossing the sacks smartly into the air, she caught one and announced to her admiring audience, "That's how you juggle."
Turning to a visitor, she exclaimed: "What a great idea! You never think of the circus as a career, now, do you?" Pinned to the easel behind her was a poster headed, "Circus Jobs," and underneath was a list that included clowns, clean-up crew, ushers and veterinarians.


It Was, Indeed, Blizzard of '93
The Blizzard of 1993 became a blizzard in the metropolitan region during a three-hour stretch at midday yesterday when visibility dropped below a quarter of a mile from falling and blowing snow and winds blew at least 35 miles an hour.


Teams Familiar With the Long and the Short of It
Tony La Russa stands prepared to do his part to shorten the length of games, but don't suggest that he and his team, the Oakland Athletics, have more to contribute than others.
"I get real bothered when people point at the A's," their manager said, discussing the new effort to speed up games.
"Be fair. Look at our games and say this is where we're stalling. I'll challenge them to show me."


Residents Don't Want Expressway Noise
I have great concern over the negative tone that was conveyed in "Expressway Noise Walls Disputed"  [ Feb. 14 ] , which appeared to be written from the viewpoint of an extremely small sampling of displeased individuals.
In my neighborhood, the State Transportation Department is looking to widen the roadbed of the Long Island Expressway, from 104 feet to 156 feet.
As the owner of a home backing up to the L.I.E., I can't help but worry about the unmerciful increase in decibels with which we will be bombarded.


Words at Work


Serbian President Is to Press Commander on Talks
In a test of his influence over Bosnian Serbs, the President of Serbia said he would try to insure that their top military commander attended the new round of peace talks, scheduled to begin here on Tuesday, diplomats said today.
At talks arranged in Paris by President Francois Mitterrand, President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia told Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen, the mediators for the talks, that he would do his best to persuade Gen.
Ratko Mladic to take part in the negotiations.


A Rape Case Worries Advocates for the Retarded
WHEN a mentally retarded young woman, promised a date with a high school athlete, allowed several young men in a basement of a Glen Ridge, N.J., home to penetrate her vagina with a broom handle, a piece of wood doweling and, possibly, a baseball bat, the cozy ideal of the mentally retarded moving quietly into the mainstream was tested to the limit.
So was the political agenda of organizations who work on their behalf.
Their reaction, now that a jury is deliberating over a verdict for four young men charged with aggravated sexual assault, has been a strange silence.
Though the New Jersey chapter of the National Organization for Women has posted two observers in the courtroom throughout the months-long trial and other women's groups are poised for protest if the four men are acquitted, no similar vigilance has sprung from advocates for the mentally disabled.


The Twin Towers: Sifting Through Mideast Politics In Ashes of World Trade Center -- The Mosque; A Multitude of Factions
The suspects are a part of the world of Arab immigrants, clustered in their enclaves in Jersey City and Brooklyn.
It is a world full of immigrants striving for a better life and the American dream, which also harbors a multitude of obscure militant factions that vie with one another over money, engage in internecine ideological battles and occasionally fall into violence.
Many of the militants, say Arabs who live in this world, congregate around a few mosques and Islamic centers, including the Al-Salam mosque in Jersey City, where Mr.
Salameh and Mr.
Ayyad worshiped.


Spared 2 Base Closings, Californians Lobby On
California's elected leaders claimed a partial victory this weekend in their effort to save military bases in the state and began a fierce second-round lobbying battle to spare at least one other base here from closing.
Two California bases were granted a reprieve on Friday by Defense Secretary Les Aspin, at least for the time being: the huge McClellan Air Force Base in Sacramento and the Presidio of Monterey, home to the Army's esteemed language school.
Mr.
Aspin has also recommended trimming, but not closing, March Air Force Base in Riverside County.


Long Island Journal
Yucks, Good and Bad
HOW desperate are Long Islanders to have a good laugh?
Jim Gossin of Farmingville sought one out carrying his portable oxygen tank.
Not even emphysema was going to keep Mr.
Gossin from the first meeting of a Long Island laughter support group.
After nine Amy Fisher jokes, Mr.
Gossin was sucking on the oxygen.
"Did you hear the one about Betty Jo?" a woman shouted out.


Fear Is Making Anti-Gun Forces A Better Match for the N.R.A.
IN the tightly wound, more-than-slightly surreal world of guns and gun-control politics, an evenly matched battle is shaping up: while public and legislative opinion is shifting, sometimes dramatically, in favor of tighter firearms restrictions, the forces challenging that trend -- primarily, the National Rifle Association of America -- are growing, just as dramatically, in size and determination.
The two seem irreconcilable.
But they are both symptoms of the same contagion of gun-related crime that has spread ever more rapidly from city to split-level suburb to farm town.
Gone are the days when gun control was a topic of dispassionate discussion, led by people ignorant of mayhem.
Now, the advocates cleave rather neatly into two groups: people who are terrified of the violence and want fewer guns aimed at them, and people who are terrified of the violence and want more guns to defend themselves.


Holly Golightly: Lopsided Romantic
To the Editor:
I had the privilege of producing "Breakfast at Tiffany's," with my associate Richard Shepherd.
I was grateful for the tribute by Janet Maslin to its star  [ "Audrey Hepburn: Farewell to the Swan," Jan. 31 ] .
I thought certain facts about casting the role of Holly Golightly might add to the record.


Measuring Makes Laying Tiles Easier
COVERING a kitchen or bathroom countertop with ceramic tile is fairly easy, although planning and patience are required.
Tile adheres readily to virtually any stable surface that accepts tile adhesive and resists moisture, including plastic laminates like Formica.
All materials, including rented tools for cutting tile, are available.
Choose vitreous tile, which is the least porous variety.
To minimize the need to cut tiles, combine selecting them with planning their layout and preparing the countertop surface.
Making a scale drawing of the countertop on graph paper and superimposing trial layouts on tracing paper over it, can help.
Remember to include spacing between the tiles for grout.


Easing Bias Against Girls in the Classroom
TWENTY years after the passage of Federal legislation meant to guarantee girls equal access to sports and educational opportunities in school, educators in the county say girls are still being shortchanged in the classroom.
Districts in Westchester, mirroring a nationwide trend, are taking a close look at sex bias and how it is reflected in teacher-student relationships, in the curriculum and among students themselves.


A Prosperous 'Saturday Night' Grows Tame
Like household pets, television formulas age far more rapidly than we mere mortals.
So it's hardly surprising that NBC's "Saturday Night Live," now in the middle of its 18th season, is showing the electronic equivalent of wrinkles.
It's still lively, and perhaps more popular than ever, but no longer the maverick it pretends to be.
In becoming an establishment darling -- to the point where George Bush invited one of its stars, Dana Carvey, to the White House to do his wicked George Bush impersonation -- the show that still prefers to think of itself as anti-establishment finds itself a linchpin in the big business of pop entertainment.
Just one spinoff, the 1991 movie "Wayne's World," grossed more than $160 million in a year.
A sequel is in production.


Arthur Mitchell Does Go Home Again
This is a time of homecomings for Arthur Mitchell and the Dance Theater of Harlem.
It was 29 years ago that Mr.
Mitchell danced the dazzling, quicksilver Puck in George Balanchine's "Midsummer Night's Dream," performed by New York City Ballet as the opening event at the State Theater.
Now Mr.
Mitchell, one of the few black dancers to reach stardom in American ballet, is returning to the State Theater as the director of an internationally celebrated troupe, renowned for the freshness, integrity and exuberance of its classical dancing -- and for the fact that most of its 49 dancers are black.
Mr.
Mitchell, whose company begins a two-week season at the State Theater on Tuesday, had gone home to Harlem to found a school and company in 1968 and, as committed as ever, is now expanding Dance Theater's headquarters on West 152d Street.
In September, the 58-year-old company director and his dancers traveled to South Africa to perform and teach in Johannesburg and neighboring townships, a return of sorts to a spiritual home.
There is, however, a special personal satisfaction for Mr.
Mitchell in the troupe's engagement at the State Theater.
"It's coming full circle, in a sense," Mr.
Mitchell said recently.
"This is the first time the company is dancing at the State Theater, and it's right before City Ballet's celebration of Balanchine. I'm coming back home."


MARCH 7-13: Japan and Mexico; It's Our Ruling Party, And We'll Cry if We Want to
Japan and Mexico, two of the world's most economically dynamic countries and each long dominated by a single party, last week suffered embarrassments born of the riches that make their political systems work for the well-connected.
In Japan, Shin Kanemaru, until recently the kingmaker of the ruling Liberal Democrats, suffered disgrace on top of tax evasion charges when the authorities went through his home and offices and found hundreds of pounds of gold bars and $50 million in cash and securities.
The stash is widely assumed to have been ill-gotten, and meant as grease for Mr.
Kanemaru to apply to the wheels of Japanese politics.
Even jaded Japanese were amazed at just how much political lubrication is evidently required nowadays.


Memphis to Honor Dr. King
On the night of April 4, 1968, the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. stepped onto a balcony at the Lorraine Motel in Memphis and was fatally shot by James Earl Ray.
Now, 25 years later, the city of Memphis is celebrating Dr.
King's life and work with a weekend of activities commemorating the anniversary of his death.
The event, called March On, is being coordinated by the National Civil Rights Museum, situated at the old Lorraine Motel.
The activities will include exhibits and discussions of the civil rights movement and current concerns of minorities.


NOTES
Deborah Norville is coy about whether she's writing a book, but people at two publishing houses say a proposal is circulating for a novel by the former "Today" show co-anchor, now a correspondent for "Street Stories" on CBS.
"I don't know," Ms.
Norville said when asked if such a proposal existed.
"But I have been doing a lot of writing for myself."


Apartment House With a Live-in Tutorial
Little is outwardly remarkable about the white stucco apartment building in South Central Los Angeles called EEXCEL Apartments.
Yet this modest three-story building has quickly become one of the most widely observed and discussed experiments in both housing and education in recent years.
The $4-million, 46-unit apartment house opened four months ago in the predominantly Hispanic and black neighborhood not far from areas ravaged by the civil unrest last spring.
Its name is an acronym for Educational Excellence for Children with Environmental Limitations, and it could be described as a sanctuary for education in an urban setting that offers children few other incentives for learning.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption in this section last Sunday about the World Trade Center bombing described a police officer's actions incorrectly.
He was inspecting the blast site, not rescuing victims.


Hired Gun


Some Good Reasons for Sauteing and Stir-Frying
IT was Barbara Tropp's new "China Moon Cookbook" (Workman, 1992) that started me stir-frying and sauteing again.
Recently, unless I'd been cooking something special on the weekend, after work I've tended to make simple pastas or grilled dishes.
But after looking at the recipes in her book, I set off for Chinatown in Manhattan, to get the ingredients and try some of the excellent recipes.
They tend to be rather complex, using oils and pastes and other ingredients that are either hard to find outside Chinatown or have to be homemade from another recipe in the book.
It is worth the trouble, though, for the flavors are unexpected and extraordinary.
Having said this, the recipe for pork with Chinese egg noodles with spinach and asparagus is a simplified version, and it works especially well as a one-dish supper.


It's Time to Get Serious, and Outdoors
Spring is just a week away, so don't forget to plant your saguaro and build your bat house.
Just kidding, though bat-house-building instructions for luring insect-eating bats to your garden would be worth a future column.
In the meantime, finish ordering any seeds or plants that you can't live without this year.
Get a good sturdy notebook, and keep a record of weather conditions and how long it takes for your seeds to germinate and plants to grow.


The Executive Computer; Managing a Company's Software Is Getting More Complex
The person who manages personal computers within a company may have 100 machines to worry about, but that responsibility pales in contrast to the task of managing the many hundreds of software applications that reside in those computers.
Anyone who uses a single PC knows the headaches that even one piece of software can cause when it misbehaves, or when it behaves well but resists the user's efforts to learn how to use it effectively.
Imagine the challenges for a company like Great Western Bank of Chatsworth, Calif., which has several thousand computers, each connected to a network and each loaded with an assortment of programs.


The Unorthodox Behemoth of Law Firms
WHEN the managing partners of most of the nation's top law firms gathered recently, the conversation turned to overseas expansion and the hot competition for multinational clients.
"Someone said, 'You know, Baker &amp; McKenzie did it right,' " recalled the lawyers' host, Steven Brill, editor of The American Lawyer.
"And no one disagreed."
For many at the meeting, it was a case of bowing to the weight of the evidence, even if it was against their instincts.
Skeptics have long derided Baker &amp; McKenzie's unusual strategy of knitting lawyers in many countries into a confederation of offices, each of which keeps most of what it earns rather than sending it on to headquarters.
Likening Baker to a legendary fast-food franchisor, some call the firm McLaw or McFirm.


Struggles Sharpen Seton Hall's Walker
Carol Walker's voice rose with a mixture of pride and emotion as she recalled how her younger son had overcome obstacles to become a high school basketball all-American and then a star for Seton Hall.
Indeed, Jerry Walker's life, she said, is filled with lessons: not only for him, about not giving up, but also for parents, about not allowing the system to gobble up your child.


Focus: Los Angeles; Apartment House With a Live-in Tutorial
Little is outwardly remarkable about the white stucco apartment building in South Central Los Angeles called EEXCEL Apartments.
Yet this modest three-story building has quickly become one of the most widely observed and discussed experiments in both housing and education in recent years.
The $4-million, 46-unit apartment house opened four months ago in the predominantly Hispanic and black neighborhood not far from areas ravaged by the civil unrest last spring.
Its name is an acronym for Educational Excellence for Children with Environmental Limitations, and it could be described as a sanctuary for education in an urban setting that offers children few other incentives for learning.


Science Fiction
It is becoming difficult these days to find a science fiction story that does not in some way confront the question of godhood.
Robert Silverberg's KINGDOMS OF THE WALL (Spectra/Bantam, $22.95) is a parable about the danger of seeking more intimate contact with the powers that control the universe.
On a distant planet a race of people who superficially resemble humans lives at the foot of a mountain so steep and so tall that it is known as the Wall.
Their myths tell of a Prometheus-like First Climber who ascended the Wall and brought back useful knowledge from the gods who live at the summit.
In honor of this First Climber, the people periodically choose 40 of their best and brightest as Pilgrims, who try to climb the Wall and parley with the gods.
Most fail to return; those who do are invariably mad, and their reports of what they have seen at the summit make little sense.
The band of Pilgrims to whom Mr.
Silverberg directs our attention has better luck.
The Wall turns out to be an entire range of mountains offering trial after trial as horrific as any observered by Dante in the Inferno.
Many former Pilgrims have ended up in the clutches of monsters capable of stealing one's body, mind and will.
The author makes some attempt to distinguish between these monsters, and there are hints that each Pilgrim's fate is determined by his or her character.
But since the only Pilgrims we get to know well are those who escape the monsters, the fate of the less fortunate seems more arbitrary than ordained.
Higher up the Wall, the obstacles become more subtle; some regions are so pleasant that the Pilgrims are tempted to settle down and forget their mission.
What awaits those who persevere is a revelation that calls into question everything they believe (although it will hardly come as a surprise to the seasoned reader of science fiction).


Social Security
To the Editor:
Loren Dunton ("I Get Social Security. I'll Sacrifice, Too." Feb. 28.) is among the many who reiterate the fiction that Social Security recipients recover their contributions, plus interest, in four to six years.


National Service Proposal Exploits the Poor; Big Brother Wants You
To the Editor:
Kim Grose's vision of extending President Clinton's national service idea to children (Op-Ed, Feb. 23) is frightening for what it ignores: the issue of compulsion.
The Indiana students who care for wildlife, the Harlem children who field a "peace team," do so out of their own concern.


From Lost Ships, Golden Bounty
WOW!
Coins from a shipwreck!
What child walking down a beach hasn't thought of pirate gold washing up in the breakers and lying in the sand, waiting to be discovered.
Actually, in some places that does happen.
The Whydah (pronounced WID-ah), a slave ship that sank in New England waters in 1717, gave up its coins winter after winter on the beaches of Cape Cod.
And reports come out of Florida of bits of eight that are found among the seaweed along the high tide mark.


Pledging Florida More Help, Clinton Offers Hope on Base
Seeking to head off an outcry from South Florida over proposed closings of military bases, President Clinton said today that he would intensify efforts to aid communities that were devastated by Hurricane Andrew, including keeping the Homestead Air Force Base operating on a reduced scale.
But he was less hopeful for Connecticut, saying for the first time that it was an "open question" whether he could ultimately support construction of another Seawolf attack submarine.
He had promised to support the program in last year's campaign.


Wall Street; Hitting the Decade Mark, an Option Stays Frisky
THE 10th anniversary of the first, and still the most active, option on the broad stock market was celebrated last week in Chicago, where options on the Standard &amp; Poor's 100 -- or OEX to Wall Street traders -- began trading on March 11, 1983.
The OEX, which includes the 100 largest stocks in the S.&amp;P. 500, appeals most to individual investors, although the Chicago Board Options Exchange says institutional interest has grown in recent years.
Last Wednesday, a trader expecting lower prices could have bought a put option on the index, expiring this week, for $1.50.
That option ended the week at $4.125.
Indeed, a speculator who gets the market right can see an options price double or triple in a day.
One who gets it wrong can lose everything invested.


Amy V. de Jesus, Brad L. Lauren
Nelson and Rosanne de Jesus of Oberlin, Ohio, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Amy Victoria de Jesus, to Brad L. Lauren, the son of Jerry and Susan Lauren of New York.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms. de Jesus is a marketing assistant with the Warner Music Group, a division of Time Warner Inc. in New York.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin.
Her father is the chairman of the romance languages department at Oberlin College, where her mother is a library technician.


Leta Fishman, William Applegate Jr.
Maribeth Curtis of Pound Ridge, N.Y., and Arthur Fishman of Crown Point, Ind., have announced the engagement of their daughter Leta Louise Fishman to William Mount Applegate Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Applegate of Scottsdale, Ariz.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Fishman, 27, graduated from the University of Rhode Island and received a master's degree in French studies from New York University.
She is a third-year law student at St.
John's University.


Bringing Theater To Rodeo Drive
NAME: Matthew Modine.
IDENTITY: Actor.
CURRENT ACTIVITY: Establishing the New Mercury Theater at Two Rodeo Drive, a $200 million shopping complex in Beverly Hills, Calif.
From March 2 to March 6, the theater presented its first play, an invitation-only production of "Twelve Angry Men," directed by Mr.
Modine.
The cast included Wallace Shawn, F. Murray Abraham, Seymour Cassel, Leo Penn and Neil Giuntoli.


Early Warnings, Then Snow, Leave a Stillness Over 3 States
For the second time in three months, a powerful winter storm buffeted the metropolitan New York region, lashing the coastline and dumping more than a foot of snow on inland areas yesterday.
This storm appeared to be even bigger than the one in December, and weather forecasters and local officials -- who were accused of giving inadequate warnings last time -- went to great lengths to make sure residents were fully prepared for the impact.
At least six deaths in the region -- two in upstate New York, one in Cornwall, two on Long Island and one in Connecticut -- were related to the storm, which closed all major airports in the region -- Kennedy Newark, La Guardia and Bradley International Airport in Hartford.


To Prune or Not, the Time Has Come
IT is time to be outdoors with the pruning shears.
This should be good news to those novices who have cabin fever, and it should also serve as a gentle reminder for experienced gardeners to get busy.
Pruning woody plants now is a good idea for several reasons.
In the first place, the plants are dormant and pruning them will not have the damaging stimulating effect it could have if the pruning were delayed another month or so.
The inner sap is not pushing up rapidly now, and the pruned areas will not bleed as they might if pruning were delayed.
Also, when plants are dormant, it is easy to see their shape and to know what cuts need to be made.


Russia's Crisis
Russia faces three options: it can continue to progress, however haltingly, toward democracy and a free market, relapse into some form of dictatorship, or dissolve in anarchy.
Contrary to conventional wisdom, the economy has not caused the present crisis: While it is far from satisfactory, nobody is starving and private initiative is beginning to fill the vacuum created by the breakdown of state ownership.
There is food in stores, public transport is running, telephones are operating.
Life goes on.


Exceeding Odd
It was Saturday afternoon and, as usual, the browsers were out in force along the commercial stretch of Philadelphia's South Street.
They were almost everywhere, in all corners, from near the Delaware River where the section of retail stores, cafes and theaters begins to where it peters out in benign urban blight 12 blocks to the west.
In one cluster, three young girls and two adults stopped in front of a shop window display where two battered mannequins modeled the black lace and leather apparel associated with sadomasochistic games.


Ethnic Cleansing
Clean words can mask dirty deeds.
The word adopted by the Nazi Reinhard (The Hangman) Heydrich to describe the planned extermination of Jews was
Endlosung
, which was translated into the English phrase "final solution." The language soon endows the bureaucratic euphemism with a sinister overtone that has a greater impact than the phrase it replaces:
final solution
induced more shudders than the straightforward "mass murder," just as
liquidation
is more sinister than "killing" and the icily bureaucratic
termination with extreme prejudice
, even if fictional, carries a more chilling connotation than "assassination."


When All (Busy) Roads Lead to the Casino
The ground under David Candler's house shakes when the buses whiz by on Route 2A on their way to Foxwoods High Stakes Bingo and Casino in Ledyard.
The house, built in 1740, is only 25 feet from the road.
And the basement, with its dirt floor, acts as an echo chamber, spreading the rumbling to every corner of the house.
"This place was never designed to have buses going by at 45 to 50 miles an hour," said Mr.
Candler, who lives in Preston, just north of Ledyard.


Martha Emorey, Ronald Ryan
Mr. and Mrs.
Howard O. Emorey of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter Martha Anne Emorey and Ronald Dale Ryan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond D. Ryan of Greenwich, Conn.
Ms.
Emorey, 36, is a director of financial planning at American Brands in Old Greenwich, Conn.
She graduated from Michigan State University and received a master's degree from the American Graduate School of International Management.
Her father, who is retired, was the treasurer and a vice president of the Fruehauf Corporation, a trucking company in Detroit.


In Your Face
IT'S the hot new fashion accessory.
It glows in the dark.
Comes in regular and king, filter and menthol.
Surgeon General's warning included.
Yes, cigarettes are back in fashion photography in spite of -- and maybe because of -- the fact that smoking itself could hardly be more out of style.
And no, the return of the cigarette as a fashion prop does not mean a return to those classic images of beautiful mannequins in beautiful clothes languorously exhaling curls of smoke.
That was in the 50's and 60's, when cigarettes were still synonymous in many minds with sophistication and elegance.


Sect Members Are Hurting but the Siege Goes On
Nearly two weeks after Federal agents began a siege on an armed religious sect here, Federal officials said today that conditions were deteriorating, with injuries suffered in the shootout now threatening the lives of some of those remaining in the fortified compound.
But there was no sign of any imminent break in the standoff.
Doctors gave medical advice to the wounded by telephone on Friday night and urged them to seek hospitalization; none accepted.
One of the most seriously wounded is Judy Schneider, the 41-year-old wife of Steve Schneider, the top lieutenant to the Branch Davidian sect's leader, David Koresh.
She said she had a badly infected finger and told doctors she might cut it off.


Corrections
An air fare listing in the Travel Watch column on page 20 of the Travel section today omits a destination under the heading "Domestic Routes." The flight originating in Washington goes to Honolulu.


June Yee, Peter Felix
June Olivia Yee, a vice president of corporate development at Chase Manhattan Bank in New York, was married yesterday to Peter Max Felix, the chief executive of the British-American Chamber of Commerce.
Canon Stephen Waine performed the Anglican ceremony at St.
Paul's Cathedral in London.
Mrs.
Felix graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pittsburgh.
She is the daughter of Kim T. Yee of Beaver, Pa., and the late Mon Yee.
Her father was a senior engineer at the McGraw-Edison Company in Pittsburgh.


Moscow Official to Ask Aid at Economic Talks
A Russian Deputy Prime Minister arrived here today to ask officials of leading industrial nations for economic help for his country and political support for President Boris N. Yeltsin.
The Russian official, Boris G. Fyodorov, was invited to confer with top officials from the Group of Seven who are planning the summit meeting of those nations' leaders to be held in Tokyo in July.
The officials from the United States, Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy and Japan are expected to issue a statement showing support for Russia's transition to democracy and a market economy.


'My Father's Guru'
To the Editor:
Many well-respected people -- whom one simply can't pass off as easily duped -- hold a view of Paul Brunton so markedly at variance with the one created by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson in "My Father's Guru" (review, Feb. 7) as to cast significant doubt on the objectivity of Mr.
Masson's memories and the conjectures based upon them.


Miss McElhone, Chad Greene
Katharine Elaine McElhone, a daughter of Donald McElhone and Josephine McElhone, both of Fairfax, Va., was married yesterday to Second Lieut.
Charles Sheldon Greene 3d of the Army, the son of Judith C. Winship of New York and Mr.
Greene Jr. of Dusseldorf, Germany.
The Rev.
John O. Mellin performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Fort Myer (Va.) Post Chapel.
Mrs.
Greene, 23, is to begin work next month as an analytical chemist in Union Beach, N.J., with International Flavors and Fragrances Inc.
She and her husband graduated from Duke University, she cum laude.
Her father is a policy analyst in Arlington, Va., for the United States Office of Personnel Management.
Her mother is a director of interest-rate risk management at the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation in McLean, Va.


Virginia Jamison, Kevin J. Walter
Antoinette H. Jamison of Richmond and Dr.
James C. Jamison of Jacksonville, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Virginia Lacey Jamison, to Kevin Joseph Walter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clark E. Walter of Pelham Manor, N.Y.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Jamison, 25, is a legal assistant at the New York law firm of White &amp; Case.
She and her fiance graduated from the College of William and Mary.
Her father is a medical director in Jacksonville for the Prudential Insurance Company.
Her mother is a librarian for the Virginia Department of Planning and Budget in Richmond.
Miss Jamison is a stepdaughter of Patricia Jamison.


Bosnia Airlifting Wounded From Besieged Areas
Clearly frustrated with the United Nations' efforts, Bosnia's military forces have begun airlifting the critically wounded and severely ill cases from besieged eastern Bosnian enclaves to a hospital here.
After the United Nations failed to overcome Serbian efforts to prevent the evacuation, a Bosnian helicopter flew the first group of 17 Muslims, including three women and at least one child, over two hostile Serbian lines from Srebrenica on Friday, doctors and wounded patients at the city's hospital said here today.


That Notorious 14th Paragraph
To the Editor:
I realize that questions of fact cannot be settled in your Letters column.
But Bruce Lee's response (Jan. 31) to my letter -- which dealt with the notorious 14th paragraph of the Japanese note concerning the breaking off of negotiations with the United States before Pearl Harbor -- requires an answer.
Regardless of the chronology established by Gordon W. Prange (from Mackay Radio and RCA), the question remains not what was on Henry C. Clausen's affidavits but what actually happened.


Citing Caution, South Korea Puts Troops on Alert


Washington Talk; Health-Care Plan Is One Thing; Passing It Is Another
Congress cannot debate the merits of President Clinton's health-care plan yet, because he has not proposed it; but lawmakers are already arguing about when and how to consider it.
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, has urged that it be combined in one big bill with Mr.
Clinton's tax and spending proposals aimed at long-range deficit reduction.
He sees that as the best way of getting a health-care measure enacted this summer.


Editorial Notebook; Maligning True Believers
From the rubble of the World Trade Center rises a gloomy thought -- that religious zealotry will supplant Communism as a global threat to peace.
In Egypt, tourists are slain by Islamic fanatics.
In Bombay, a bomb kills hundreds after Hindu militants carry out a pogrom against Muslims.
In a crescent from North Africa through Iran to Central Asia, true believers would appear to be marching backward to a new Dark Age.
A second glance suggests a less fearsome reality.
What is loosely called fundamentalism is indeed on the rise, the secular state under assault.
But the phenomenon is hardly monolithic: Algeria's jailed Islamic dissenters are less intolerant than ruling fundamentalists in Iran and the Sudan.
In any case, religion is not the enemy: few believers are bomb-throwers.
The real menace is the political manipulation of religious differences.


Arrests Begin, Questions Remain
THE investigation of the World Trade Center bombing continues.
Each day, there is a new arrest or a bank account to trace or an address to pursue.
So far, two Muslims with Palestinian roots and one born in Egypt are under arrest.
The police have reopened their investigation into the 1990 murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane, suspicious that El Sayyid A. Nosair, who was acquitted of the killing but imprisoned for related crimes, is somehow tied in.
But each new development seems to add mystery, not clarity.
What is known is that Mohammed A. Salameh, 25, an illegal alien who migrated from Jordan and worked at odd jobs in Jersey City, is charged with having rented the van that carried an estimated 1,000 pounds of home-made explosives to the skyscraper.
Nidal A. Ayyad, another 25-year-old Palestinian, raised in Kuwait and now a naturalized American, had a job as a chemist in New Jersey; the police say he helped Mr.
Salameh rent the van and carry out the attack.
Federal investigators have traced some $8,000 in wire transfers from a bank in Germany to a New Jersey account the two men shared.
Mr.
Salameh's lawyer says it was to be used to start a business.
The police want to know whether some of it underwrote the Feb. 26 attack, which killed five people and injured more than 1,000.


Jets' Free-Agent Moves: Big Step on a Long Road
Some people have suggested that Jets General Manager Dick Steinberg and Coach Bruce Coslet are on some kind of "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid" kick with free agency: If they can effect a quick turnaround through free-agent signings, they will salvage their jobs; if not, they will at least go out in a blaze of glory.
Well, even if it is last hurrah, hurray for them.


Pontiac's Trans Sport Keeps on Truckin'
THE New York Auto Show is coming around again, and when it opens on April 10 it will mark its seventh year at the Javits Convention Center, which is hard to believe.
At least for curmudgeons like me.
For 30 years, the exposition had been crammed into the Coliseum at Columbus Circle, and I remember that final 1986 show as if it were yesterday.
The Coliseum was on death row, due imminently for the wrecker's ball, and the show had to move.


Try Convincing Counties the Recession Has Ended


A.&amp;P.'s Proposal For New Supermarket
The article on the A.&amp;P.'s proposal for a new supermarket in Midland Park ("Residents Fight New Supermarket; So Does the Competition," Feb. 14) presented a contrast to what the A.&amp;P. has gone through in Kenilworth.
Despite similarities like having the present sites zoned industrial, small stores nearby, and bordering a residential section and a major highway where traffic could be a problem, the A.&amp;P. course of action in Kenilworth sharply differs to what is going on in Midland Park.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93 -- Early Warnings, Then Snow, Leave a Stillness Over 3 States; Westchester: Unusual Wedding: Everyone in White
Undaunted by blizzard-like conditions, Cathy Prendergast spent this morning just as she had planned, having her hair curled at Gino's Unisex, a salon on Mamaroneck Avenue in White Plains.
But this was no ordinary appointment.
Today was her wedding day.
And she said it would take a lot more than blowing snow and gusting winds to keep her and her fiance, Les Kovacs, from walking down the aisle of St.
Gregory's Church in nearby Harrison.


Belgrade Banker, Relaxing in Tel Aviv, Denies Taking Funds
Jezdimir Vasiljevic, the Yugoslav banker who left a flood of financial scandals in Belgrade this week, pushed his son's stroller along the Mediterranean today, shoulder to shoulder with Israelis enjoying the sun on Tel Aviv's beachfront promenade.
He did not run away from Yugoslavia, Mr.
Vasiljevic, 44, said, and certainly not with Jugoskandic Bank's money, as some press reports charge.


AL SHARPTON'S NEW ATTITUDE
Anyone who speaks of racism in a loud voice is branded as "self-promoting." And Al Sharpton, as several of your letter writers (Feb. 21) intimate, must develop better manners to initiate properly a public discourse on racism.
This economically insulated perspective on racism -- mannered, polite -- seems inappropriate after watching the spectacle of Rodney King's beating, the subsequent revolt in the wake of the Rodney King verdict and other recent incidents.
Perhaps, only Sharpton's brand of activism, mixed with the Realpolitik of media consciousness, can strike effectively at the malaise of American racism.
JEFFREY L. HOOGEVEEN
Reston, Va.


A Zeus for the 90's
THE MARRIAGE OF CADMUS AND HARMONY
By Roberto Calasso.
Translated by Tim Parks.
Illustrated. 403 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: The Overview; STORM PARALYZES EAST COAST; SNOW COVERS SOUTH; 33 KILLED
One of the most powerful storms of the century -- a monster with the heart of a blizzard and the soul of a hurricane -- invaded the New York City region and the Northeast yesterday after battering the Atlantic Seaboard and spawning deadly tornadoes and six-foot snowdrifts in the South.
The enormous storm, which developed over the Gulf of Mexico on Friday and barreled up the coast with blinding snow, driving sleet and winds that sometimes reached over 100 miles an hour, was blamed for at least 33 deaths, cut power to 2.5 million homes, forced thousands to evacuate flooded shores, closed many airports and roads and virtually shut down normal life in the eastern United States.


Broncos Sign Bernstine To $4.6 Million Pact
The Denver Broncos yesterday signed the veteran free-agent ROD BERNSTINE to a contract that a person close to the negotiations said would pay the running back $4.6 million over three years.
That would would make him the third-highest-paid running back in the National Football League, behind THURMAN THOMAS and NEIL ANDERSON.


Trio in Recital Offers Works Old and New
A FREE concert this afternoon gets the week off to an enticing start with the Guild Trio of the violinist Janet Orenstein, the cellist Brooks Whitehouse and the pianist Patricia Tao appearing at the Greenwich Public Library.
Beethoven's "Kakadu" variations and the B-Flat Trio of Schubert enclose "To the Spirit Unconquered," written for the Guild threesome last year by Sheila Silver.
No tickets are required for the 3 o'clock recital.
Another recent work, Elizabeth Lauer's collection of dances for four hands at the piano, "It Takes Two . . .," will be sampled on the program the composer is giving with the pianist Linda Maranis at 8 P.M. on Friday at the Westport Arts Center.
Also listed are several of Brahms's Hungarian dances, Samuel Barber's "Souvenirs" and other duos by Faure, Schubert and Mendelssohn.
For reservations, call 226-1806 or 762-2020.


Manila Pop
DANGER AND BEAUTY
By Jessica Hagedorn. 209 pp. New York: Penguin Books. Paper, $14.


Suit Attacks Swap Plan On Pollution
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the New York State Legislature are moving to block a Federal law that allows one utility to sell its right to pollute to another.
If they succeed, environmentalists around the country could follow suit and a system that economists have hailed as a cheap way to clean the environment could be stopped before it gets started.
The Cuomo administration filed suit on Friday to stop the Long Island Lighting Company from selling a Midwestern company the right to emit pollutants that might be blown into upstate New York.
The Assembly may act as early as tomorrow on a law that would do the same.


CRYING WOLF OVER ELEPHANTS
In "Crying Wolf Over Elephants" (Feb. 7), Raymond Bonner argues that the doctrine of "sustainable use" supports killing elephants for ivory to help pay for conservation.
However, the doctrine requires levels of management currently available only in parts of southern Africa.
It is not yet practical in central Africa, where almost half the elephants live and where much of the ivory has been coming from.
Morever, sustainable utilization of wild species rarely has been achieved even in the most developed countries.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 14, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
8
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
3
6
BYGONES, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A dinner party reveals family strains and love.
4 *
34
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
5 *
2
SILENT PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) Lieut.
Lucas Davenport on the trail of an escaped serial killer.
6
59
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
7
2
UNTAMED, by Elizabeth Lowell. (Avon, $5.99.) A young woman's romance, in 12th-century Britain, with a man returning from the Crusades.
8
12
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman's death leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
9
48
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
10
4
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is still threatened by aliens.
11
3
THE ELF QUEEN OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The third volume in a series about a fantasy land.
12
8
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of the state of Nebraska on behalf of an Indian tribe.
13
1
TEMPERATURES RISING, by Sandra Brown. (Bantam, $5.99.) The romance of a woman and a resort developer who threatens the serenity of her South Pacific island home.
14
2
THE FIRST WIVES CLUB, by Olivia Goldsmith. (Pocket, $5.99.) Three women conspire to get even with the men who divorced them.
15
1
ON THE PULSE OF MORNING, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $5.) The poem read at President Clinton's inauguration.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
3
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) The autobiography of the retired commander of a Navy counterterrorist unit.
2 *
4
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
3
23
ALIVE, by Piers Paul Read. (Avon, $5.99.) How some of the members of a rugby team survived a plane crash in the Andes in 1972.
4
9
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
5
488
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
6
11
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
7 *
5
HILLARY CLINTON: The Inside Story, by Judith Warner. (Signet, $4.99.) A biography of the First Lady.
8 *
95
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
9
22
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
10 *
6
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life during the past two decades that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
125
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
108
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
83
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
4
THE TIGHTWAD GAZETTE, by Amy Dacyczyn. (Villard, $9.99.) Ways to save money and make frugality part of your life style.
5
8
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Michelle DePaulo and Thomas Dewey
May wedding plans have been announced for Michelle C. DePaulo, a marketing services manager at Revlon, and Thomas E. L. Dewey, an associate at the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.
Ms.
DePaulo, who works in New York, graduated from Georgetown University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
S.
F.
DePaulo of Centreville, Del.
Her father is president of Erectors Inc. and the Continental Equipment Company, construction companies in Wilmington, Del.


Despite Plant's Closing, a Town Remains Hopeful
When Pamela Mott started working at Smith Corona's factory here 15 years ago, she was continuing a family tradition.
Her parents, grandparents, uncles, aunts and cousins made their livings building typewriters for a company whose roots in upstate New York go back nearly 100 years.
The tradition will end with her.
Recently, the plant began layoffs in preparation for moving its assembly line to Mexico.
But Ms.
Mott is adapting to the change and so, it appears, is Cortland, a town 30 miles south of Syracuse that is no stranger to the loss of factory jobs.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Barnegat  $225,000
123 Clifton Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 5-year-old contemporary; bayfront, deck, fireplace; taxes $5,018.
Edison  $227,000
5 Fielding Place  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old ranch; updated kitchen, c/a, screened lanai, full finished basement; taxes $4,831.
Fair Lawn  $166,000
33-02 Norwood Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 44-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, modern eat-in-kitchen, finished recreation room; taxes $3,500.
Fords  $147,900
158 Arlington Drive  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; dual zone heating, central vacuum, fenced yard; taxes $2,814.
Forked River  $177,500
1214 Ariel Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1-year-old ranch; waterfront, h/w floors, custom kitchen; taxes $1,113.
Saddle Brook  $190,000
37 George Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; in-ground pool, finished basement, new kitchen; taxes $2,6933.
OTHER AREAS Baiting Hollow, L.I.  $115,000
97 Sound Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement, 2-car garage, 0.5 acres; taxes $3,200.
Wallingford, Conn.  $231,500
264 Highland Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; trilevel deck, 2-car attached garage, skylights, 0.66 acre; taxes $3,394.
Lewisboro, N.Y.  $140,500
226 Lakeside Drive  1-bedroom, 1-bath, duplex condominium; fireplace, deck, dining room, loft, storage room; common charge $206, taxes $3,066.


Report on Gruber
The California Angels submitted an investigative report Friday to American League President BOBBY BROWN on their acquisition of third baseman KELLY GRUBER from the Toronto Blue Jays.
Gruber, suffering from neck and shoulder injuries, was placed on the 60-day disabled list by the Angels on Friday, effective on opening day.
That means he can't be activated until June 4 at the earliest.


Educators Seek Panel to Keep Tests Bias-Free
A group of leading educators is calling for the creation of an independent commission to make sure that national student tests are free of sexual, racial and cultural bias.
As part of the six national education goals, including proficiency for every student in math, science, English and other subjects by the year 2000, education groups are developing nationwide standards and tests.
The idea is to gauge student progress and allow educators to adjust curriculums and instruction if necessary.


A Back-Road Drive to Vienna
THE road taken by most tourists between Salzburg and Vienna is the autobahn, which enables them to cover the 180 miles in barely three hours.
It is a boring drive.
The back roads offer a more rewarding alternative, and by allowing three days instead of three hours travelers discover some of the most scenic regions of Austria, where Alpine grandeur is offset by the quaint charm of small Baroque towns and villages.
What's more, the region abounds in inns and hostelries that are marked by local atmosphere to a degree uncommon in an age of institutionalized tourism.


Leslie Crawford, Steven C. Fox
Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm Crawford of Denver have announced the engagement of their daughter Leslie Moira Crawford to Steven Caplan Fox, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Fox of Neponsit, Queens.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Crawford, 30, is the managing editor of Frisko and California Kids magazines in San Francisco.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her father is a lawyer and her mother, Sheila Crawford, a writer in Denver.


For a Chronicler Of Bad Vibes, A Lighter Touch
Popular culture has been so inundated with visions of glitzy sleaze that it has become next to impossible to shock or titillate audiences with visions of evil.
David Baerwald, a Los Angeles singer, songwriter and self-styled poet maudit of Hollywood lowlife, seems more than half aware of the problem.
That's why "Triage," his ambitious second solo album, leavens its juicy dollops of depravity and paranoia with just enough humor to keep from being an apocalyptic bore.
As the chronicler of bad vibes from the West Coast, Mr.
Baerwald made a vivid first impression seven years ago with the album "Boomtown," which he recorded with his former partner, David Ricketts, under the name David and David.
A first solo album, "Bedtime Stories," followed in 1990.


How Uncertain Was He?
WERNER HEISENBERG visited Switzerland to give a colloquium at the University of Zurich on Dec. 18, 1944.
Among the 20 or so int he room was a man with a concealed pistol.
This would-be assassin was an agent of america's Office of Strategic Services, which had contrived to place within a few feet of Nazi Germany's greatest physicist a former catcher for the Boston Red Sox who knew enough physics and enough German, the O.S.S. hoped, to figure out whether Heisenberg was building an atomic bomb for Hitler.
For two years American military intelligence officers, inspired in part by scientists who had fled Hitler's regime, had worked on plans to kidnap or even to kill Heisenberg in an effort to halt or delay work on a German atomic bomb.
Morris (Moe) Berg decided not to shoot.
Heisenberg had spoken on the safely esoteric topic "S-matrix theory." But Berg garnered an invitation to a small dinner party being given for Heisenberg by a Swiss physicist who was aleague with Allen Dulles, then the O.S.S. man in Zurich (and later Director of Central Intelligence).
After dinner, the ingenious Berg managed to claim the honor of walking the discoverer of the uncertainty principle, who had to his hotel.
Heisenberg was a bit suspicious.
But he seems not even to have realized that Berg was Jewish; he later speculated that this enigmatic dinner guest had been an agent of the Nazi SS sent to monitor his table talk.


A Warning In Rwanda
Rwanda's Parc National des Volcans, one of the oldest game reserves in Africa and home to more than 300 of the world's approximately 600 mountain gorillas, is believed to be in the control of Rwandan rebels following a recent incursion, according to a human rights organization and scientists who had been monitoring the primates.
Dieter Steklis, the director of the park's abandoned Karisoke Research Center, said all efforts to protect the endangered gorillas had been halted.
Mr.
Steklis, now in the United States, fled Rwanda last month, along with other Western scientists and personnel associated with the park.


Deborah Teichholz, D. A. Rappaport
Dr. and Mrs.
Louis Teichholz of Oradell, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Deborah Lynn Teichholz, to Douglas Adam Rappaport, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Rappaport of Roslyn, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Teichholz, 25, is an assistant actuary at Kwasha Lipton, an employee-benefits consulting concern in Fort Lee, N.J.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, from which her fiance graduated summa cum laude.


Yarns Spun, Souls Blessed By Old Salt on City Turf
SAILOR JOE O'DONNELL swaggered into his compact room on Park Street in New Haven the other day, clutching his cane and a plastic bag stuffed with treasures he'd collected from the neighborhood's Dumpsters: a pair of designer sneakers, soap dishes, croissants, poppy seed muffins and a half a loaf of French bread.
He plugged in his coffee pot and turned on the light.
"This is all going for my girls," said the sailor, who is 78 years old.
He was referring to the prostitutes and other street dwellers who stroll the sidewalks below his window or make their homes in the nearby back alleys in abandoned buildings.


Welfare Recipients Are Joining the Age of Plastic
When Donnie Delrio goes to the supermarket here, she no longer takes food stamps or cash from her monthly welfare payments.
She carries plastic instead.
As a result, she said, she no longer feels the stigma of fumbling with food stamps at the checkout counter, and she can go home with less fear of being mugged for cash or stamps.


Seton Hall And Dehere Tough It Out
No one has ever seriously questioned Terry Dehere's talent.
From the time he came to Seton Hall as a freshman, Big East coaches agreed that he would became a conference superstar by his senior season.


Miss Douglas, Mark Sargent
Dr. and Mrs.
R.
Gordon Douglas of Lawrenceville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Catherine Lewis Douglas, to Mark Adams Sargent, a son of Joan Sargent of New Canaan, Conn., and Daniel I. Sargent of North Salem, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Douglas, 26, is studying for a master's degree in elementary education at Antioch New England Graduate School.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father, the former chairman of the department of medicine at New York Hospital/Cornell Medical Center in New York, is a vice president of Merck &amp; Company in Whitehouse Station, N.J., and president of the Merck vaccine division.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday about a Family Interfaith Network Education program at the Suffolk Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. misidentified an interfaith couple.
They were Debbie and Greg Vilardi.


Christa Ludwig, Embarked on a Long Goodbye
Christa Ludwig was in good spirits recently, speaking from her home in Paris.
The distinguished mezzo-soprano was relieved that she had managed to sing a recital the evening before despite having a cold.
"I had a week without speaking," she said, "in the hotel room, with a doctor, and with all the electric machines, so that I could sing."
But there was more to her good spirits -- more even than her infectious and seemingly deep-rooted good humor. (Laughter pervaded a conversation that included some decidedly somber turns.) "In the morning I woke up, and I had a smile on my face," she said, "because it was the beginning of my end." The recital was the first in a series of farewells, running into 1994, in cities where she has sung frequently.
On Saturday evening, four days after her 65th birthday, she will sing her New York farewell recital at Carnegie Hall.
Her final Metropolitan Opera performances, as Fricka in Wagner's "Walkure," will follow on March 30 and April 3.


Alison D. Winer, David Dinerstein
Margery S. Schab of New York and James P. B. Winer of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alison Deborah Winer to David Ian Dinerstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Dinerstein of East Hills, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Winer, 29, is a sales representative at Ridley Scott &amp; Associates, a television-commercial production company, in New York.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father is an architect in Briarcliff Manor.
Her mother is a photographer in New York.
The prospective bride's stepfather, Frederick G. Schab of New York, is president of William H. Schab Gallery, a New York art gallery.


Volkswagen Says G.M. Blocked Its Effort to Lure a Top Executive
The hard-charging Spanish purchasing executive who last week resigned from the General Motors Corporation to take a job with Volkswagen A.G. might not be leaving G.M. after all.
The German automobile maker announced late today that the executive, Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, had asked for a delay of his appointment to a top post, which was to have been confirmed at a board meeting in Germany on Tuesday.
VW and Mr.
Lopez would continue talks toward a later starting date, the German company said in a statement, with a decision expected "within one year."


Tom Gillett and Marina Volokhonskaya
TOM GILLETT describes his romance with Marina Mikhailovna Volo-khonskaya as a mix of "WASP-y Connecticut Ivy and Leningrad Brooklyn Russian."
They met a year ago, soon after Mr.
Gillett, a freelance advertising copywriter and a longtime Russophile, pulled out his Russian word processor and composed what he now refers to as his most successful ad.


The Relentless Cult of Novelty
To the Editor:
As someone who wrote an enthusiastic three-part essay on "The Gulag Archipelago" when it appeared, and published his early lectures in the United States, I must admit to dismay at Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's long, slow descent into a sort of critical dogmatic posture that reminds me of none other than that Stalinist nemesis of free thought, Andrei A. Zhdanov.


The View From: New Haven; On the Hill, Where Many Low Notes End on High
IN assorted corners and crannies of the Wesley United Methodist Church in New Haven, people were making music.
Pianists pounded keys in the chapel, in an upstairs cubbyhole and in the basement.
Flutists and saxophone players also shared the basement; violinists played in a meeting room.
All were teachers and students in the Hill outreach program of the Neighborhood Music School, which brings music lessons -- and more -- to youngsters in one of New Haven's poorest neighborhoods.


From the Vatican Museum, A Glimpse at the Etruscans
THE Morris Museum is dressed to kill with a suite of galleries painted purple, cinnabar, green earth and umber.
Docents, identifiable by the medallions they wear on purple ribbons, are everywhere; an audio guide and a whopping, fully illustrated catalogue are available, and the atmosphere hums with excitement.
Museum hours have been extended and there is an admission charge of $9 ($8 for the elderly).
All this is in honor of the long-touted Etruscan show, making its one stop in the Northeast.
In New Jersey, these 178 objects made in Etruria in the first millennium B.C. are celebrating the 80 years that the Morristown Museum has been in existence.
In Rome, they are housed not -- as might be expected -- in the Etruscan Museum at the villa named for Pope Julius but in the Vatican's own Gregorian Etruscan Museum, whose curator, Francesco Buranelli, is responsible for the exhibition.


French Campaign Deepens Voters' Suspicions
With political campaign spending and advertising strictly controlled in France, temporary billboards provide one of few places where candidates can sell their virtues to voters.
Yet, one week before nationwide elections here, many billboards carry no posters.
That French voters should feel indifference is perhaps understandable.
A huge conservative victory in the parliamentary elections has long been in the cards.
And while President Francois Mitterrand may soon have to live with a conservative Prime Minister and Government, his own term doesn't end until 1995.


Japanese Power Broker Indicted for Tax Evasion
Prosecutors filed one of the most politically explosive indictments in years today, charging the former kingmaker of the governing party and an aide with evading taxes on more than $2 million in 1987.
The indictment, against Shin Kanemaru and his former political secretary, took place on the last day of the five-year statute of limitations.
It is expected to be the first of several after raids on the offices and home of Mr.
Kanemaru and family members turned up more than $50 million in hidden cash, securities and gold bars.
The Main Keeper of the Money
Since Mr.
Kanemaru, 78 years old, was well known as the Liberal Democratic Party's principal dispenser of political funds and patronage, there is growing speculation that tracing the money could undermine the scandal-tainted but still immensely powerful governing party.


Hundreds Killed in Bombay Explosions


In the Region: Connecticut; Gun Dispute Ruffles Litchfield Tranquility
MUCH of Litchfield County is a peaceful Arcadia where towns of 50 square miles may have fewer than 2,000 people and the quiet is occasionally broken by a passing car -- or gunshots.
Many hunters live in or visit the county, making use of private shooting ranges and gun clubs for target practice.
Shots echoing through the hills are hardly noticed by most residents.


Reserve Forward Steps Up To Lead Rutgers to Title
Atlantic 10 Championship
Rutgers 59, St.
Joseph's 51: Regina Kalucki came off the bench to score 20 points and grab 10 rebounds, leading Rutgers to the 59-51 victory over St.
Joseph's yesterday in the Atlantic 10 championship game in Washington.


Talking: Banking; The Option Of Private Financing
SHROUDED in a patrician image of mahogany, Persian rugs and hushed voices, private banking is a service that most people think is strictly for old-money families or people of exalted net worth.
True.
But it's changing.
Private banking as a source of mortgage money for a personal residence -- and certainly for investment property -- is increasingly being offered to a broader range of people.


Commercial Property: Early Lease Renewals; Making Deals That Work to Everyone's Advantage
WHITTLE Communications was perfectly happy with the 4,000 square feet of offices in the Seagram Building that it had rented five years ago.It was less happy with the above-market rent to which it was committed for five more years.
So when it needed 10,000 feet more, Whittle and Brian D. Gell, the Edward S. Gordon managing director who handles the building's leasing, worked out a deal.
They tore up the lease and wrote a new one to cover 14,000 feet at a rental still about $10 above market but a good 30 percent below what Whittle had been paying.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: Coping; A Humbled Northeast Hunkers Down Anew
New York was blizzard-bound and humbled yesterday as the storm hobbled locomotion and muffled life with awesome relentlessness.
"It's the end of the world," Robert Gill estimated playfully, watching children use a de-hinged door as a makeshift bobsled on Cross Bay Boulevard in Queens.
Other residents of the borough's southern lowlands worried more openly that the disaster of last December's rainstorm would be repeated before the weekend ended.


A Back-Road Drive to Vienna
THE road taken by most tourists between Salzburg and Vienna is the autobahn, which enables them to cover the 180 miles in barely three hours.
It is a boring drive.
The back roads offer a more rewarding alternative, and by allowing three days instead of three hours travelers discover some of the most scenic regions of Austria, where Alpine grandeur is offset by the quaint charm of small Baroque towns and villages.
What's more, the region abounds in inns and hostelries that are marked by local atmosphere to a degree uncommon in an age of institutionalized tourism.


When Day Care Begins With the Night Shift
It was 9 P.M., bedtime.
Hannah and Rachel Reliford had taken showers, brushed their hair and changed into frilly pink nightgowns.
Hannah, who is 9, dived under her "Beauty and the Beast" quilt.
Rachel, 7, wrapped herself cocoon-style in an "Aladdin" quilt and grabbed a white teddy bear.
Within minutes the sisters were asleep in their beds.
Not really
their
beds.
The beds were the property of Toyota Motor Manufacturing, U.S.A., as was the room where they and several other children slept on mattresses lined up on gray industrial carpeting.


On Their Marx


The South Is Raised Again
Since the South's defeat in the Civil War, the myth of the lost cause has become something akin to a civil religion there, complete with symbols and rituals.
Last week in Georgia, the myth showed its enduring strength.
The lost cause actually won a round by beating back efforts in the state Legislature to remove the Confederate battle emblem from the state flag.
The star-studded St.
Andrew's cross had been added to the flag by the 1956 Georgia Legislature in a defiant gesture at a time of court-ordered integration.
Gov.
Zell Miller had sought its removal, saying it offended many blacks, who make up 30 percent of the state's population, and sent the wrong message as Atlanta prepared for the 1996 Olympics.


Ageless


Kathleen Mackay, L. F. Whittemore 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
James G. Mackay of Westerly, R.I., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter Kathleen Ann Mackay and Laurence Frederick Whittemore 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick B. Whittemore of New York.


The Wife's Perspective
To the Editor:
In light of the new musical, "Martin Guerre," and the recently released American film, "Sommersby," based on an earlier French film, readers might be interested to know about the novel "The Wife of Martin Guerre," by the American writer Janet Lewis.


Social Security
To the Editor:
I was old enough to witness the contract between the Federal Government and its citizens.
"We're going to tax you," they said, "to build a fund so we can pay you a pension in your old age." My Social Security card was issued in 1937.


New Police Force Takes Up Duties in El Salvador
The pace of this country's move toward meeting the demands of its peace accords quickened today as a new, apolitical police force assumed jurisdiction over the capital of this province, the scene of some of the most violent conflicts in a 12-year civil war.
In a ceremony in this town's small public square, elements of the long-dreaded Policia National handed over the national flag as well as authority over the area to the Policia Nacional Civil, who were trained with United Nations aid as part of the settlement.


Technology; A Versatile Sponge Made From Oats
IT'S a cosmetic, an oil-spill remediator and a food preservative.
It's also a sunscreen and a pesticide carrier.
This versatile product, made from oats, is called Nurture.
Nurture Inc., based in Missoula, Mont., uses a highly efficient solvent extraction process to make Nurture.
From 1.1 million pounds of oat grain, it says, it gets 1 million pounds of product.
Most of the 10 percent left over is oat oil, which has useful properties of its own, or crude fiber, which can be sold for animal feeds.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Henneman, pitcher, on a three-year contract.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Named Reggie Jackson special adviser to the general partner.
National League  PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Assigned Toby Borland, Cliff Brantley and Mike Williams, pitchers; Tony Longmire and Cary Williams, outfielders and Ron Lockett, infielder, to Scranton-Wilkes Barre of the International League and Mike Farmer, pitcher, and Jeff Jackson and Tom Nuneviller, outfielders, to Reading of the Eastern League.
Sent Kevin Stocker, shortstop to their minor-legue camp for reassignment.
Football National Football League  NEW YORK GIANTS -- Announced the resignation of Ed Croke, director of media services.
Hockey National Hockey League  SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Acquired Jon Morris, center, off waivers from the New Jersey Devils.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Baiting Hollow  $115,000
97 Sound Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement, 2-car garage, 0.5 acres; taxes $3,200.
Coram  $125,000
51 Thomas Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 2-car garage; taxes $4,800.
Lattingtown  $260,000
1 Millford Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 38-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $4,400.
Locust Valley  $315,000
20 Fox Ridge Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $4,500.
Moriches  $170,000
356 Sea Breeze Court  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old condominium town house; 1- car garage, pool, tennis, marina; taxes $3,500, common charges, $294.
Sea Cliff  $365,000
70 8th Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 86-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, basement, wraparound porch, attic, slate roof; taxes $2,800.
OTHER AREAS Barnegat, N.J.  $225,000
123 Clifton Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 5-year-old contemporary; bayfront, deck, fireplace; taxes $5,018.
Wallingford, Conn.  $231,500
264 Highland Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; trilevel deck, 2-car attached garage, skylights, 0.66 acre; taxes $3,394.
Lewisboro, N.Y.  $140,500
226 Lakeside Drive  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 8-year-old duplex condominium; fireplace, deck, loft, storage room; common charges, $206, taxes $3,066.


Man Is Killed During Chase By L.I. Police
A Nassau County Police investigator, who was in the Bronx to arrest a man sought in connection with the shooting of a police officer two years ago, fatally shot the suspect in a scuffle on the street, authorities said yesterday.
Detective Rudolph Zitti and his partner, Officer Raymond Ruiz, received a tip on Friday that the suspect, Jose Batista, 23, had just arrived in the Riverdale section of the Bronx from Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, said Sergeant Tina Mohrmann, a spokeswoman for the New York City Police Department.
Grabbed Detective's Pistol
Eight plainclothes officers began a stakeout in the neighborhood, the police said.
Mr.
Batista was spotted at 10:54 P.M.
Friday as he walked near 2875 Sedgwick Avenue, just south of Reservoir Avenue, the sergeant said.
When the officers approached him, he ran and they gave chase, she said.
During the pursuit, Mr.
Batista picked up a stick and swung at the officers, the police said.
The officers cornered him and tried to subdue him, but he grabbed Detective Zitti's service pistol and fired one shot, grazing the detective on the hand, Sergeant Mohrmann said.
Officer Ruiz then fired one shot, striking Mr.
Batista in the head, she said.
Mr.
Batista, whose address is unknown, died at the scene, the police said.
Detective Zitti was treated at Montefiore Medical Center for the graze wound and released.
Officer Ruiz was treated at the hospital for trauma and released.
Investigation Continuing
Sergeant Mohrmann said a preliminary investigation had concluded that the shooting was justified.
She said the investigation is continuing.
Mr.
Batista is suspected of being involved in a burglary of a house at 442 Fifth Street in Elmont, L.I., on Dec. 21, 1991, said Detective Frederic Eno, a Nassau County Police spokesman.
Officer Christopher Pohren was one of several officers who responded to a burglary alarm and caught four armed men leaving the house, Detective Eno said.
Shots were fired and Officer Pohren was grazed on the wrist, he said.


For Pateks, the Safety Net Fails
A summer breeze rippled the curtain of the open window in the dark master bedroom on Evergreen Lane in this Kansas City suburb.
The breeze carried with it the scent of a recent rain that still lay in scattered patches on the silent streets.
At 3:35 on that morning last July 21, the telephone rang in that bedroom, waking the couple there.
"Is this the Patek residence?" asked the caller.


Evan R. Collins Is Dead at 81; Aided SUNY-Albany Expansion
Evan R. Collins, who transformed a small teachers college into a major university as the founding president of the State University of New York at Albany, died on Friday at his home in Marblehead, Mass.
He was 81.
The cause of death was Parkinson's disease, his family said.


The Clinton Fuel Tax Finds a Few Unexpected Allies
ORDINARILY, big companies are not eager for their customers to pay higher taxes any more than the customers themselves like it.
But President Clinton's proposed energy tax is demonstrating that, among big auto-makers, refiners and utilities, politics is thicker than oil.
If enacted as proposed, the tax would raise gasoline prices by at least 8 cents a gallon, and a typical homeowner's electric bill by $1.50.
However, General Motors, Ford and Chrysler have decided they support the higher fuel tax, and, broadly speaking, so do the chairmen of Arco, the refining company, and Southern California Edison, the utility.
Other companies the tax would hurt have hinted that they are not entirely against it.


Czech-Slovak Visitors' Tax
Although Eastern Europe has enjoyed a recent surge in popularity among tourists, some of the region's most popular locales have suddenly become more expensive.
In the former Czechoslovakia, in particular, hotel rates are now similar to those in New York, London and Paris.
The reason is a new value added tax, introduced by both halves of the former Czechoslovakia -- the Czech and Slovak republics.


Measuring Makes Laying Tiles Easier
COVERING a kitchen or bathroom countertop with ceramic tile is fairly easy, although planning and patience are required.
Tile adheres readily to virtually any stable surface that accepts tile adhesive and resists moisture, including plastic laminates like Formica.
All materials, including rented tools for cutting tile, are available.
Choose vitreous tile, which is the least porous variety.
To minimize the need to cut tiles, combine selecting them with planning their layout and preparing the countertop surface.
Making a scale drawing of the countertop on graph paper and superimposing trial layouts on tracing paper over it, can help.
Remember to include spacing between the tiles for grout.


A Bit Too Much Mr. Nice Guy For 'The Goodbye Girl'?
"The Goodbye Girl" would be a better show, I think, if Martin Short were less likable.
That may seem a strange observation.
A number of things are clearly wrong with the musical that the playwright Neil Simon, the composer Marvin Hamlisch and the lyricist David Zippel have fashioned from Mr.
Simon's 1977 film of the same name.
Few spectators leaving the Marquis Theater these nights would count Mr.
Short among them, however.


Swedes Facing Rigors of Welfare Cuts
Like most Swedes, Karin Lizana worked for decades knowing that she was paying one of the world's highest tax rates in return for the most extensive health, education and other social benefits of any industrial democracy.
And based on Sweden's remarkable record of improving living standards and rising affluence, she assumed that the nation's economy would remain vibrant.
Now, with its economy reeling and its politics having shifted to the right, Sweden is rapidly scaling back its vast social welfare system, plunging people like Ms.
Lizana into a world of new uncertainties.


Bill Murray Takes On De Niro and a Groundhog
One day Bill Murray is in a movie with a groundhog; the next, he's in a movie with Robert De Niro.
The groundhog is easy to act circles around and doesn't get any good lines.
In Mr.
De Niro's favor, he offers a richer character to play against and probably doesn't bite when he gets annoyed.
It's a strange and versatile career Bill Murray has, but there is nothing fluky at work.
"Groundhog Day" and "Mad Dog and Glory" are the season's most entertaining films because Mr.
Murray is the screen's most likable cynic.


Marijuana Is More Than a Symbol: It Endangers Users and Others
To the Editor:
In reference to last Sunday's cover story ("Repotted," by Ian Fisher), if I were handling public relations for the marijuana division of the illegal-drugs industry, I would be ecstatic.
Since I've spent 20 years with two leading public-relations companies, I feel qualified to judge the consequences of articles.
More important, until her recent death, I was married to the author Peggy Mann, who became the hero and the hope of parents across America as one of the country's foremost authors of books and articles about preventing drug abuse.


Aqueduct Closed Today
Aqueduct, which was closed yesterday because of the storm, will be closed again today, the New York Racing Association announced yesterday.
The nine races set for today, including the Distaff Handicap for fillies and mares, will be run on Wednesday.


Van Slyke Has Surgery
ANDY VAN SLYKE underwent arthroscopic surgery on his right knee yesterday in Pittsburgh, and the Pirates said they were optimistic he would be ready to play by opening day.
The team orthopedist, Dr.
JACK FAILLA, removed loose cartilage from Van Slyke's right knee and said the center fielder would miss two or three weeks.
That would be enough time for Van Slyke to recover for his team's April 6 opener at Pittsburgh against San Diego.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Feb. 27 MANHATTAN East Midtown  $1.5 million
721 Fifth Avenue (56th St.)  (Trump Tower)  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,800-sq.-ft. condo in a 10-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned elevator, dining room, 9-ft. ceilings; common charge $2,448, taxes $20,676 (Broker: Corcoran Group) SoHo  $325,000
136 Grand Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 2,100-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, 11-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $880, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia) SoHo  $2.7 million
59 Wooster Street  6-bedroom, 7-bath, 7.500-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; dining area, 5 fireplaces, terrace, 4 exposures, 2 skylights, sauna; maintenance $2,200, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group) Upper East Side  $315,000
316 East 72d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room; maintenance $1,135, 65% tax-deductible (Broker: David Day Realty) Upper West Side  $590,000
15 West 72d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room, Central Park view; maintenance $1,500, 47% tax-deductible (Broker: Halstead Property Co.) BRONX Classon Point  $155,000
748 Taylor Avenue  2-family detached brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, 1 bath in each; 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Marland Real Estate) Riverdale  $135,000
2-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached brick house; eat-in kitchen, finished attic, six 1-car garages, 114- by 39-ft. irregular lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Trebach Realty) BROOKLYN Brighton Beach  $270,000
3063 Brighton 13th Street  4-family semiattached brick house; 2 bedrooms in three units; 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each, 1-car garage, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,600 (Broker: Homes R' Beautiful) Park Slope  $282,000
92 Prospect Place  3-family semiattached brownstone; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, eat-in kitchen, private garden in owner's duplex unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining area in two simplex units, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,200 (Broker: Aguayo &amp; Knox) Sheepshead Bay  $177,000
2630 East 29th Street  3-bedrooms, 1 1/2-bath, attached one-family brick side-hall colonial; dining room, front and rear porches, new windows and bath, finished basement, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,538 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty) QUEENS Forest Hills  $315,000
68-23 Clyde Street  2-family semiattached, brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, fireplace, eat-in kitchen in each unit; 2-car garage, 23- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Dix Realty-Advantage Realty) Rego Park  $223,000
64-54 Booth Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family attached, stucco-frame house; dining room, fireplace, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.) STATEN ISLAND Emerson Hill  $210,000
34 Witteman Place  3 bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, detached one-family brick house; dining room, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, attached 2-car garage, 88- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,500 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty) Heartland Village  $215,000
101 Bowdoin Street  2-family detached, hi-ranch; 3 bedrooms, 2 1/2 baths, dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,200 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
HISTORY OF YACHTING
Mystic Seaport will sponsor its fifth annual Yachting History Symposium Friday through Sunday, focused on the subject of boat-building.
The fee is $100 whether participants stay for three days or one.
Registration starts at 1 P.M.
Friday, followed by a series of lectures that will end at 5 P.M.
Speakers include Stephen Burnell, yachting journalist from the Pacific Northwest; Tom Nye, City Island historian, and Harold Shield, a boat-show organizer from Toronto.
There will be time for questions following each talk.


SURFACING
WEATHER --
A "snow event":
The recent prevalence of snow in this hemisphere has prompted a linguistic revision.
Storm Field, a Channel 2 weatherman, has been repeatedly describing such climactic disturbances as "snow events" -- as if snow were Mother Nature's idea of performance art.
HEALTH --
Post-Biennial exhaustion:
Is it art or is it post-modern boot camp?
Otherwise-hardy New Yorkers are requiring extensive doses of bed rest and Mary Tyler Moore reruns even after just an hour inside the Whitney Museum's installationfest.
MUSIC --
From crayons to perfume:
Her hair flip is gone and her voice more seasoned, but Lulu's back.
Specialty record shops in New York report healthy sales of the "To Sir With Love" star's new extended single and album, "Independence," and Billboard magazine named it the top dance breakout single last week.
Can a Petula Clark revival be far behind?


BALKAN UPDATE
Tuzla, Bosnia  Bosnia's military forces have begun airlifting the critically wounded and severely ill from besieged Muslim enclaves in the republic's east to a hospital in Tuzla.
Sarajevo, Bosnia  A Serbian nationalist fighter took the witness stand at his trial and said he killed and raped dozens of Muslims in Serbian "ethnic cleansing" offensives last year.
United Nations  Serbia's President said he would try to insure that the military commander of Bosnian Serbs attended peace talks scheduled to resume on Tuesday, diplomats said.


Johnny One-Note on Health Care
To the Editor:
Of the 35, not one represents psychologists, social workers or nurses.
The only psychiatrist in the group represents a business interest.
I had thought that in this century we had come to realize that mental and emotional disturbances deserve the same attention as do physical and biological pathologies.
SHEILA J. KAPLAN New York, March 1  The author is executive secretary of the New York State Psychological Association.


In Garden City, First Class All the Way
WHEN the new Garden City Hotel opened a decade ago, its fine restaurants with their well-trained staffs, elegant good looks and impressive food shattered Long Island hotel-dining stereotypes.
Last fall, the Polo Grill continued its upward march with the arrival of Richard Allen as executive chef.
Mr.
Allen lighted up the Island's culinary skies last summer at the Crescent in Bayville.
His exciting cooking reflects a myriad of influences, including classical European training, four and a half years at Le Gavroche in London, his Mediterranean dishes at the Opera Restaurant in Los Angeles and the cutting-edge California cuisine he adopted while at the Checkers Hotel and the Citrus Restaurant in Los Angeles.


Measuring Makes Laying Tiles Easier
COVERING a kitchen or bathroom countertop with ceramic tile is fairly easy, although planning and patience are required.
Tile adheres readily to virtually any stable surface that accepts tile adhesive and resists moisture, including plastic laminates like Formica.
All materials, including rented tools for cutting tile, are available.
Choose vitreous tile, which is the least porous variety.
To minimize the need to cut tiles, combine selecting them with planning their layout and preparing the countertop surface.
Making a scale drawing of the countertop on graph paper and superimposing trial layouts on tracing paper over it, can help.
Remember to include spacing between the tiles for grout.


A Desert Survival Team
IF not for a furry little Mexican bat with a long nose, the saguaro cactus -- that skinny giant of the Sonoran Desert in the Southwest that stretches its arms toward the sky -- might have toppled off the evolutionary trail millenniums ago.
And so might have the bat, if not for the cactus's waxy white flowers that bloom in May, opening like big trumpets when night falls and the bats fly out of their caves.


New Jersey, A Home for Musicals
AS Broadway struggles to keep musical theater breathing, New Jersey is increasingly emerging as a center -- in preservation and in development -- for the song and dance show, the traditional mainstay of the Manhattan stage.
While the number of incoming Broadway musicals has dwindled to a paltry few, with four scheduled to open before the season's end in May, the state's professional theaters will have had six by the beginning of June.
Of the two musicals that have opened on Broadway this season, one ("My Favorite Year") is closed; the other ("The Goodbye Girl"), an expected hit, was trounced by the critics.


N.F.L. Free Agents Hear Some Vigorous Sales Pitches
With the new world of free agency, National Football League teams are for the first time having to resort to old-fashioned recruiting techniques to attract players.
Clubs are making appeals to the free agents' families, creating videotapes to promote the advantages of certain areas as places to live, and introducing the visiting free agents to politicians and other local dignitaries.
In Phoenix, the Cardinals are even plastering the way in from the airport with billboards that include the names of the special visitors.


National Service Proposal Exploits the Poor; A Double Bargain
To the Editor:
"National Service -- Now" (Op-Ed, Feb. 28) by Bill Clinton reminded me of my year in the Vista program, Volunteers in Service to America more than 12 years ago in Decatur, Ill.
I was a college graduate originally from New York earning a little more than $300 a month working as a credit and housing specialist.
My sponsor was a nonprofit agency, which was efficient and did not resemble a government bureaucracy.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93 -- Early Warnings, Then Snow, Leave a Stillness Over 3 States; New Jersey: Malls Don't Open And Buses Stop
The snow began falling before dawn today, and it seemed as if it would never stop.
It snowed so much that New Jersey's major highways were all but impassable, its mass transit paralyzed and its biggest shopping malls closed.
And along the coastline, the state's much-battered beaches lost more sand to wind and tide, with a high midnight tide threatening to cut off roads and power.


Help the Guantanamo Haitians
More than 200 Haitians infected with the AIDS virus languish in a primitive camp on the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay, forbidden to enter this country and unable to return home for fear of persecution.
Despite the ban on immigrants infected with the AIDS virus, there are strong humanitarian and political reasons to make an exception for this small band of refugees.
Their plight overrides the small medical risks and the costs they might impose.
And they would not bring the same problems as would a large wave of permanent immigrants.


Enjoying Whales At a Safe Distance
The Feb. 21 article "Whale-Watching Cruises Take a Northerly Turn" should do much for this budding New Jersey industry.
I have been on similar trips off Cape Cod, and it is nice to know it won't be necessary to travel a long distance to enjoy these creatures.
Of particular interest was the reference to safety guidelines followed by operators, indicating that boats must keep a safe distance away from the whales.
It seems a more global approach to the safety issue would be more effective, with the impending slaughter of these creatures by some countries.


Message Of Possibility
To the Editor:
Perhaps the allure of the legend of Martin Guerre  [ "A Mystery Haunts the Ages," Feb. 21 ]  is not in its portrayal of uncertainty but in its message of dream and possibility.


Corrections
A report in the Night column last Sunday about the restaurant Orso referred incorrectly to Robert Benton, who was a customer there.
He was co-author of the screenplay of "Bonnie and Clyde"; the director was Arthur Penn.


Nancy Pyle and Rodney Nichols
Nancy Stephenson Pyle, a vice president in international planning and development in New York for the American University of Beirut, was married yesterday to Rodney Wayson Nichols, the chief executive of the New York Academy of Sciences.
The Rev.
L.
Denver Hart performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Bartholomew's Church in New York.
Mrs.
Nichols, 48, graduated from Smith College and received a Ph.D. in Islamic art and architecture from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas W. Stephenson of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Her father, now retired, was the public affairs director of the Du Pont Company.
Her mother, Elizabeth Stephenson, designs indoor gardens in Chestnut Hill.


Pedigreed Pawnshop Deals Discreetly With a Big Burglary
The Provident Loan Society is where Jim Thorpe pawned his Olympic medals in 1912 and where the newspaper heiress Evalyn Walsh McLean gave the Star of the East diamond as security for $50,000 in fast cash 20 years later.
A down-and-out Theodore Dreiser once pawned a watch there for $25, an amount he used to turn his life around before writing "An American Tragedy."
The institution has existed for more than 99 years, making many loans for under a dollar and others for tens of thousands.
Inside its mahogany-paneled headquarters, clerks still fill out tickets with wooden pencils.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.Voter Registration: Vote to cut off debate and begin consideration of a bill that would make it easier to register voters.
Approved 62 to 38 (60 votes were needed), March 9.
2.Line-Item Veto: Procedural vote to waive Senate rules to consider a line-item veto amendment to a bill that would make it easier to register voters.
Rejected 52 to 45, March 10.
1
2
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
Y
N
Lieberman (D) . . .
Y
N
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Y
N
Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y
N
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
N
Y
Moynihan (D) . . .
Y
N
House
1.
Immigrants With H.I.V.: Procedural vote to instruct House conferees on a medical research bill to accept Senate language that would ban immigration into the United States by people infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
Approved 356 to 58, March 11.
2.
N.I.H.: Vote on passage of a bill to expand the authority of the National Institutes of Health, to direct it to concentrate greater efforts on women in health issues, and to put financial power in the institute's Office of AIDS research.
Approved 283 to 131, March 11.
1
2
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
N
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Y
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
Y
5. Franks (R) . . .
Y
Y
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Y
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
Y
3. Saxton (R) . . .
Y
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
N
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
Y
6. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
Y
7. Franks (R) . . .
Y
Y
8. Klein (D) . . .
Y
Y
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
Y
Y
10. Payne (D) . . .
N
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
Y
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
Y
13. Menendez (D) . . .
Y
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
Y
2. Lazio (R) . . .
Y
Y
3. King (R) . . .
Y
N
4. Levy (R) . . .
Y
Y
5. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
N
Y
7. Manton (D) . . .
Y
Y
8. Nadler (D) . . .
N
Y
9. Schumer (D) . . .
Y
Y
10. Towns (D) . . .
N
Y
11. Owens (D) . . .
N
Y
12. Velazquez (D) . . .
N
Y
13. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
Y
14. Maloney (D) . . .
Y
Y
15. Rangel (D) . . .
N
Y
16. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
Y
17. Engel (D) . . .
N
Y
18. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
Y
19. Fish (R) . . .
Y
Y
20. Gilman (R) . . .
Y
Y
21. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
Y
22. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
N
23. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
Y
24. McHugh (R) . . .
Y
Y
25. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
N
26. Hinchey (D) . . .
Y
Y
27. Paxon (R) . . .
Y
N
28. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
Y
29. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
Y
30. Quinn (R) . . .
Y
N
31. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Corrections
A listing on Feb. 14 with an article about Costa del Sol and a related correction in this space on Feb. 28 misstated the fax number for Joan Parker, who rents villas there.
It is 58-61-05-27.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Wilmington, Del.; A 'Colosseum' For Baseball
MOTORISTS traveling along the elevated sections of Interstate 95 slicing through the state's largest city have been getting a bird's-eye view of the construction of a much-ballyhooed baseball stadium.
The yet-to-be-named 5,500-seat stadium, wedged between the highway and a vacant industrial building, will be home to the newly created Wilmington Blue Rocks, a Carolina League Class A team.


Investigators Hunting for 3 Suspects as Conspirators in World Trade Center Bombing
The authorities are searching for at least three more suspects in the bombing of the World Trade Center and believe they narrowly missed arresting one of them on Friday, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
Along with two men already under arrest, the three were said to be listed on records of a Jersey City storage locker where chemicals believed to match used in the bomb were found.


Clinton Judgment On Wrong Track
To the Sports Editor:
If President Clinton wants to jog ("Presidents Should Run in Circles," The Times, Feb. 26), that's his prerogative.
But couldn't he have circumvented the media hoopla surrounding the construction of a White House jogging track by simply purchasing a treadmill?


Mattingly Is Boss, Not Steinbrenner
To the Sports Editor:
There has been too much talk about the second coming of George Steinbrenner and the possible effect on the Yankees.
Don Mattingly is the team, as noted in Claire Smith's column ("It's Not the Boss, but Good Guess," The Times, Feb. 25), and people better recognize this because if he is not recognized, the Yankees may lose him when his contract is up.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: Meteorology; 3 Disturbances Became a Big Storm
The monstrous storm of March 1993 -- more intense than some hurricanes, bigger than the legendary blizzard of March 1888 -- is a classic East Coast winter cyclone, or low-pressure system.
But this type of cyclone has not been seen in a decade, and its scope and power have not been seen in a century or more.
"I guess it has happened, but not in modern history, and certainly nothing this late in the year, over such a wide area," said Paul G. Knight, a meteorologist at the Pennsylvania State University Weather Communications Group.


Spring Break, and the Beach Beckons
STUDENTS are on the move.
From now until late April, they will be flying, driving and busing to places where they can relax in the sun on their spring break.
Cancun, Mexico, is the No. 1 foreign choice, according to those who sell student travel, followed by Negril, Jamaica.
In Florida, Daytona Beach is the top draw, expecting 300,000 young people this year, with Panama City on the Gulf Coast coming up fast.
"Fort Lauderdale does not exist," one operator said.
Fort Lauderdale, which by 1985 found itself unhappily awash in student bodies, elected its nonexistence by hotel and beach ordinances and through heavy promotion aimed at other sources of tourists.
The travel agents agreed that students wanted a beach, preferably with an easygoing atmosphere, a hotel on the beach, possibly with a kitchenette, and a minimum of trouble to get there.
Florida, reachable by car or bus in 20 or 22 hours from New York, is both cheap and accessible.
Mario A. Ricciardelli, owner of Take a Break in Boston, a tour operator, said that a Daytona bus-hotel package with four or five people in a room might cost $239 each, depending on the week.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Early March auto sales, millions
6.7
6.0
Tuesday
February housing starts, millions
1.19
1.21
February building permits, millions
1.18
1.19
Wednesday
Feb. consumer prices, percent change
0.5
0.1
Feb. industrial production, percent change
0.4
0.4
Feb. capacity utilization, percent
79.5
79.8
Thursday
Jan. trade deficit, billions of dollars
7.0
7.4
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
376
360
Friday
U.S. budget, change in billions of dollars
29.8
-45.0
Tuesday: Johnson Redbook survey released  Thursday: Bundesbank meeting


A Hybrid Lens For Near and Far
THE future of photography may be seen through a new breed of aspheric lenses.
Until now, aspheric lenses have been difficult to make and very expensive.
To produce an aspheric lens required the precision grinding of each element so finely and accurately that when the elements were put together, wonderful optics emerged.


Assistance in Dealing With Head Injuries
As an addendum to "After a Coma, Finishing New York Marathon"  [ Nov. 1 ]  there appeared a resource list for help.
It appears that our organization did not appear at all, although it is the oldest and largest program in the State of New York.
The New York State Head Injury Association is an affiliate of the National Head Injury Foundation.
Both were created 11 years ago, and the major purpose is to provide information, educate, advocate, but most importantly to establish support groups for the person who has sustained a head injury and for the family, as well.


Terry Greenberg, David Goldsmith
Terry Ellen Greenberg, an account manager at Austin Knight Inc., an advertising agency in New York, was married yesterday evening to David Joe Goldsmith, the assistant director of admissions at the American Business Institute, also in New York.
Rabbi Henry Michaelman officiated at the Whitehall Club in New York.
Mrs.
Goldsmith, 34, is the daughter of Betty Greenberg of New Rochelle, N.Y., and the late Frederic G. Greenberg.
Her father was a senior partner of the former New York accounting firm of Clarence Rainess.
Her mother is the vice president of marketing for the World of Interior Design, an arts and antiques gallery in White Plains.


MOB TOWN
In "Mob Town" (Feb. 14), Michael Kelly provides interesting insights into a particular part of postwar Iraqi society -- that which profited from the war.
But, in doing so, he slips into some unfortunate cultural stereotyping.
He describes wealthy Iraqis at the Alwiyah Club "scooping up globs of hummus and baba gannouj, and gulping down tumblers of whisky." As an Arab-American from a middle-class family, I can tell him that eating hummus and other appetizers with one's fingers (that is, with bread) is not limited to the wealthy or to black marketers.
He describes his disgust at watching an Iraqi "shoveling" fat from boiled sheep's head into his mouth "as if he were stoking coal."


Up-to-the-Minute Rice
Rice is having a renaissance.
Rather than a mere afterthought -- a sad spoonful of white on a dinner plate -- rice is now rivaling pasta as both backbone and canvas for a main dish.
Pasta is actually the reason for rice's recent ascent.
Having wound itself around the nation's health concerns, rising from peasant to princely status in less than a decade, the once-lowly noodle blazed a trail for other humble staples.


Iguacu Falls
To the Editor: I read with interest Maureen B. Fant's article on Iguacu Falls ("South America's Mighty Iguacu," Jan. 24).
I write to emphasize the opportunities on the Argentine side.


Despite Recession, Australia Premier Is Re-elected
Prime Minister Paul Keating and his Labor Party held on to power in national parliamentary elections today despite an economic downturn, the worst since the 1930's, that has bred uncertainty about Australia's prospects and place in the world.
With most of the votes counted, it appeared that Labor would expand its current 7-seat majority in the 146-member house.
Television projections based on vote returns indicated that the party would probably end up with 84 seats.


WHAT'S OPEN, WHAT'S NOT
Airports: Port Authority officials said Newark, Kennedy and LaGuardia airports would not open before noon today.
Travelers should call their airlines before heading to the airports.
Trains: Between Washington and Boston, Amtrak trains were running with delays of one-and-a-half to three hours yesterday.
Similar delays are expected today.


Proportional Voting Didn't Corrupt Italy
To the Editor:
"Twilight in Italy" (editorial, March 3), on proposed electoral reforms in Italy, implies that proportional representation is somehow responsible for the widespread corruption shaking the political leadership of most of Italy's major and minor political parties.
And you suggest that Italy's succession of postwar non-Communist coalitions, supported by the United States precisely to keep Western Europe's largest Communist Party out of power, also contributed to the culture of corruption.


As 1968 Joins the Centuries, McCarthy Goes On
A quarter of a century has slipped by since Eugene J. McCarthy turned the Vietnam issue on President Lyndon B. Johnson in the 1968 New Hampshire primary, forcing him from the race.
But 25 years and a day later, the impact of that upset in the New England snow lingers in the Democratic Party and in the American political system generally.


Ukraine's Rising Star Sets Worlds Ablaze
Oksana Baiul listened to her skates, which told their 15-year-old owner from Ukraine that they were ready for wondrous things.
Nancy Kerrigan heard footsteps instead, and suffered an ugly meltdown that might require a period of introspective healing.
After a topsy-turvy day of triple jumps and epic flops at the World Championships, figure skating had itself a nimble, brawling teen-ager for a gold medalist.
Behind Baiul, Surya Bonaly of France was second, while Lu Chen of China finished third.
Kerrigan was dropped from first to fifth after a horrendous long program, and the United States team completed its worst performance at the Worlds since World War II.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a recipe on Feb. 28 for Oaxacan yellow mole filling and a recipe for pumpkin tamales with black-bean filling misstated the amount of tamale dough.
The correct amount is the yield from the basic tamale recipe, not 4 basic tamales.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the complete recipes may write to the Editor, The New York Times Magazine, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Lyrical Appreciation
To the Editor:
Charles M. Young's essay analyzing Eric Clapton's career  [ "Why Eric Clapton's Grief Touches His Generation," Feb. 21 ]  offers well-deserved praise for a musician/songwriter revered by colleagues and "civilians" alike.
"Tears in Heaven," from his album "Unplugged," is not only a beautiful song but touched a nerve in an audience now prepared to deal with life-and-death issues.


MARCH 7-13: Health-Industry Headaches; Take Shrewd Action and Call Hillary in the Morning
Hillary Rodham Clinton's publicity-shy work to overhaul health care has raised consumers' hopes, but causes anxiety among drug-makers and doctors trying to influence the outcome from outside the loop.
Last week they moved forcefully to get some relief.
The Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, representing drug companies, requested an exemption from antitrust laws so its members could restrain prices on their own.
The companies want to head off Federal price controls, and what they call "bureaucratic costs and inefficiencies," by collectively holding annual increases to the rise in the Consumer Price Index.


IN SHORT: FICTION
STORYVILLE By Lois Battle. Viking, $22.


An Opening Of Tulips
Works by David Croland at Stubbs Books and Prints, March 9.


Bond Traders Love Clinton, And Vice Versa
IT'S a wonderful time to be a bond trader.
It's not just that the value of bonds in inventory has risen so far, producing profits and big bonuses.
It's also the new respect from Washington.
Almost on an hourly basis, it seems, some Clinton Administration official cites the bond market as evidence of economic health and Wall Street approval.


Russia May Be A Spectacle Beyond Reach
CAN Bill Clinton save Boris Yeltsin?
The American President can embrace his Russian counterpart, send him food and money, promise to help reschedule his debts, invite him to a summit in Canada, ask him to help solve crises in the Balkans and the Middle East and maybe even look the other way if Mr.
Yeltsin does some undemocratic things in the name of democracy.
But he cannot resolve Russia's constitutional crisis, make Mr.
Yeltsin less a bully and more a statesman, pass a Russian code for private property, stabilize the ruble, dismantle Russia's nuclear arms, wipe out a bureaucratic mindset or settle Russia's disputes with Ukraine.


Sports of The Times; New Ice Age Has Struck The Big East
AGIANT depression looms over the Big East tournament, packing high winds and slippery underfooting, making for hazardous travel conditions.
We are not talking here about the snowstorm blasting the East Coast, but rather about Syracuse, the phantom of the opera, the overalls in the chowder, the abominable snowman, the big chill personified.


Nancy Berkowitz and Robert Kaplan
Nancy Deborah Berkowitz, a daughter of Florence Berkowitz of Brookline, Mass., and Dr.
Bernard Berkowitz of Saratoga Springs, N.Y., was married last evening to Robert Blair Kaplan, the son of Andrea and Harvey Kaplan of Woodbury, L.I.
Rabbi Emily Lipoff performed the ceremony at the Colonnade Hotel in Boston.
Mrs.
Kaplan, 25, is an English teacher and the assistant director of the Birch Wathen Lenox Middle School, a private school in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Columbia University.


Julie Nora Mack and Joseph Titlebaum
Julie Nora Mack, an associate at Coudert Brothers, was married last evening to Joseph Matthew Titlebaum, an associate at Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton, both New York law firms.
Rabbi Helaine Ettinger performed the ceremony at the Puck Building in New York.
Ms.
Mack, 28, is keeping her name.
Next month, she and her husband are to become associates in the Tokyo offices of their law firms.
The bride graduated from Harvard University, from which she and Mr.
Titlebaum, a graduate of Columbia University, received their law degrees.
She is the daughter of S. Kenneth and Beatrice Mack of Wyckoff, N.J.
Ms.
Mack's father, who is retired, was a vice president of Mack Drug Stores, a chain of pharmacies formerly in Moonachie, N.J.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: Workers; An Army With Plows For a War In the Streets
Hundreds of sanitation workers took the reins of their plows and salt spreaders about 7 A.M. yesterday, maneuvering the lumbering beasts onto the roadways of New York City to do battle with the swirling snow that had already begun to paralyze many neighborhoods.
Frank J. Gallo, a veteran of the urban weather wars, was ordered to unclog a normally bustling section of lower Manhattan that within the first hours of the storm had turned into a quagmire.
Creeping through the streets at 5 miles per hour, his plow reclaimed small swaths of territory from Mother Nature.


Put a Tax on Litigation
To the Editor:
The tax debate should consider a tax on litigation, perhaps a 1 percent or 2 percent filing tax, paid up front by the litigant but reimbursed in whole or in part by a similar augmentation of any settlement.
Civil damage claims, Forbes magazine has estimated, amount to hundreds of billions of dollars annually and are increasing twice as fast as the gross national product.


Greenburgh Supervisor Faces Democratic Fight
When Paul J. Feiner, a Democrat, decided two years ago to give up his seat on the County Board of Legislators for a chance to become Greenburgh town supervisor, he found that his highest hurdle was winning the support of his own political party.
He cleared it, but just barely, winning the Greenburgh Democratic Committee's endorsement for supervisor by a 1 percent margin over Lois T. Bronz, a former Town Councilwoman.
Then he successfully overcame the opposition of the 75-year-old incumbent supervisor, Anthony J. Veteran, a powerful Democrat who had decided to delay his planned retirement to keep "this harebrained kid," as he referred to Mr.
Feiner, out of the supervisor's office.


A Caramoor for All Seasons: Year-Round Music and Art
IF the name Caramoor conjures up summer sunshine, acres of green and music by moonlight, look again.
Even as the snow melts and the bare trees stretch toward spring, the Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts here is welcoming visitors and celebrating beauty.
The idea, said Howard Herring, Caramoor's executive director, is to make this sequestered estate of the late Walter and Lucie Rosen a year-round destination for a wider number of people.
Somehow, he said, no matter how many maps have been included in its brochures and programs, Caramoor has remained unknown to many county residents.
Others, despite its winter programs, regard the place as a kind of Brigadoon that slumbers until July and August.


Making a Difference; A Former Dishwasher Plays A Big Part in Sardi's Revival
THE venerable Sardi's, which was down and out in 1990, seems to be alive and well in 1993.
Center stage during the comeback has been Vincent Sardi Jr., 77, who came out of retirement to keep his theater-district restaurant from ending its more-than-70-year run.
The man behind the scenes, however, is Max Klimavicius.


Isles' Big-Ticket Weekend Is Disrupted
The biggest winter storm in years spoiled the Islanders' biggest weekend of the season here, forcing postponement of the team's game with the champion Pittsburgh Penguins scheduled for this evening.
In Landover, Md., the storm also caused the Rangers to miss a game with the Capitals.
With games against top divisional rivals scheduled for today and Sunday against Washington, the Islanders had been expecting crowds of close to capacity at Nassau Coliseum.
Even the Stanley Cup was on display as part of its centennial tour.
But today's game was called off about four hours before the 5:10 P.M. face-off.
The two teams will try to play the game Sunday at 5:10 P.M.


Landlords Develop a Taste for Takeout
UPSCALE takeout food shops, with and without places to sit and eat, are becoming ever more visible in midtown and downtown Manhattan and are creating ripples in the world of New York real estate.
Brokers say that more and more landlords, who in the past would rather have eaten moldy tuna on stale rye than let a food establishment into their high-toned buildings, are eagerly taking takeout into their arms, especially if the cooking is done off the premises and the places have a classy look about them that is not reminiscent of the corner deli.


Designers Respond to 'Where Is Art?'
"I don't believe for a second that art is a painting on a wall or a sculpture in a garden," said the director of the Silvermine Guild Arts Center, Brian Gormley, over lunch in a New Canaan restaurant.
"Art is everything," he continued, "and everything, from the coffemaker to the salt shaker, is designed."
To celebrate design in everyday life, Mr.
Gormley has devised a monthlong exploration of the American esthetic titled "Art in Living." Symposiums running through April 1 feature representatives from architecture, graphic design, landscape design, glassware and performing arts, to name a few areas. (The events will be held in various places in Fairfield County and are open to the public for a nominal donation. For information call 966-9700.)


Debbie Davis And John Porada
Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel C. Davis of Encino, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Debbie Lynn Davis, to John Anthony Porada, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Porada of Brooklyn.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Davis, 26, graduated from Barnard College.
She is a technical legal assistant in the electronic publishing department of Matthew Bender &amp; Company, a legal publishing company, in New York.
Her father is the western region manager of American Gramophone Records, an Omaha-based recording company, in Los Angeles.
Her mother, E. Luann Davis, teaches Spanish at the Buckley School, a private elementary and secondary school in Sherman Oaks, Calif.


Maija Smith, John Arbolino
Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Philip Smith of Katonah, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Maija Tuulikki Smith to John Paul Arbolino, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Arbolino of Harrington Park, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Smith, 30, is an assistant vice president at the Bankers Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Rochester, from which she also received an M.B.A.
Her father is the president and chief operating officer of the Lewco Securities Corporation, a securities clearing concern, and a managing director of Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, an investment bank, both in New York.


Henneman Re-signs
Relief ace MIKE HENNEMAN agreed to a three-year contract with the Detroit Tigers, a deal that replaces the $3,437,500, one-year contract he agreed to in February.


STREET GUNS
While the expressions "dressed to kill" and "dressed to the nines" are more or less synonymous, the ready availability of lethal weaponry of all kinds in this country gives each an entirely new dimension.
JAMES W. HAMILTON, M.D.
Santa Fe, N.M.


Conversations/Mariko Mitsui; A Feminist Politician in Tokyo Uses Anger and Pranks to Battle Despair
IT has never been easy tilting against the male-dominated establishment in this tradition-bound country, but many women feel the news from Japan's war of the sexes has not been good lately.
Part-time workers, 70 percent of whom are women, have been hit hardest by the recession.
The number of women in political office, after a brief boomlet in the 1980's, has been declining.
Two female politicians have complained that they were groped by male colleagues, one on the buttocks and one on the breast; neither got much sympathy.
And the woman most in the news these days is Masako Owada, a brainy diplomat who set what some here see as an ambiguous example by abandoning her career to become engaged -- to the Crown Prince.


Elizabeth Gibbens And Mark Epley
Mr. and Mrs.
Wayne Gibbens of Arlington, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Ann Gibbens, to Mark Jeffrey Epley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marion Jay Epley 3d of Millbrook, N.Y.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Gibbens, 25, is a curatorial assistant at the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University.
Her father is president of the Mid-Continent Oil and Gas Association, a trade group, in Washington.


Please Hold for the President
President Clinton promised to cleanse politics and curb the special interests, and millions of people agreed with those goals.
Alas, there is reason to wonder if the chairman and staff of the Democratic National Committee count themselves in that number.
The D.N.C. chairmanship was turned over to a Clinton campaign aide named David Wilhelm.
Friends say he's a reformer at heart, but under his leadership, the professional Democrats are looking for ways to preserve the loophole through which special interests flush big bucks into both parties.
By giving to the parties, big donors like corporations, labor unions and wealthy individuals can dodge the limits on contributions made directly to candidates.
The party can then spend these unrestricted gifts on behalf of the candidates.


Sarah L. Judd, Peter O. Branscombe
Dr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Judd of New Britain, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sarah Larkin Judd, to Peter Ogilvy Branscombe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Branscombe of New York.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Judd is a fourth-grade teacher at the Foote School, a private elementary school, in New Haven.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father, who teaches and lectures on emergency medicine, is the vice president of Central Connecticut State University in New Britain.
Her mother, Nancy Judd, is the director of admissions and development at Moreland Hill School, a private school in Kensington, Conn.


Business Diary/March 7-12
THE ECONOMY Into Each Camelot Some Inflation Must Fall


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
CAT-FISH.
Written and illustrated by Jill Newton.
Lothrop, Lee &amp; Shepard. $14. (Ages 4 and up) A fisherman's cat decides to go to sea.
Witty, wettish watercolor illustrations.


Malcolm McDowell Post-'Clockwork'
You still recognize Malcolm McDowell, even if it is, in a manner of speaking, 20 years since you are likely to have seen him last.
He has white hair now -- a bit thin, if truth must be known -- and he has, as he puts it, finally grown into that young punk's face, taken off the sheen of adolescence and replaced it with the solidity of a 49-year-old man.
But Mr.
McDowell's is a face you don't quickly forget, even if you may not quickly place it.
It has to do with the intensity of his blue eyes and a certain inextinguishable rakishness.
It was the face of the rebellious schoolboy Mick Travis in "If . . . . ," Lindsay Anderson's 1969 parable about a revolution at a British boarding school, that in its time was the film of the moment.
Then, most memorably, it was the face of the ultimate punk, the almost irredeemably and yet somehow joyfully vicious gang leader named Alex in "A Clockwork Orange" in 1971, directed by Stanley Kubrick.


Some Good Reasons for Sauteing and Stir-Frying
IT was Barbara Tropp's new "China Moon Cookbook" (Workman, 1992) that started me stir-frying and sauteing again.
Recently, unless I'd been cooking something special on the weekend, after work I've tended to make simple pastas or grilled dishes.
But after looking at the recipes in her book, I set off for Chinatown in Manhattan, to get the ingredients and try some of the excellent recipes.
They tend to be rather complex, using oils and pastes and other ingredients that are either hard to find outside Chinatown or have to be homemade from another recipe in the book.
It is worth the trouble, though, for the flavors are unexpected and extraordinary.
Having said this, the recipe for pork with Chinese egg noodles with spinach and asparagus is a simplified version, and it works especially well as a one-dish supper.


Bias Charged In Promotions Of Firefighters
AS hundreds of firefighters across New Jersey take oral examinations for promotion this month, officials of fire unions are charging that the state's Department of Personnel and the United States Department of Justice have practiced reverse discrimination in the testing process.
They say that the Personnel Department, which administers both the oral exams and the written tests that precede them, has consistently sought to promote minority candidates, often at the expense of other candidates.


To Prune or Not, the Time Has Come
IT is time to be outdoors with the pruning shears.
This should be good news to those novices who have cabin fever, and it should also serve as a gentle reminder for experienced gardeners to get busy.
Pruning woody plants now is a good idea for several reasons.
In the first place, the plants are dormant and pruning them will not have the damaging stimulating effect it could have if the pruning were delayed another month or so.
The inner sap is not pushing up rapidly now, and the pruned areas will not bleed as they might if pruning were delayed.
Also, when plants are dormant, it is easy to see their shape and to know what cuts need to be made.


When Children Have to Deal With a Loved One's Death
YOU would think the Ryan Whites of the world have had enough to do with tragedy.
But there in the basement of the Hospice of the South Shore sat Ryan White of Ronkonkoma, another victim of a fatal circumstance.
Ryan is 7.
The age of Little League homers and Super Mario triumphs.
Not the age to have your mother die.
But Ryan's did.
Eight months ago.


Johnny One-Note on Health Care
To the Editor:
Where are the Puerto Rican, African-American, Mexican-American or Native American health care providers?
As a Puerto Rican physician and member of the National Medical Association, I was appalled to learn that the N.M.A. has not been approached for input on health care reform.
Neither has any other group representing minority physicians and their patients.
Some of the constituencies most in need and standing to be critically affected by the decisions now being hammered out are once again out of the loop.


CREAM OF THE CROCK
What's the dish in tableware?
The plain white plate has been reinvented thanks to fantasy shapes, witty lettering and evocative textures.
Table talk.
Read all about it!
There's an abracadabra magic about words written on dishes, whether they say Paris bistro or IHOP diner.


New in the 2d Grade: Business Education
FOR 74 years, Junior Achievement has taught teen-agers about business, but last year its volunteer adult executives appeared in second-grade classrooms.
They came with programs intended to give students as young as kindergarteners hands-on lessons in the basic skills they will need to become part of the future work force.
Too young, one might think, to understand things like decision-making or an assembly production line.
Not so, said Leigh J. Abrams, the chairman of the Westchester County division of Junior Achievement of the Hudson Valley, which celebrated its 20th anniversary last month.
The programs, he said, give young children incentives to learn.


Honoring Gerry Mulligan, Composer
When Gerry Mulligan was a teen-ager playing the saxophone at the Academy of Music in Philadelphia, in a concert that featured some of the new jazz talent of the day, Charlie Parker invited him to a post-concert jam session.
Because he thought he was there only to listen, the young musician was "scared to death" when the legendary saxophonist insisted he play.
"It never hurts to have someone like him give you a shove when you're young," Mr.
Mulligan said recently.


Cairo Security Is Tightened After Blast
The bomb blast that tore through a Cairo cafe on Feb. 26, killing two foreign tourists and two Egyptians, and wounding 16, has prompted Egyptian officials to institute new security measures to halt assaults by Islamic militants against foreign tourists.
Altogether, three tourists have died and at least two dozen have been wounded in the attacks, which began last fall and have included armed militants firing automatic weapons on tourist buses.
The attacks have devastated the country's $2.5 billion tourism industry.
Tour operators report declines of up to 60 and 70 percent.


The Twin Towers: Sifting Through Mideast Politics In Ashes of World Trade Center -- Sheik Rahman; The Cleric Under Scrutiny
On a Thursday night, hours after the first suspect in the World Trade Center bombing had been arrested in New Jersey, Sheik Rahman, the Egyptian cleric who went blind from childhood diabetes, walked into a Detroit area mosque.
He was trailed by 30 to 50 supporters and he demanded to speak.
In the Islamic tradition of hospitality, the imam of the Dearborn Islam mosque, Mohamed Moussa, invited him to join the prayers.
But as the prayers began, said Arab-American leaders in Dearborn, the sheik's followers started chanting and demanding that their own holy man speak.
Some worshipers wanted to call the police.


Church Honors History and Looks To Its Future
EVER since it was built 134 years ago, the Mamaroneck United Methodist Church has been prized as a fine example of Carpenter Gothic architecture.
The church, built in 1859 by Solomon Gedney, a shipbuilding carpenter, also has a more mundane distinction: its steeple, rising 120 feet on East Boston Post Road, is a guide for sailors and plane pilots.


The Future of Tall Towers Shaken By Circumstances at Street Level
AS investigators and construction workers inched their way last week to Ground Zero, an old question about the World Trade Center, once the audacious symbol of a city that never doubted its ability to reinvent itself, was also being exhumed: Should it ever have been built?
The crippling bombing exposed the vulnerabilities of a complex made for the very idea of an intense concentration of commerce.
That the concentration came under the sponsorship of a public agency only aggravated to the question.In the bombing's aftermath, for example, was the spectacle of financially pressed landlords scrambling to win tenants dislocated from a mega-competitor owned not by a private company, but by a public agency that pays the city relatively modest fees in lieu of real estate taxes.


The Nonproliferation Treaty Bares Its Toothlessness
ONLY a few months ago North Korea seemed like a pathbreaking example of how the world's great powers can set aside other differences to make sure that fanatical leaders and nuclear bombs are kept apart.
Faced with overwhelming evidence that the hard-line Communist regime of Kim Il Sung was building a bomb, the United States harnessed the West, and then Russia and China, to stop the project from turning into a nightmare.
For most of last year, it looked like the strategy was working.
Beneath his usual cloud of defiant oratory, the 80-year old Mr.
Kim finally agreed to live up to his obligations under the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
He allowed international inspectors to visit the mysterious nuclear site called Yongbyon.
His motives seemed clear.
He sought the trade and investment he desperately needs, especially now that there are reports of food riots and troops stand on rail-side coal piles to keep the residents from stealing enough to heat their homes.


Haiti Arrests Man on Way to Asylum in the U.S.
In a move that provoked a strong rebuke from the Clinton Administration, the Haitian military has arrested and imprisoned a 22-year-old Haitian deserter who last week was granted political refugee status by United States officials in Haiti.
The military chief of security at the Port-au-Prince airport arrested the refugee, William Corascelan, on Thursday morning, moments before he was to fly to asylum in Miami and days before the first scheduled meeting between President Clinton and Haiti's deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Sound Bytes; At I.B.M., Staying Ahead of the Bureaucracy Police
AS a high school student in postwar Japan, Nobuo Mii won the Minister of Education Award for building his own television set.
It was the beginning of a lifetime of research and invention, first in communications with NHK, Japan's national broadcasting company, and since 1969 with the International Business Machines Corporation.
Mr.
Mii had sharpened his English while searching out spare electronic parts at American military bases, became head of NHK's effort to computerize and as such caught the attention of I.B.M. recruiters.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MY FATHER'S SON Memories of War and Peace.
By Farley Mowat.
Peter Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.


Coming of Age


For Construction Workers, Opportunities From Tragedy
After hours of hauling rubble out of the damaged basement of the World Trade Center, Charles Janus collapsed into a chair and lit a cigarette.
His face was black with soot and when he lifted his cup of coffee, pain spread through his 50-year-old body.
But Mr.
Janus was happy, for the disaster at the Trade Center has turned his life around.
"You have to be out of work for months to appreciate going back," he said.
A phone call from the Turner Construction Company, which is handling some of the repairs at the complex, brought his first job since last summer.


Iguacu Falls
To the Editor: I am tired of letters to the editor like the one from Alan Weiss (Feb. 14) continuing to bad-mouth Rio.


Carbajal, Down Twice, Unifies Title With Knockout
The first belt Michael Carbajal ever won was made of cardboard.
He was approximately 11 years old, and he and his kid brother, Angel, concocted a makeshift belt out of a shoe box.
They then fought for its rights, in their steamy Phoenix backyard, with Michael eventually taking the prize to bed.
Carbajal's belts weigh a lot more now.
Tonight, he unified the International Boxing Federation and World Boxing Council championships (108- pound class) by knocking out Humberto (Chiquita) Gonzalez with a seventh-round left hand that Gonzalez never saw coming.


Corrections
A report in the Postings column on Jan. 31 about a new ornamental pergola for the New York Yacht Club identified the architects of Grand Central Terminal incompletely.
Reed &amp; Stem did the basic design.
A reader noted the error in a letter dated Jan. 31; publication of this correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


Green's Watchword: Location, Location, Location
Norman Green, owner of the Minnesota North Stars, used to park his black Rolls-Royce in a Met Center corridor.
That way, he didn't face winter weather in the parking lot or knowledgeable fans who might discuss his sports business.
Parking there made it easier for him to beat traffic for the drive home or to Dallas or to wherever his real-estate instincts led him.
Green won't need his space today when the Stars play their first home game since he announced he would move his team to Dallas next season.
He will never go back to Minnesota for a game, Green said by phone from Dallas, because "people are reacting emotionally."


Tiffany Nitka, Angus McDougall Jr.
Tiffany Anne Nitka, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore L. Nitka of Clearwater, Fla., was married there yesterday to Angus James McDougall Jr., the son of Mr.
McDougall of Toorak, Victoria, Australia, and the late Joan F. McDougall.
The Rev.
Thomas Madden performed the ceremony at St.
Cecelia's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
McDougall, 25, is a brand manager at the Procter &amp; Gamble subsidiary in Hong Kong.
She graduated magna cum laude from Georgetown University.


Stuffed Shirts They're Not
Women are letting down their French cuffs and deconstructing their classic white shirts.
For some, taking the stuffiness out of the classic white shirts suggests a dash of grunge style tailored for the corporate world.
But how do you keep the dangling cuffs out of the soup?
This first harbinger of spring continues the century-old saga of women wearing their husbands' shirts, which began with the Gibson girl.
The tailored look of the man's shirt is one of the longest-running fashion successes because it constantly provides a new vitality to the classic jacket.


To Prune or Not, the Time Has Come
IT is time to be outdoors with the pruning shears.
This should be good news to those novices who have cabin fever, and it should also serve as a gentle reminder for experienced gardeners to get busy.
Pruning woody plants now is a good idea for several reasons.
In the first place, the plants are dormant and pruning them will not have the damaging stimulating effect it could have if the pruning were delayed another month or so.
The inner sap is not pushing up rapidly now, and the pruned areas will not bleed as they might if pruning were delayed.
Also, when plants are dormant, it is easy to see their shape and to know what cuts need to be made.


Karen Gross, Kevin Fittinghoff
Karen Gross and Kevin Alexander Fittinghoff, both teachers at Columbia Grammar Preparatory School in New York, were married yesterday in New York.
Cantor Robert Abelson officiated at a home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen C. Gross, also of Westport, Conn.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: The Past; '93 Storm Seeks Its Place in History
Big as it may be, the Blizzard of '93, is, by far, not "the mother of all storms," as some prognosticators had hyped it.
And, perhaps surprisingly, that label cannot even be affixed to the legendary Blizzard of '88.


POSTINGS: Judge Acts in Discrimination Case; Priority for Minorities in Brooklyn
A Brooklyn landlord, Jeno Jakabovits, has been ordered to give priority to prospective tenants who are black or Hispanic, after a jury found him and others liable for discrimination.
The case was brought by the Open Housing Center, a private agency, against Mr.
Jakabovits; another Brooklyn landlord, Benjamin Breitman; A M Realty of Brooklyn, one of its brokers and two of its agents.
Last May, a Federal jury in Uniondale, L.I., awarded $15,350 in damages.
This month, a Federal judge, Arthur D. Spatt, further ordered Mr.
Jakabovits to give priority to black and Hispanic apartment seekers for every fourth vacancy in 7 of his 14 apartment buildings over two years.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
118.07
117.60
133.67
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6652
1.6698
1.6697
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.2445
1.2466
1.1973
per U.S. Dolla
British Pound1.4324
1.4460
1.7075
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Gold
$327.90
$329.60
$346.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


The Best Partnerships Have Staying Power
A SERIOUS bridge partnership is rather like a marriage: if those concerned are compatible they will enjoy the experience and it will last for many years.
If not, they will divorce, often with some pain.
The passage of time diminishes the chance that unexpected situations will create problems.
Most of the world's best partnerships, like Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco of Brazil, and Paul Chemla and Michel Perron of France, go back a long way.
Equally long-lived are three American partnerships: Bob Wolff and Bob Hamman have played together for 20 years, and two others, Lew Stansby and Chip Martel, and Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell, for almost as long.


MARCH 7-13: A Chilling Effect?; Slaying in Pensacola: A Doctor Pays With His Life In the War Over Abortion
Doctors and staff members at abortion clinics across the United States saw their worst fear realized last week: One of their number paid with his life for his work.
Outside a clinic in Pensacola, Fla., a man approached Dr.
David Gunn as he arrived for work and killed him with three shots in the back.
Michael Griffin, 31, who was said to be a recent convert to the anti-abortion cause, was arrested and charged with the first killing of an American doctor in an abortion protest.


Treasure Hunt
Black tie or pirate at the American Museum of Natural History's winter dance, March 4.


Hands Off My Social Security
To the Editor:
Loren Dunton says he feels guilty about his and my Social Security benefits and proposes to increase taxation thereon and forgo cost-of-living adjustments ("I Get Social Security. I'll Sacrifice, Too." Feb. 28.) I am puzzled at his claim that this would be good for our children and grandchildren.
How would it be good for them to have their eventual benefits frozen at the present scale (average $653 a month -- thanks to COLA)?


The Children Of the 60's and 70's Can Take a Name From the Future
To the Editor:
In reference to Betsy Israel's article "Lost in the Name Game" (Feb. 14), I would like to suggest that the generational tag for people born in the 1960's and 1970's be "centurians": those belonging to the 21st century.


For Concertgoers, a Day for Freebies
TICKET costs need not keep you from enjoying fine music today since at least three concerts in the area have no admission charge.
The Bronx Opera Chorus under Beatrice Affron is performing Mozart's "Coronation" Mass, plus shorter works of Rossini and Bruckner, at 3 P.M. in Vladeck Auditorium, which is in the Bronx at 74 Van Cortlandt Park South.
Those seeking more information can call (212) 365-4209 until about an hour before concert time.
The Yonkers Philharmonic gets an assist today from two members of the New York Philharmonic, Dorian Rence and Gino Sambuco, who will be taking the solo parts in Mozart's Sinfonia Concertante for Violin, Viola and Orchestra, also at 3 o'clock, at the Saunders School.
The music director,Jerome Sala, conducts the program, which also lists the Overture to Rossini's "Tancredi," Tchaikovsky's Fourth Symphony and, looking ahead to the imminent arrival of St.
Patrick, Victor Herbert's "Irish Rhapsody." The number to call for more information is 965-5232.


New Rules For Air Tours
Alarmed by recent accidents involving sightseeing airplanes in Hawaii and the Grand Canyon, the National Transportation Safety Board has recommended that the Federal Aviation Administration create a separate classification for such flights.
The classification would entail the development of strict safety requirements, including routine background checks on pilots' employment records.
The recommendations were issued last month following the investigation of the crash of a sightseeing airplane near the crater rim of Mount Haleakala on the Hawaiian island of Maui last April.
All nine people on the plane were killed.


STREET GUNS
Anderson's article may have left some readers with the erroneous impression that Colt produces an AR-15 assault rifle for civilian use that can be readily converted into a machine gun.
We don't.
Colt continues to produce an AR-15 for law-enforcement agencies and the military.
The Colt Sporter, while based on the best of AR-15 technology, is not an AR-15.
It has been designed to be exceptionally difficult to convert to automatic fire, a fact that Anderson acknowledges, while leaving the impression that it is often done.
It isn't


Carlton Wessel and Sarah Morgenthau
Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Morgenthau 3d of Saunderstown, R.I., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Sarah Elinor Morgenthau, and Carlton Edward Wessel, a son of Patricia J. Wessel of Newton, N.J., and the late Dr.
Edward J. Wessel Jr.
Miss Morgenthau, 29, is an associate at the New York law firm of Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt &amp; Mosle.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father, a former executive producer at WGBH-TV in Boston, is now an author.
Her mother, Ruth S. Morgenthau, is the Adlai Stevenson professor of international politics at Brandeis University in Waltham, Mass., and a consultant on Africa to the World Bank in Washington.


Jennifer Gillen, Robert Rasmussen
Jennifer Chase Gillen, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Gillen of New York, was married yesterday to Robert Henry Rasmussen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Rasmussen of Little Silver, N.J.
Msgr.
George Bardes performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Rasmussen, 29, is a cost-accounting manager for Communications Diversified, a sales promotion company in New York.
Her father is a plastic surgeon in New York.


He Was 44. Now He's 46. Reggie Is Back.
George Steinbrenner stepped to a lectern in a dining room here today to announce the hiring of Reggie Jackson as a special assistant to the Yankees' general partners.
But the owner's optimistic speech was barely a minute old when he launched into his version of damage control and defended the move.
Jackson will remain in California, working for a trading-card company, while also accepting the responsibility of evaluating players for the Yankees.
Perturbed by suggestions that the Hall of Famer and former Yankee star might have been hired for publicity reasons, Steinbrenner stressed that Jackson would play an integral role in executive decisions and would not simply be a famous name in a newly created position.


To Prune or Not, the Time Has Come
IT is time to be outdoors with the pruning shears.
This should be good news to those novices who have cabin fever, and it should also serve as a gentle reminder for experienced gardeners to get busy.
Pruning woody plants now is a good idea for several reasons.
In the first place, the plants are dormant and pruning them will not have the damaging stimulating effect it could have if the pruning were delayed another month or so.
The inner sap is not pushing up rapidly now, and the pruned areas will not bleed as they might if pruning were delayed.
Also, when plants are dormant, it is easy to see their shape and to know what cuts need to be made.


A la Carte; No Matter How You Slice It, Bar Pizza Ranks High
LONG before bar pizzas were considered trendy fare by yuppies and the "in" crowd, the small thin individual pies were being served at the original Eddie's in New Hyde Park.
In fact Eddie's was making pizza, both bar and regular size, even before American soldiers who had served in Italy in World War II came back and popularized it in this country.


Good Doctors And Bad Doctors
It is very refreshing to know there a few dedicated doctors in our area like Dr.
Luigi M. Capobianco of Glen Cove  [ "About Long Island," Feb. 28 ] .
God bless him -- almost another Mother Teresa -- but in our land!
FRANCES WINTON Elmhurst


Some Good Reasons for Sauteing and Stir-Frying
IT was Barbara Tropp's new "China Moon Cookbook" (Workman, 1992) that started me stir-frying and sauteing again.
Recently, unless I'd been cooking something special on the weekend, after work I've tended to make simple pastas or grilled dishes.
But after looking at the recipes in her book, I set off for Chinatown in Manhattan, to get the ingredients and try some of the excellent recipes.
They tend to be rather complex, using oils and pastes and other ingredients that are either hard to find outside Chinatown or have to be homemade from another recipe in the book.
It is worth the trouble, though, for the flavors are unexpected and extraordinary.
Having said this, the recipe for pork with Chinese egg noodles with spinach and asparagus is a simplified version, and it works especially well as a one-dish supper.


Measuring Makes Laying Tiles Easier
COVERING a kitchen or bathroom countertop with ceramic tile is fairly easy, although planning and patience are required.
Tile adheres readily to virtually any stable surface that accepts tile adhesive and resists moisture, including plastic laminates like Formica.
All materials, including rented tools for cutting tile, are available.
Choose vitreous tile, which is the least porous variety.
To minimize the need to cut tiles, combine selecting them with planning their layout and preparing the countertop surface.
Making a scale drawing of the countertop on graph paper and superimposing trial layouts on tracing paper over it, can help.
Remember to include spacing between the tiles for grout.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93 -- Early Warnings, Then Snow, Leave a Stillness Over 3 States; New York City: Broken Glass And Quiet Streets
Glass fell from a skyscraper, bus service was halted and some events were canceled.
But with its residents forewarned and, for the most part, off the streets, New York City appeared to come through the Blizzard of '93 without major calamity.
"Everything seems to be coming along well," Sgt.
John McCluskey, a spokesman for the Police Department, said yesterday evening.
"So far, we've weathered the storm."


Location Is Everything
THE POWER OF PLACE
How Our Surroundings Shape Our Thoughts, Emotions, and Actions.
By Winifred Gallagher. 240 pp.
New York: Poseidon Press. $22.


Babbitt to Map Ecosystems Under New Policy to Save Them
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt has taken the first steps in a major policy shift intended to head off conflict over the Endangered Species Act by focusing on the preventive, long-term care of entire ecosystems.
Two of the nation's best-known conservation biologists, Dr.
Thomas E. Lovejoy of the Smithsonian Institution and Dr.
Peter H. Raven of the Missouri Botanical Garden in St.
Louis, have been recruited to help set up a national biological survey to map the country's ecosystems and biological diversity, much as the United States Geological Survey maps its geology and geography.


The Clinic Gunman and the Victim: Abortion Fight Reflected in 2 Lives
David Gunn never set out to be a symbol.
He wanted to deliver babies.
But then an abortion clinic asked for help, and because no other doctor would do the job, performing abortions in the rural South became Dr.
Gunn's life.
There were wanted posters with his name on them, people following him late at night, hate mail, death threats, protesters yelling "Murderer!" Dr.
Gunn kept three guns in his car -- one in the glove compartment, one under the seat and one in the trunk.
Michael F. Griffin, who grew up in this conservative, military base city, is a fundamentalist Christian and a loner with a bad temper.
Dr.
Gunn was shot fatally three times in the back last Wednesday in the parking lot of a clinic where he worked here, and Mr.
Griffin told the police that he pulled the trigger.
Two months ago, Mr.
Griffin showed up on the fringe of an extreme anti-abortion group here led by a lay minister named John Burt.


Changing Clocks
To the Travel Editor: Before it is summer again in Europe, I am writing this letter to warn other travelers.
Daylight time begins in Europe one week before the United States, something I did not know one year ago.


It's Nostalgia, Of a Fashion
EVERY few months, it seems, New York gets a country-western rash.
Last week, for instance, there was a Patsy Cline Look Alike Contest at the Cowgirl Hall of Fame in the West Village on Monday, a party for the start of Western Styles magazine on Tuesday, and the opening of Koyote Kate's, a midtown restaurant, on Wednesday.
City folk can be very nostalgic for a heritage that isn't their own.
They like to pull on cowboy boots, stick thumbs in pockets and put a quarter in the jukebox.
At Monday's Patsy Cline event, Cindy Adams, the New York Post gossip columnist, was not buying into any of it.


Resolving the Business-in-Condo Question
A PSYCHIATRIST practicing out of his condominium on Chicago's Gold Coast was told to stop at once because he was violating the development's no-business provision.
"What he was doing was perfectly legal under the zoning laws, but wasn't allowed in the condominium's declaration, which forbids business activity of any kind," said J. Richard Bockelman, president of the Near North Association of Condominium Presidents, a Chicago organization representing co-ops and condominium associations.


Data Bank/March 14, 1993


Abigail Parsons, Robert L. Pakter
June wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore D. Parsons Jr. of Rumson, N.J., for their daughter Abigail Paine Parsons and Dr.
Robert Louis Pakter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul D. Pakter of New York.
Ms.
Parsons, 23, is a saleswoman at Staccato, a women's clothing boutique in Mill Valley, Calif.
She graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder.
Her father is a partner in Parsons &amp; Cappiello, a law firm in Fair Haven, N.J.
Her mother, JoAnn Parsons, is a designer of interior gardens, in Rumson.
Her paternal grandfather, the late Theodore D. Parsons, was a New Jersey Attorney General.


Documentaries and the Oscars: No Cinderellas at the Ball
It's almost Spring and, in what has become a tribal ritual, accusations are again flying about the Oscar nominees for best documentary feature film.
To bypass complaints next year, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences has agreed to reform some of its procedures, but critics still take exception to the way the organization handles the selection process.
It has come to be expected that, when the documentary nominees are announced in February, the list will exclude at least one conspicuous film; indeed, some well-known movies that haven't been nominated in past years include "Shoah" (1986), a nine-and-a-half-hour film about the Holocaust; Errol Morris's "Thin Blue Line" (1988), a stylized true-crime tale of a convicted murderer in Texas, and Michael Moore's "Roger and Me" (1989), about hard times in Flint, Mich.


Social Security
To the Editor:
The article was typical of the short-sighted, narrow-minded foolishness that has helped place Bill Clinton in his undeserved office.
Most Social Security recipients are not six-figure income people.
The majority have worked a lifetime in order to enjoy their remaining years with a minimum of financial security.


Do We Need Expiration Dates for Condoms? You Bet We Do
To the Editor:
Recently, I spent the afternoon with an older friend, who had been widowed for three years.
Like most singles, we discussed dating.
She joked that she had purchased a box of condoms a while back and was beginning to wonder if she would die before she needed to buy another box.
I said the condoms probably would expire before she did, and she would have to buy more, regardless of her sex life.


A Back-Road Drive to Vienna
THE road taken by most tourists between Salzburg and Vienna is the autobahn, which enables them to cover the 180 miles in barely three hours.
It is a boring drive.
The back roads offer a more rewarding alternative, and by allowing three days instead of three hours travelers discover some of the most scenic regions of Austria, where Alpine grandeur is offset by the quaint charm of small Baroque towns and villages.
What's more, the region abounds in inns and hostelries that are marked by local atmosphere to a degree uncommon in an age of institutionalized tourism.


Other New York Owner: Quiet and Supportive
The Mets are 2-6 and the owner is in the dugout.
All, however, is quiet.
Fred Wilpon, the president and co-owner of the Mets, is not George Steinbrenner.
Those who inhabit Shea Stadium, from management executives to players to fans, have enjoyed that indisputable, arguably luxurious reality for more than a decade.
There has been no bombast from the owner's box, no front-office revolving doors, no tours of duty in exile.


INSIDE
Australia Re-elects Premier
Despite fears over Australia's economic recession, Prime Minister Paul Keating's Labor Party won parliamentary elections.
Page 3.
Sweden Cuts Welfare System
With its economy reeling and its politics having shifted to the right, Sweden is scaling back its vast social welfare system.
Page 18.
A Fatal Encounter
The lives of a clinic doctor and the abortion opponent accused of killing him reveal much about the bitter divisions on the issue.
Page 24.
Fears on Cutbacks
President Clinton tried to soothe fears about job losses stemming from the Defense Department's proposed base closings.
Page 30.
Air Evacuation in Bosnia
Bosnia's military forces have begun evacuating the critically wounded and severely ill by air.
Page 10.


CAMPAIGN IS BEGUN TO PROTECT MONEY FOR SPY AGENCIES
Warning of crippling consequences to national security, the Clinton Administration has begun a quiet but forceful campaign to persuade Congress to protect the nation's $29 billion intelligence budget from deep immediate cuts.
The Administration's unexpected protectiveness toward spy agencies that grew up with the cold war stands in marked contrast to the views of Democratic lawmakers who believe that the agencies' budgets should now shrink in accordance with both the collapse of much of the Communist world and Congressional cost-cutting.


Riley Is Fully Satisfied? Can It Really Be True?
Even Pat Riley has had trouble finding fault with the Knicks' play lately.
New York (41-18) has won five consecutive games and 16 of its last 19 heading into tonight's home game against the Indiana Pacers.
The game was originally scheduled for last night, but was put back one day because the snowstorm created hazardous conditions for fans who would be traveling to the Garden.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 28 about the spreading of Wal-Mart stores in New England misstated the affiliation of Kenneth Stone, an economics professor who is an expert on the effect of Wal-Mart on downtown businesses.
He teaches at Iowa State University, not the University of Iowa.


The Twin Towers; Sifting Through Mideast Politics In Ashes of World Trade Center
From the moment a twisted fragment of a yellow rental van led Federal agents to arrest a young Palestinian drifter, the investigation of the World Trade Center bombing veered into the complex realm of Middle Eastern politics, from the deeply held grudges of displaced Palestinians, to the aspirations to power of Islamic fundamentalists.
Two of the young men arrested so far -- Mohammed A. Salameh and Nidal A. Ayyad -- came from families that fled their West Bank homes around the time of the 1967 Arab-Israeli war to be cast into an unsought, and often unwelcoming, diaspora.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
'GHOSTS OF THE HUDSON'
Henry Hudson's Half Moon, the first ship to land 300 years ago on the Hoboken waterfront, will be recalled in "The Ghosts of the Hudson," a dramatic presentation that Lisa Lipkin, a storyteller, will give on Tuesday in Hoboken.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93 -- Early Warnings, Then Snow, Leave a Stillness Over 3 States; Long Island: Awaiting Word To Evacuate
Blinding snow and hurricane-force winds swept Long Island from Montauk to Manhasset today, threatening to topple power lines and push high tides across barrier beaches already weakened by the worst series of winter storms this century.
In Coram, a volunteer firefighter died after an oxygen tank he was filling exploded, Suffolk County officials said.
Dennis Rodd, 47 years old, died about 12:45 P.M.


Total Eclipse of the Suns Gives Nets 5th in a Row
Things were so ridiculously unbelievable, so insanely out of hand, that even Nets center Sam Bowie decided to get in the action, and he made a 3-point shot.
When it snows, it pours, and the Phoenix Suns, contenders for the National Basketball Association title, were absolutely buried by the Nets.
Some of the Nets had been watching the storm rage back home on television, and they created a blizzard of their own here.
New Jersey played its best basketball of the season by far and tonight, hammering the Suns, 124-93, before a stunned and silent crowd of 19,023 at the America West Arena.


Sports of the Times; Steinbrenner Scrutiny Makes a Comeback
NOW that George Steinbrenner is in view again, Bob DeMartin is watching again. Closely.
You may remember Bob DeMartin, the organizer of the Bring Back the Yankees movement.
He first pierced Yankee Stadium's psyche late in the 1989 season after Steinbrenner grandly announced that fans could parade with signs and banners critical of the principal owner's deportment.


Johnny One-Note on Health Care
To the Editor:
Of the 35, none represents working people or senior citizens groups.
None speaks for groups dealing with AIDS or drug abuse, the two most devastating ailments of our time.
None speaks for groups familiar with illnesses peculiar to immigrants.


'Lead . . . or Leave' Asks: Who's Spending Our Inheritance?
The words travel slowly across the computer screens in the downtown Washington office: "Lead . . . or Leave." This political signature of angry young fiscal Puritans doubles as a screen-saver program, somehow fitting for the rallying cry of the first generation to grow up with computers.
Less than nine months since the words were first typed onto a screen, the group Lead . . . or Leave is commanding the attention of senators, college students and Ross Perot.
Its founders, clustered in donated office space in downtown Washington, the heartland of the special-interest lobbyists they deplore, have a grandiose vision: that the impact of their ideas may rival that of the antiwar crusade of the 1960's.


Les Cages Folles
TIFFANY's does not just stick its stuff in its windows.
Neither does Barneys nor, to slide down the scale a bit, Bed Bath &amp; Beyond.
Oh no.
Instead, they make whatever it is -- the porcelain plate, the tweed suit, the pile of printed sheets -- desirable, delicious,
divine
. They make you -- you with your nose pressed against the glass --
hungry
.
Which is why, at the International Cat Show in Madison Square Garden last weekend, a Persian named Joyvyn Om Shanti Star was set off, so to speak, by white lace and pink ribbons.
Who could resist wanting to pat, wanting to cuddle, wanting to
own
a great big beautiful doll like Joyvyn Om Shanti Star?
Actually, Joyvyn usually travels with much more than a pelmet, portieres, a small bassinet and matching parasol.
But what with having to fly here from Santa Cruz, her breeder, Joy Anandi, had to leave a lot of gear at home.
"I'm a California girl," she said, "so this looks ordinary to me. ."


Corrections
The Cuttings column last Sunday, about a solar house and greenhouse on Martha's Vineyard, referred incorrectly to contractors' design concerns.
Their warnings about climate, bugs and the possibility of a fire referred to the original design proposed for the house, not for the greenhouse.
A picture caption with the column referred incorrectly to the design of the greenhouse.
The greenhouse's solar panels are installed on the ground.
It is the house that has solar panels on a third of its roof.


Storm Disrupts Local Schedule
A fierce winter storm yesterday affected teams all along the East Coast, including many in the metropolitan area.
The Knicks' game against Indiana, scheduled for last night at Madison Square Garden, was moved to 6 P.M. today.
The Islanders' game against Pittsburgh at Nassau Coliseum was rescheduled for 5:10 P.M. today, but the Rangers' game against Washington will be made up at a later date.
In horse racing, the Bay Shore Stakes at Aqueduct has been moved to tomorrow.


Can Chanel Be Grungily Correct? Not a Chance
To the Editor:
As a young fan and wearer of Doc Martens, I believe that Chanel, as hard as it may try, will never be able to challenge Doc Martens ("On the Street: Chanel Goes to the Front," Feb. 28).
The lace-up boot, associated with the grunge or punk look, appeals to the 25-year-old-and-under crowd, and at $1,190 a pair, very few young people are able to afford the Chanel boots.


U.N. Rights Group Cites Indonesia on Timor
Reflecting a shift in United States policy, the United Nations Human Rights Commission has adopted a resolution expressing "deep concern" at human rights violations in East Timor for the first time since Indonesia annexed the former Portuguese colony in 1975.
With 22 nations voting in favor, 12 voting against and 15 abstaining, the Human Rights Commission also agreed on Thursday in Geneva to ask Indonesia to allow United Nations officials to visit the island to investigate allegations of torture, secret executions, religious persecution and continuing detention of citizens by the Indonesian authorities.


Jamie Larowitz and Steven Sherman
May wedding plans have been announced by Shirley and Paul Larowitz of Brooklyn for their daughter Jamie Mara Larowitz and Steven Jason Sherman, the son of Ruth Sherman of Swampscott, Mass., and the late Barney Sherman.
Ms.
Larowitz, 35, is an associate at the New York law firm of Patterson, Belknap, Webb &amp; Tyler.
She graduated from the New School for Social Research and received her law degree from Brooklyn Law School, where she was an editor of the Brooklyn Law Review.


Q AND A
A Gypsy Pilgrimage
Q.
I understand that European Gypsies meet in the Camargue in May for two days.
Can you supply details? -- Angelo J. Brenna, New York N.Y.
A.
The Gypsy Pilgrimage takes place each May 24 and 25 at Stes.-Maries-de-la-Mer, about 14 miles south of Arles.
Provencal legend says the place, in the marshlands of the Camargue, was where St.
Marie Jacobe and St.
Marie Salome and their servant, St.
Sarah, among others, arrived safely on shore after being abandoned in a boat off Palestine.
The three saints remained in the Camargue and were buried there.
A church was built at their tomb in the ninth century, and the building was replaced in the 12th century.
Gypsies (who call themselves Romany) consider Sarah their patron saint, and thousands of them, many of whom still live in caravans in their traditional nomadic life, arrive at the town each year.
The pilgrimage events begin May 24 with a mass at 10 A.M. at the church.
At 3 P.M. is the descente des chasses, in which the bones of the three saints are lowered by rope and pulley from an upper chapel to an altar in the chancel.
At 4 P.M. there is the St.
Sarah procession, in which a painted wood figure of the saint is taken to the sea for blessing.
At 9:30 P.M. a mass is celebrated .


She'll Swing If You Sing 'Tiny Bubbles'
If you can't go back to your little grass shack, this bisque hula nodder may be an evocative collectible for a city apartment shelf.
The four-inch-high doll, its top and bottom connected by an inner spring, was made in Japan in the late 1940's.


The Politics of Dealing With the Threat of Boycott
MO Siegel, chief executive of Celestial Seasonings Inc. in Boulder, Colo., feared the worst when New York City gay activists announced a "tea party" last month to dump the company's herbal teas into the East River to protest a Colorado amendment banning local laws that protect homosexuals from discrimination.
New York City is Celestial Seasonings' largest market, accounting for 10 percent of its sales, and a successful boycott could ruin the company.
So Mr.
Siegel flew in to meet with New York Boycott Colorado, a group that says it is boycotting all consumer products from the state.


FOCUS IS ON TAMILS IN BOMBAY BLASTS
While the Indian authorities questioned potential witnesses and sought suspects today in the explosions that killed more than 250 people and wounded more than 1,000, large crowds and heavy traffic returned to the streets of India's business capital, flowing past bombed-out buildings and cratered roads.
Top officials were careful not to link the blasts to any particular group, but they did say that the Tamil insurgents of Sri Lanka possessed the technical capability to assemble and use the plastic explosives that had hit the city.


Yeltsin Suffers Final Rout As Russian Congress Ends
Barely pausing for a backhanded rejection of President Boris N. Yeltsin's final bid for a national referendum on who should govern Russia, the Congress of People's Deputies today concluded a four-day rout of the President and dispersed for another three months.
Abandoning even the pretense of national unity that they made at previous sessions, the 1,000 or so deputies left with a statement to the nation that harshly criticized the President and his reforms and left little doubt that the confrontation would only get worse.


The Twin Towers: Sifting Through Mideast Politics In Ashes of World Trade Center -- Nosair; Suspicion of Conspiracy
The suspicion of a wider conspiracy arose almost as soon as investigators concluded that the van used in the bombing was rented in New Jersey by Mr.
Salameh.
The address listed on his driver's license was the Brooklyn apartment that Mr.
Nosair had listed in an application for a city job as an air-conditioning repairman.
The two-bedroom apartment in a six-story complex at 57 Prospect Avenue Southwest has also been the home for almost a decade of Mr.
Elgabrowny.
A 42-year-old civil engineer with five children, he quit his job as a carpenter and general contractor to go on welfare and devote himself to the defense of Mr.
Nosair, a distant relative, said Mr.
Kunstler, one of Mr.
Nosair's lawyers.


From MTV To NBC
FOR Tabitha Soren, the 25-year-old star of MTV News, it had been a remarkably successful day.
She had spent the morning at Rutgers University preparing a special news segment on Bill Clinton's national service plan, which he had introduced in a speech that afternoon.
Everywhere she had gone, adoring teen-agers had demanded her autograph.
And after the speech, when the rest of the press corps had been herded into the back of the hall, she had been ushered into an exclusive interview with the President.
Still, when it was all over, Ms.
Soren couldn't quite suppress a tiny, half-serious scowl of disappointment.
Not because the interview had gone badly; in fact, it had gone quite well.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: Long Island; New Invasions Of Barrier Beaches
A last-minute shift in winds helped spare this seaside village and other Long Island communities from severe flooding as a blizzard and high tides battered the island's shoreline for more than 24 hours.
Twenty-foot waves created at least three new breaches this morning in the barrier beaches that protect the South Shore of the Island, but the damage was far less severe than that caused by the storm that pounded Long Island for more than three days in mid-December.


The Streets For Snow Workers, a Measure of Praise
The Department of Sanitation got mostly good marks from New York City officials yesterday for its initial response to Saturday's storm.
But the real test of the agency's snow-removal performance, some officials said, will come this week as New Yorkers try to return to their normal routines.
Early warnings of the storm's approach and the Sanitation Department's readiness were credited for the agency's swift response to the blizzard, which blew as much as a foot of snow into some parts of the city.


Sports of The Times; Seton Hall's Lithuanian Connection
" WHAT I Did on My Summer Vacation," by Arturas Karnishovas.
They didn't really ask him to write this essay when he came back to Seton Hall University last fall.
Business majors with a 3.2 grade point average have more complicated homework than that.


F.C.C. Tilts Toward Lower Cable TV Rates
Taking a tough new stance toward cable television prices, the Federal Communications Commission is preparing new pricing rules that are likely to jolt the industry but make consumers happier.
In recent months, the agency has collected pricing information from hundreds of cable operators and found that cable systems with competitors charge about 48 cents a channel each month, while those that have a monopoly charge 65 cents.
Systems with fewer than 1,000 subscribers generally charge even more.


Executive Brief -- HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT; Remaking H.U.D. for Those It Serves
Henry G. Cisneros has been walking the halls, and he does not like what he sees.
Mr.
Cisneros, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, earned his Ph.D. in public administration from George Washington University.
He says he knows "internalization of subgoals" when he sees it.


The N.R.A., Wounded
For the second time in a matter of weeks, a Governor fed up with the National Rifle Association's bullying seems likely to rub the arrogant lobby's nose in the dirt, perhaps crushing its invincible image once and for all.
A vote today in New Jersey's Senate is almost certain to uphold Gov.
Jim Florio's firm position on gun control -- thus signifying a historic transformation in the national gun control debate.
A bill before the Senate would override Mr.
Florio's veto of an earlier measure that repealed a law severely limiting assault weapons.
The law, passed in 1990, is the toughest in America to restrict military style guns that have no legitimate civilian purpose and are favored by drug gangs and other organized criminals.


Verona Journal; Dear Juliet: Let Me Tell You About My Problem
O Romeo, Romeo.
Wherefore art thou Romeo?
Or Omer, or Tony?
Juliet's not the only person who'd like to know.
Last year, some 2,000 letters from the lovelorn across the globe arrived in this northern Italian city that Shakespeare endowed with fame beyond its Roman antiquities, addressed either to Juliet Capulet or, since she was secretly wed by the time she died, to Juliet Montague.


This Cable Connects Connecticut
Connecticut's affluent Fairfield County has a split identity -- partly southwestern Connecticut and partly New York City suburb.
The cable TV company that blankets the area tried to exploit the split recently by lopping off broadcasts from the rest of the state.
Fortunately, the move backfired and the company has been forced to retrench.
The outcome is still unsettled, but the public interest is clear: All Connecticut viewers should have access to Connecticut TV channels for news, sports and any other programming that relates to the state where they live.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: Jersey Shore; Many Thanks For a West Wind
For those who braved the icy blasts of a west wind today, the beaches along the New Jersey shore were a welcome sight.
They were still there, more or less, escaping the worst when the wind shifted before midnight Saturday, sparing the battered coastline a direct hit at high tide from mountainous seas.


St. Patrick's Parade Organizers Don't Bar Gays From Marching
To the Editor:
"Right Parade Ruling, Wrong Message" (editorial, March 2) acknowledges that a Federal court was correct in ruling "that private citizens have a constitutional right to express publicly, in a parade, their own message about their own values without interference by government." But then you judge that the parade sponsors made "a wrong decision." You say that the sponsors "have chosen to exclude openly gay Irish."


Record Loss in '92 for Volvo
Volvo A.B., the Swedish auto maker, had a record loss in 1992.
Volvo had a pretax loss of 3.31 billion kronor, or about $430 million, in contrast to a profit of 1.11 billion kronor, or $144 million, in 1991.


J. David Grey Is Dead; Jane Austen Expert, 57
J.
David Grey, an expert on the author Jane Austen, died on Thursday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan at the age of 57.
He resided in Manhattan and Spring Lake, N.J.
The cause of death was bone cancer, his family said.


St. Patrick Was a Slave
In America, St.
Patrick's Day is a quintessential ethnic celebration, highlighting Irish-American identity as not-British, not-Protestant, not-Italian or Polish (though Roman Catholic like these), certainly not-black or Jewish, and, in some quarters, not-homosexual.
In these multicultural times, those of us who are not-Irish are encouraged to stand by the roadside cheering as the Irish parade their Irishness.
We can do so knowing that, whatever our ethnic group, our moment will also arrive in the calendar of ethnic glory days that defines diversity in America.
To the salad-bowl multiculturalists, this is all there is -- and should be -- to America.
From this perspective, St.
Patrick belongs as exclusively to the Irish as Martin Luther King Jr. does to African-Americans and Columbus to Italians.
The Irish alone have a collective patent on the interpretation of St.
Patrick's life and meaning.


Review/Pop; Branford Marsalis Runs a Blues Gamut
Branford Marsalis's concert on Friday night at Carnegie Hall was nothing but blues, and mostly plain old 12-bar blues.
That didn't prevent the program from sauntering through most eras of jazz history, from New Orleans traditionalism to modality on the edge of free jazz.
Joined by Albert Collins, the Texas blues guitarist and singer, Mr.
Marsalis's usual jazz quartet moved to the border of rock-and-roll, and with the singer Linda Hopkins it picked up the theatrical side of the music.
Ms.
Hopkins performed on Mr.
Marsalis's current album, "I Heard You Twice the First Time," which also supplied some of the program.


Members of Texas Sect Hint Resolve Is Weakening
The Federal siege against a heavily armed religious sect here entered its third week today amid some signs of weakening resolve among the 105 remaining cult members.
Negotiators for the Federal Bureau of Investigation said that a number of members of the Branch Davidian sect had asked for details about the judicial process and what charges they might face if they were to surrender -- "a favorable sign," in the words of the chief bureau spokesman here, Bob A. Ricks.


Dance in Review
JoAnna Mendl Shaw St. Mark's Danspace
JoAnna Mendl Shaw took the emotion-drenched themes of adolescence and memory and created dances that intriguingly suggested rather than evoked emotion in "Coming of Age," a program of new and recent work presented on Friday night.


Some Sturm, Much Drang at the Bonn Opera
To enliven the opera house in this sleepy soon-to-be-ex-capital on the Rhine, the city fathers decided to take the risk of hiring someone who would bring creative disorder to the job.
So far, Giancarlo del Monaco has delivered in spades.
Since taking on the $250,000-a-year job of general director of the Bonn Opera last August, the 49-year-old Mr. del Monaco has overspent his budget by $2.4 million, received a formal reprimand from the city council, been placed under investigation by the local district attorney for possible breach of trust, and staged two provocative new productions -- Weber's "Freischutz" and Verdi's "Otello."


Say It Ain't Toe? Not Yet
Dwight Gooden, who had hoped a second medical opinion today would reassure him about the condition of his damaged toe, wound up having to endure another 24 hours of uncertainty about his immediate pitching future when an appointment with the club's associate team physician had to be canceled.
Dr.
David Dines was scheduled to arrive here from New York to examine Gooden and review the X-rays taken last Friday after Gooden injured his left big toe during a fielding drill.
But Dines wound up snowed in.
The concern in Gooden's mind, then, was left to swirl like the gale-force winds that have howled here for the last 48 hours.


Salvadoran Leader Will Seek Amnesty In U.N. Rights Cases
President Alfredo Cristiani said tonight that he would seek an immediate amnesty for those implicated in abuses by an exhaustive United Nations report on atrocities committed during El Salvador's 12-year civil war.
Mr.
Cristiani appeared grim in a brief address broadcast nationwide by state television and radio shortly after 8 P.M.
Repeatedly using the word "pardon," he said, "The moment for us to forgive each other has arrived." Mr.
Cristiani, many of whose most senior military aides were implicated in some of the worst episodes of the country's war, said he would seek an "immediate amnesty, general and absolute."


Thriving on Fashion's Tattered Edge
Remember when Sinead O'Conner ripped up the Pope's photograph on television?
A Sinead look-alike model named Eve is presiding over the fashion season here.
Eve creates an artificial edge where one might not otherwise exist.
With her bald head and dragon tattoo wrapped around her cranium, Eve has become the mainstream model of the season.
Established designers -- who are nothing if not herd animals when it comes to choosing models -- are trying to say with Eve what the next generation is saying with clothes.
There are three designers who don't need Eve to signal their place on the tattered, unfinished, unraveled edge of fashion: Martin Margiela, Ann Demeulemeester and Helmut Lang.
None are Parisian: Mr.
Margiela and Ms.
Demeulemeester are Belgian, Mr.
Lang, Austrian.


Corrections
A profile on Thursday about Nidal A. Ayyad, a chemical engineer charged in the World Trade Center bombing, misstated his birthplace in some editions.
He was born in Kuwait after his parents moved from the West Bank.


Muslims' Fury Falls on Egypt's Christians
In a striking example of the power of Muslim fundamentalists, nearly 10 million Coptic Christians in Egypt, the largest religious minority in the Middle East and one of its most ancient, are under siege.
Copts from all walks of life are being attacked, robbed and killed by roving bands of fundamentalists.
Churches are regularly vandalized and sometimes burned, prompting the Government to place virtually all them under police guard.


A Temporary TKTS
The lower Manhattan TKTS booth, the reduced-price theater-ticket outlet that was closed after the explosion at the World Trade Center, is to reopen today in temporary quarters at the Manhattan Savings Bank at 4 World Trade Center, at the corner of Liberty and Church Streets.
Its hours are 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Mondays through Fridays.


Union Plans Bias Lawsuit Over Agency Promotions
Charging that dozens of supervisors in New York City's Human Resources Administration were passed over for promotion because they were white, the union that represents them plans to file suit against the city this week.
Union officials said top officials of the agency, in the interests of promoting what they called cultural diversity, systematically manipulated Civil Service rules to promote black and Hispanic supervisors who did not perform as well as whites on Civil Service tests.


Lehman Without Shearson Can Still Be a Wall St. Force
The Lehman Brothers securities firm, which will remain at American Express after its Shearson brokerage affiliate is sold to Primerica later this year, will be less imposing than before, but its competitors and industry analysts say it will remain large enough to succeed.
The Primerica Corporation hopes that merging Shearson with its smaller Smith Barney, Harris Upham unit will be an opportunity to cut costs and raise profits.
"One plus one makes three," said Sanford I. Weill, Primerica's chairman.


Devil His Due Pulls Gulfstream Upset
Allen Jerkens, the master of the upset, the trainer who twice beat Secretariat and three times beat Kelso, was up to his old tricks today.
He sent out Devil His Due, a 12-to-1 long shot who had lost 10 straight races, and saw him storm through the stretch to win the $500,000 Gulfstream Park Handicap against eight of the best senior horses in the business.
But Devil His Due didn't hatch the only upset of the day.
The horse who finished one length behind him, Offbeat, had lost his last six races.
And Pistols and Roses, who was beaten for second by the length of his head, had lost seven in a row until he won the Donn Handicap here last month as a roaring surprise at 44 to 1.
And they all outran the three favorites: Missionary Ridge finished fourth, Irish Swap fifth and Siberian Summer sixth over the mile and a quarter.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: Commuting; Forget Those Cars: Mass Transit's the Ticket
Commuters who spent the weekend dreading Monday morning with even more intensity than usual may be pleasantly surprised when they emerge from their snow-besieged homes and begin their trek to work today -- as long as they leave their cars behind and use mass transit.
Transportation officials across the region said yesterday that nearly all railroad lines from the suburbs into New York City will operate on normal schedules this morning, with some scattered delays.
Subways in the city are also expected to run without serious problems.


If Clothes Make a Man, Esquire May Make a Hit
Men may indeed be deeply en sconced in the Nesting Nineties, the Daddy Decade and family fun.
But here's a little secret: the Nineties Man is absolutely hooked on fashion.
At least, that's what Esquire, which considers itself expert when it comes to men, is betting its hat on.
Next week, it will introduce Esquire Gentleman, a full-fledged fashion magazine for men.
The new publication will include more than 100 pages of ads, and its features will range broadly -- from psychedelic grunge to the perfect suit for the board room. (Black, of course.)


Union Plans Bias Lawsuit Over Agency Promotions
Charging that dozens of supervisors in New York City's Human Resources Administration were passed over for promotion because they were white, the union that represents them plans to file suit against the city this week.
Union officials said top officials of the agency, in the interests of promoting what they called cultural diversity, systematically manipulated Civil Service rules to promote black and Hispanic supervisors who did not perform as well as whites on Civil Service tests.


Iran Is Not Aiding Rahman, Son Says
The family of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman today denied reports that the radical Muslim cleric had received money from Iran through one of his wives.
"This is not true, Sheik Rahman's eldest son, Abdullah, said. "We do not receive money from Iran."


Super Nets? Supernova? Just Ask the Phoenix Suns
The day after.
And it can only look even better for the Nets.
After they humbled the mighty Phoenix Suns on their own court, hammering them by 31 points, not many players on either side could believe it.
All were stunned, as if they had just seen a U.F.O.
But this truly was an amazing game.
Not in the Nets' wildest dreams did they think they would ever beat the Suns the way they did on Saturday night, 124-93.
Afterward, the Suns, considered by many to be the best team in basketball, just wanted to forget it all ever happened.
Like a bad dream.


Roy Rogers Spoofs Car Ads
At first glance, it looks as if a luxury car marketer is introducing yet another television commercial using a little silver ball to demonstrate its manufacturing precision.
Instead, this demonstration tests the "precision" of a Roy Rogers sourdough roast beef sandwich.
The commercial, created by Earle Palmer Brown of Bethesda, Md., is the second to parody the silver ball commercial for Lexus, created by Team One Advertising in El Segundo, Calif.
The first parody ad, created by Chiat/Day of Venice, Calif., was for the Nissan Altima.


Courier &amp; Life: It Wasn't a Cabaret Weight of No. 1, and the World
Used to be tennis was all it took to make Jim Courier angry and resentful and the solitary leading man of his own version of "Les Miserables."
This is a guy who signed a $26 million endorsement contract a year ago at Nike headquarters in Oregon but walked away from it "a complete wreck" because he felt unprepared for his next tournament.


Review/Music; A Flashy But Also Thoughtful Program
Earlier this season, Herbert Blomstedt announced his intention to relinquish the directorship of the San Francisco Symphony Orchestra in 1995, when he will have been on its podium for a decade.
The Swedish conductor's accomplishments with the orchestra are well known to record collectors.
He has made an extensive series of disks for London Records, including a superb Nielsen symphony cycle, some fine Sibelius recordings and some solid standard-repertory recordings, including a "Carmina Burana" that won a Grammy this year.
He has also tightened the ensemble's sound over the years, at least in certain repertory, and he has made San Francisco's aspirations to be counted among the best American orchestras seem plausible, depending on how long a list one is willing to make.
On Tuesday evening, Mr.
Blomstedt led his musicians through a program divided between splashy works and introspective ones, and he showed how far the orchestra has come and how much ground is left to conquer.


Review/Dance; Some Canadian Visitors Are in Town
The Alberta Ballet is probably best known for its director, Ali Pourfarrokh, who performed with three major New York ballet companies and with Alvin Ailey, and for its reputation for producing engaging dancers.
Those dancers include three current members of Feld Ballets/NY, and Jean Freebury, a delicious new member of the Merce Cunningham troupe, who received her early training at the Alberta company's school.
New Yorkers got a chance to see the 35-year-old Canadian group on Saturday night at the Pace Downtown Theater.
It was an unluckily timed New York debut, given the blizzard, but a surprisingly large audience turned up and the performance was well worth the effort.
The Alberta dancers are fresh, beautifully schooled and full of charm, and they presented an unusually varied program of ballets that demonstrated considerable skill in a variety of styles.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
G.M. has persuaded Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the hard-driving purchasing executive who in nine months has saved it hundreds of millions in costs, not to go to Volkswagen, apparently by offering him more authority.  [ Page D1. ]
VW is planning a major overhaul that is expected to include significant cutbacks in its work force as well as a big spending program to help spur growth in Germany and America.  [ D1. ]


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of March 15:


G. Joseph Minetti Is Dead at 85; Ex-Leader of Aeronautics Board
G.
Joseph Minetti, who was appointed by five Presidents to help regulate aviation as it flourished into the jet age, died Saturday at his home in Arlington, Va.
He was 85.
He died of heart failure, said his nephew, Thomas J. Donohue.


Bombay Seeks Link to Stolen Car In Fatal Blast at Stock Exchange
Workers restored power and telephone lines today to prepare for the reopening Monday of the Bombay Stock Exchange, the financial nerve center of India, which was struck on Friday by one of a string of blasts that killed more than 250 people and wounded more than 1,000.
While workers cleared burned furniture, metal, glass and plaster from the battered high-rise, the police were tracking vehicles stolen in the days before the blasts to determine whether any had carried the car bombs that devastated the stock exchange, the Air-India building and a passport office.


Maurice Frey, Dentist And Humanitarian, 83
Maurice Frey, a retired dentist and volunteer in international humanitarian efforts, died on March 8 at his home in Southampton, L.I., at the age of 83.
He also resided in Manhattan.
The cause of death was heart failure and pneumonia, his family said.


Foreign Minister of Canada Drops Bid for Mulroney Post
Foreign Minister Barbara McDougall announced today that she would not run for the leadership of Canada's Conservative Party to succeed the lame-duck Prime Minister, Brian Mulroney.
"I'm not going to seek the leadership of my party," she told the CBC.
"I have chosen this decision essentially for personal reasons."


Topics of The Times; Something Works
After hearing horror stories about long waits in past years at the State Department of Motor Vehicles in Manhattan, the suburbanite was understandably anxious as he approached the Yonkers office to transfer his driver's license from Maryland to New York.
The line waiting for the doors to open was a block long.
How pleasant to find that, at 9 A.M. sharp, everyone filed in quickly and in order.
Not a line-jumper in the crowd.
And there, just inside the door, was a courteous woman answering questions and pointing each person toward the proper desk.
No danger of waiting hours in the wrong line only to be sent to some other line.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: New Jersey; Crunching Along On Highways
New Jersey returned today to what passes for normal the day after a blizzard.
On Saturday, snow and sleet driven by wind gusts of more than 50 miles an hour halted commerce and most transportation from Cape May to the New York border and forced hundreds of coastal residents to flee to temporary shelter.
Today, desolate roads began to fill with cars, crunching along at 25 miles an hour on a washboard roadbed of ice, punctuated by huge drifts and the gigantic snow mounds left by plows.
Stores reopened, short of snow shovels and calcium chloride but stocked with bagels and beer and selling what Sunday newspapers they had.
And church congregations were diminished in proportion to the amount of snow blocking members' driveways.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Publishing; Smaller books can be tactile, and even sensual, hinting at delights, and profits, ahead.
THE Itty Bitty Book Light now has the perfect companion: the itty bitty book.
Inspired by the recent success of several books that have come out in a smaller, more compact format, publishers are now packaging more books, particularly novels, in trimmer size and are increasingly regarding this once-rare design as a standard option.
And customers are buying them.
Two small-size novels are on the New York Times best-seller list next Sunday: "The Bridges of Madison County" (Warner) by Robert James Waller, in the No. 2 slot, which has been on the list for 32 weeks, much of that time in the No. 1 position, and "Einstein's Dreams" (Pantheon) by Alan Lightman, the No. 10 book.


China's Congress Likely To Pick Younger Rulers
The National People's Congress opens its annual session on Monday to amend the Constitution and shuffle Government leaders, part of a grand effort by Deng Xiaoping to prod China further in the direction of a market economy.
The President, Vice President and head of the Congress are all expected to be replaced by much younger men.
New leaders will also be installed as deputy prime ministers and Government ministers, and some people from outside the Communist Party are expected to be promoted in a show of openness.


The Generals' Shrinking Threat
The Pentagon's motto after the cold war could well be: nothing exceeds like excess.
If it were up to Gen.
Colin Powell and his colleagues in the armed services, they'd keep it that way.
General Powell has criticized Defense Secretary Les Aspin for trying to match American forces to plausible threats.
Mr.
Aspin's threat-based force would cut the Pentagon budget from $298 billion to $265 billion by 1996.
His own reasoning, however, would allow him to make even larger cuts.
Even after Mr.
Aspin finishes cutting, the U.S. arsenal will still enjoy a formidable advantage.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: Meteorology; 'Monster' Is Just Wind On Coast
Was it the winter storm of the century?
Scranton, Pa., and Chattanooga, Tenn., certainly have reason to think so.
The blizzard of '93 dropped 21 inches of snow in each place, a record in both cases.


2d King Case Trial No Double Jeopardy
To the Editor:
William Safire states in "Against the Grain" (column, March 1) that Federal prosecution of police officers for beating Rodney King violates double jeopardy.
Prosecution under Federal and state laws for the same conduct (it is irrelevant for double jeopardy whether the defendants were acquitted or convicted in the first prosecution) is well established.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: Westchester; Sighs of Relief And Exhaustion
After shoveling out the driveways of his grandmother, his parents and at least five neighbors, all for free, Billy Avery, age 13, was taking a break.
Climbing onto a red plastic disk at midday, Billy began to glide down a modest, snow-crusted hill outside the Westchester Jewish Center here, turning this way and that by shifting his body weight.


Tourney Games Are Rescheduled
Because of the storm over the weekend, the Catholic High Schools Athletic Association City championship game between St.
Raymond of the Bronx (20-4) and Monsignor McClancy of Queens (18-9) was rescheduled from last night to tonight at Fordham University in the Bronx.
The title game will be played after the Class C championship game between Regis (17-6) and Salesian (12-11), which begins at 5 P.M..


Weddings; Amy J. Fastenberg, James R. Marsh
Amy Jessica Fastenberg, a literary agent, was married yesterday to James Ryan Marsh, a lawyer.
Rabbi Judith Lewis officiated at the Pierre in New York.
Ms.
Fastenberg, 28, is keeping her name.
She works for Connie Clausen Associates, a literary agency in New York.
She graduated from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Marvin Fastenberg of New York and the late Shirley Fastenberg.


Patents
THE last thing a patient wants to hear after having a potentially cancerous growth removed is that a piece of the tumor has been lost inside the body.
Yet that is exactly what happens a surprising number of times when polyps are removed from the colon.
Now two doctors at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York City who tired of searching for wayward polyps have won a patent for a simple snare that traps the growth before it is cut away.


The industry hears a plea to save old campaigns from being swept into the dustbin of history.
NORMAN DOUGLAS, an English novelist, wrote in 1917, "You can tell the ideals of a nation by its advertisements." Will we be perceived years hence as a philosophical and probing people, reflected in the "Why ask why?" campaign for Bud Dry?
Or grammatically sophisticated, as Pepsi's "Uh-huh" tagline would suggest?
Lofty questions like these are no doubt best left to future historians.
And to make sure they have the raw material needed to form accurate conclusions, the advertising industry appears increasingly concerned with treating the stuff of its day-to-day workings with more reverence.
This was the theme of a conference -- Advertising in America; Using Its Past, Enriching its Future -- at Duke University in Durham, N.C., over the weekend.


Accounts
*
ATGTBT Inc., Louisville, Ky., to the Martin Agency, Richmond, to handle its Louise's Fat-Free Potato Chips account, a new brand.
Billings were not disclosed.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: Airports; After Storm, Little Consolation for Travelers as Airports Open
The weary were everywhere.
Slumped against their suitcases on the cold airport floors.
Stretched out along windows overlooking icy runways.
On snaking, angry lines, clutching spring vacation plans nearly blown away by a mean winter day.
Like its counterparts in New York City and up and down the East Coast, Newark International Airport was not a pretty sight on the day after the weekend blizzard.
As airlines scrambled to reschedule grounded flights, thousands of travelers remained in limbo.
Many had been stranded since Friday night, or early Saturday morning after all three area airports closed.


With Buyer's Plans Unclear, New York Post Is in Disarray
The New York Post's precarious existence grew more precarious yesterday, as its latest editor quit in a confrontation with the newest buyer, the newsroom fell into chaos, this morning's edition was all but scrapped and many union workers and top managers joined together in resisting a court-approved takeover of the newspaper by Abraham Hirschfeld.
Mr.
Hirschfeld, who was authorized to buy the newspaper just this Friday after months of revolving editors and potential publishers, triggered what amounted to a staff revolt yesterday afternoon by demanding a list of 272 people, one third of the paper's work force, for dismissals that he said would begin today.


Serbs Overrun Muslim Enclave In Bosnia's East
Serbian forces backed by tanks and artillery overran the Konjevic Polje area today, pushing Muslims who had sought refuge in the valley onward across a mountain track into Srebrenica, United Nations officials said.
"Konjevic Polje has fallen," said Maj.
Alan Abraham, commander of the British Army squadron escorting aid convoys in eastern Bosnia.


Reynolds Says He's 'Too Legit to Quit.' Stay Tuned.
Butch Reynolds won the 400-meter gold medal today as the world indoor track and field championships ended.
The victory gave him satisfaction and vindication, if not his $27.3 million.
This three-day competition in the Skydome ended with a blaze of exciting and often excellent performances.
There were world indoor records by Dan O'Brien, the American decathlon hero, in the seldom-held men's heptathlon (6,476 points for the seven events) and Inessa Kravets of Ukraine in the women's triple jump (45 feet 5 3/4 inches).
Never mind that the organizers did not have a tape of the Ukrainian anthem for Kravets's medal ceremony.


Nervous Traders Await Florida County's Vote
Brevard County on Florida's east coast usually captures the national spotlight with space launches from Cape Canaveral.
But when the county's citizens vote on a bond referendum tomorrow, thousands of municipal bond traders and many more investors will be anxiously awaiting the outcome.
At stake is whether the financially sound county will default on a $23.9 million issue that was used to pay for the new government operations center in Viera.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  BLAME FOR SALVADORAN KILLINGS


Honoring a Philosopher Of American Dance
Robert Ellis Dunn, a philosopher whose workshops in New York in the 1960's revolutionized American modern dance, will be honored with a performance tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the Dia Center for the Arts, 155 Mercer Street in SoHo, and a panel discussion on Wednesday at 7:30 P.M. at the Judson Memorial Church, 55 Washington Square South in Greenwich Village.
Mr.
Dunn's teachings at the church led to the birth of post-modernist dance.
Tickets to the performance, a benefit for the Laban-Bartenieff Institute of Movement Studies, are $25, $50 and $100.
The panel discussion, "The Dunnian Perspective: The Influence of Improvisation and Choreography," is free.
Both events are presented by the institute.
Information: (212) 477-4299.


Islanders Lose Two Points and Two Players
The Islanders lost a third-period lead, lost the game, lost two key players and lost a chance to tighten up the Patrick Division playoff race tonight when the Pittsburgh Penguins beat them, 3-2, at Nassau Coliseum.
They'll try not to lose their sense of direction or mission during a four-game trip that begins Tuesday night in San Jose.
Although their power play is struggling and their first line is in a scoring slump, the Islanders aren't losing confidence.


Weddings; Amy Bermant, Elliott Adler
Amy Joy Bermant, a daughter of Tobias J. Bermant of New York and the late Jane Newhouse Bermant, was married yesterday to Elliott Adler, a son of Bernice and Arthur Adler of the Bronx.
Rabbi Norman E. Singer performed the ceremony at the Americas Society in New York.
Mrs.
Bermant-Adler is the special projects manager at HG magazine in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is a founding member and of counsel to the New York law firm of Sabin, Bermant &amp; Gould.
The bride's maternal grandfather, Theodore Newhouse, retired as associate publisher of the Newhouse Newspapers in New York.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Eva Bermant of New York.


The Street Fighter And the Professor; Moynihan and D'Amato: A Loyal Pair
Philosophy gives us yin and yang, the golden mean and the balance of the humors.
New York offers the more complicated reality of Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Alfonse M. D'Amato.
That Senator Moynihan is a liberal Democrat and Senator D'Amato a conservative Republican represents only the first small step into the vast gulf that separates New York's two Senators.
In manner, method, and substance, their differences define them: Mr.
Moynihan, the author, diplomat and raconteur, seems all the more droll and tweedy next to the high-octane Mr.
D'Amato, a Long Island politician whose high-strung style in turn, looks like hyper-drive compared with Mr.
Moynihan's.


Dance in Review
Feld Ballets/NY Joyce Theater
Eliot Feld is a choreographer of many moods, as a program by his company on March 7 revealed.


Claims and Counterclaims on Vaccine Costs Generate Heat but Little Light
The price of a dose of the vaccine for whooping cough leaped from 19 cents in 1977 to $10.04 in 1992, and a dose of polio vaccine rose from $1 to $9.91.
The cost of giving a child all the recommended immunizations rose more than 1,000 percent in the same period.
President Clinton has seized on these skyrocketing prices as he attempts to build political support for revamping the nation's health-care system, setting off a bitter fight with drug companies over what the figures mean: price gouging of citizens willing to pay anything for the health of their children, or an honest effort to insure a profit.


Americans Carve An S O S in the Ice
Claire Ferguson, the president of the United States Figure Skating Association, was not spotted today in any wooden phone booths, dialing USA-Direct.
There were no calls, quite yet, to Kristi Yamaguchi, Brian Boitano or somebody, anybody, maybe Dorothy Hamill.
"We have some really bright, intelligent athletes," Ferguson said.
"We have a lot of young skaters coming up. Together, they'll figure it out."


Everything's Coming Up Gangbusters For the Hall
There were heated, high-minded debates last week about whether the Syracuse basketball team, on probation and banned from the national tournament, should have been participating in the Big East tournament.
Had Syracuse known then what it knows today, the school might have volunteered to take a rain check.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: The South; Regions Used to the Sun Took the Severest Blows
As the blizzard that trampled the Eastern Seaboard marched into Canada today, it was clear that what some were calling the storm of the century had been cruelest to the South.
Sunny skies replaced the blinding, driving snow of Saturday throughout much of the region, but the weather was bitter, with temperatures hitting record lows in many cities.
The sun gave just enough relief to show how bad the damage was.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK POST THROWN INTO CHAOS
The New York Post's precarious existence grew more precarious as its latest editor quit in a confrontation with the newest owner, the newsroom fell into chaos, this morning's edition was jeopardized and unions and top managers joined in resisting a court-approved takeover of the newspaper by Abraham Hirschfeld.
A1.
RUSHING TO MAKE DEADLINE
What began as a bitter standoff between The Post's staff and its newest owner, Abraham Hirschfeld, ended in a frenzied effort to make up lost time and publish by deadline.
B3.


Strawberry at Bat and on the Mets
The home run was a signature shot, a blast that staged its own, altogether familiar act of anarchy against the physical principles of nature.
It halted Bobby Bonilla in his tracks in right field, cleared the outfield fence, kept going right on over the plateau of ground beyond.
Darryl Strawberry, months after back surgery, is healthy, dangerous and, of course, eminently quotable.
"Has anyone asked, and can the Mets ever explain, how they could get rid of all the talent they had?" asked Strawberry.
"The fans in New York know their baseball. I'm sure they are asking what happened to their players."
The players Strawberry was talking about, of course, have gone a lot of places -- into retirement, to free agency, off to other clubs in trades of debatable merit.
Others have come in, and the results have not been special.
The Mets, who declined to bid seriously for Strawberry after the 1990 season, have finished fifth twice since Strawberry left, and the giant contracts they have handed out to others have generated scarcely any dividends to date.
"I don't even know who they are," Strawberry said of the Mets. 'New York's a Hard Town'
The club's anonymity for Strawberry is not total.
He doesn't need to be reminded that Vince Coleman is there, a base-stealer signed for nearly as much as the Mets offered Strawberry.
He knows full well Bobby Bonilla is in New York, under siege and all over the headlines.
"New York's a hard town," said Strawberry.
"I think people, over time, have realized how tough I was."
He was updated on the details of Bonilla's most recent difficult week.
His reaction mixed understanding and advice.
It was not, however, exactly suffused with sympathy.
"You put your hand in the fire, and that's what you are going to have to deal with," said Strawberry.
"He's in a fireplace. And he's making big money. They want you to put the club on your back and carry it."
Asked if Bonilla were up to the load, Strawberry, who bears Bonilla no personal animus, hedged.
"You can't judge what kind of player he is," Strawberry said of the Mets' current right fielder.
"When the pressure is on, you have to rise above it. And I'm quite sure he's feeling a lot of pressure." He Has Heard That Before
He was told of Bonilla's being booed here in spring-training games.
"It's a town that can make you or break you," said Strawberry.
"Hey, they booed me in spring, too. He got the big contract, I didn't. He has to learn to accept the boos."
Bonilla's strategy, said Strawberry, should not be to look to escape, but to, by force of will and talent, reverse it all.
"The way you answer it is put the fans on their feet," said Strawberry.
"I didn't run and hide. I had my share of run-ins. But I didn't let it stop me from doing what I had to do."
Strawberry believes he can at long last get back to doing what he does best -- manufacturing nearly mythic home runs, like the one he hit today against Frank Tanana.
"It's been hard days of hard work," said Stawberry, who underwent back surgery on Sept. 15.
"When they cut on your back, you never know what's going to happen. When they tried to get me to walk after surgery, it was scary. I thought I might never be able to walk like a normal person. But I worked my way up to be able to walk. And now, I'm almost comfortable out there."
Today, Strawberry sounded as if he'd be quite comfortable back in right feld at Shea.
He won't be, of course.
Bobby Bonilla will be there, and Strawberry had no sure prescription for making that work.
INSIDE PITCH
JOHN FRANCO, the recovering closer for the Mets, pitched to live batters Sunday for the first time this spring.
"It's almost there," said Franco.
"I asked the guys I faced in B.P., and they all said my velocity was there. The real test will come when I pitch two days in a row."


Salvador Officers Named As Killers in U.N. Report
A United Nations-sponsored investigation into the most notorious violence of El Salvador's long civil war has found active and retired military officers responsible for the killings of thousands of civilians, including the Archbishop of San Salvador.
The 211-page text names the Defense Minister, Gen.
Rene Emilio Ponce, who offered his resignation on Friday, as one of a group of senior officers who ordered the killing of six Jesuit priests in 1989.


Russia's Peril: Soviet-Type Breakup
The failure of the Congress of People's Deputies to find a workable compromise for governing Russia raises questions not only about President Boris N. Yeltsin's political future and economic reforms but also about the very survival of the Russian Federation.
The threat to the unity of the Russian Federation is probably most significant.
Already over the last 15 months, Russia's various semi-autonomous regions, provinces and cities have seized considerable autonomy.


Networks Press Nielsen to Count the Barfly, Too
Is a person who watches television outside the home really watching television?
For the purposes of the Nielsen ratings, the answer has always been no; the A. C. Nielsen Company simply does not count such people.
But in an effort to change this -- and to increase both ratings and advertising revenue -- the three major networks last week released their first joint survey of "out-of-home" viewership.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
None  Tuesday
Housing Starts Feb.  Wednesday
Capacity Utilization Feb.
Consumer Prices Feb.
Industrial Production Feb.  Thursday
Weekly Jobless Claims Merchandise Trade Jan.  Friday
None


Wrangler Selects TBWA for Europe
The Wrangler division of the VF Corporation of Greensboro, N.C., said it had selected TBWA Holmes Knight Ritchie of London to handle its account for Britain, France, Germany, Italy and Spain.
The account, with billings estimated at $15 million, was previously handled by Simons Palmer Denton Clemmow &amp; Johnson of London until that agency resigned it in November.


In The Post's Newsroom, Some Efforts to Publish
A bottle of antacid tablets within his reach, Marc Kalech, the managing editor of The New York Post, shifted uncomfortably in front of his desk yesterday before giving a grim assessment of the newspaper's future: "My inclination is we will not publish a paper."
Two hours later -- amid the threat of layoffs, shrill protests throughout the newsroom and the sudden resignation of the latest editor -- some reporters and editors agreed by 5:30 P.M. to put out the next day's paper.


Weddings; Olivia Sohmer, D. J. Rosenbaum
Olivia Sohmer, an assistant district attorney in Manhattan, was married yesterday to Daniel J. Rosenbaum, an editor.
Rabbi Roy Mittelman officiated at Moran's Restaurant in New York.
Mrs.
Rosenbaum, 32, graduated summa cum laude from Queens College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Bernard and Margot Sohmer of Jackson Heights, Queens.
Her father is a mathematics professor and the ombudsman at City College in New York.


Bring on the World: 6-in-Row Knicks on a Roll
Bring on the Chicago Bulls. Bring on the Phoenix Suns. Bring on Seton Hall.
All contenders, all comers, all conferences.
The Knicks right now believe they belong in a league of their own.


Getting to Work Today
Nearly all rail lines in the New York region will operate on normal schedules today, with some scattered delays, officials said.
Commuters using buses may face longer delays because of some poor driving conditions, and officials urged people to leave their cars home.
Article, page B4


No Headline
We misunderstood the immensity of the job.
ANDREI M. JACKAMETS of Hoboken, trying to dig out his Toyota with a spatula and frying pan.  [ B5:3. ]


Review/Music; At LaMama, the Banal Made Grotesque
Under television's glare the recent quickly turns ancient.
John Moran, a young composer of enormous promise, works from artifacts of popular and media culture, refashioning them as myth.
He and his regular collaborators, the Ridge Theater performance troupe, drew attention in past seasons for operas entitled "Jack Benny" and "The Manson Family," the latter a dispassionate re-creation of Charles Manson's distinctive verbal and musical esthetic.
On March 5 at La Mama, Mr.
Moran unveiled "Every Day Newt Burman (The Trilogy of Cyclic Existence)," a feast of pop-cultural eclecticism.
This particular child of the age detected allusions to Stanley Kubrick's film of "The Shining," Andy Kaufmann's lip-sync routines, "Beetlejuice," "The King of Comedy" and "The Twilight Zone."


N.C.A.A. Invitations Come With Bandages
At the end of the jockeying that helps determine the difficulty of a path toward the Final Four, North Carolina, Indiana, Kentucky and Michigan were awarded No. 1 seedings yesterday in the National Collegiate Athletic Associaton basketball tournament.
With five teams hoping for the relative safety of No. 1 positions, Arizona became the fifth.
The Wildcats were made a No. 2 seeding in the West, as Michigan, the 1992 runner-up, was given the top West seeding in the tournament, which begins Thursday afternoon.


Review/Music; On the Joys and Dangers of Privacy
Joel Krosnick and Gilbert Kalish continued their occasional series of afternoon and evening cello-and-piano concerts on March 7 with two programs called "The Spirit of Romanticism," at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater in Morningside Heights.
The first half, which this writer did not attend, offered Mendelssohn, Ernst Bacon, Schumann and Chopin.
The evening edition began with Reger and Ralph Shapey and ended with Messiaen and Franck.
An enterprise like this demands a definition of "Romantic," and Sunday's program notes gave it a few tries.
The Concise Oxford Dictionary adds a few more: "Imaginative, remote from experience, visionary, in music subordinating form to theme, preferring grandeur or picturesqueness or passion or irregular beauty to finish and proportion."


Unpopular Projects Unite Minorities
WHEN Robert F. Wagner was Mayor, he once recalled, some of the loudest opposition to a proposed low-income housing project came from black residents of a nearby Queens neighborhood.
Most had graduated from the slums only to find that city government was, by design, creating what market forces and racial prejudice had periodically fashioned on their own: a new ghetto.
Decades later, a Federal judge is weighing a similar challenge.
Three Brooklyn women have filed a suit contending that the Fort Greene site for a proposed residence for homeless people with mental disabilities and drug or alcohol addictions was chosen because it is in a predominantly black and Hispanic neighborhood.


Weddings; Jennifer Coburn, William O'Nell
Jennifer Coburn, the daughter of Carol Krickett-Coburn of New York and the late Shelly Coburn, was married yesterday to William O'Nell, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl O'Nell of South Bend, Ind.
The Rev.
Wendy Craig-Purcell, a Unity Church minister, officiated at Cafe Del Rey Moro in San Diego.
Ms.
Coburn, who is keeping her name, is a freelance writer in San Diego.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father was a composer and lyricist in New York.
Her mother is a news assistant at The New York Times.


Dance Notes; A Lack of Hospitality By City Ballet Board?
Stories have been floating around the dance world for the last few weeks about a decidedly unenthusiastic welcome extended to three ballet companies at the New York State Theater.
Did board members of the New York City Ballet, the theater's resident company, really skulk through the lobby removing advertising leaflets, as rumor had it, for performances by the Dance Theater of Harlem (which begins a 12-day engagement tomorrow), the San Francisco Ballet (March 30-April 4), and the Bavarian National Ballet?


Reviews/Fashion; Lacroix's Sumptuous Dressing
Christian Lacroix received a standing ovation for his fall and winter fashion show here.
It was the first of the European collections to be received so enthusiastically.
The ready-to-wear clothes provided a dazzling display of inventive design that combined fabrics and textures brilliantly, exuded luxury and hinted at distant times and places.
The photographers who were clustered at the end of the runway shouted "ole!" as the first black brocade jacket and swirling sheer skirt appeared.
Later, they yelled "basta!" (enough!, in Italian) as the show, with its 137 styles, extended far beyond normal limits and threatened their film supply.


Reviews/Music; Music and Plenty of It: 12 Hours' Worth, in Fact
New York's downtown avant-garde hangs together.
Despite apocalyptic weather conditions, nearly all of the scheduled artists showed up on Saturday evening for the second part of "Off the Wall to Wall," the 12-hour marathon at Symphony Space.
And the audience did not fail them; the house was full for the orchestral finale at about 11:30 P.M., John Zorn's orchestral "Cobra."
The evening segment had definite high points, but few surprises.
The avant-garde, or downtown movement, continues to focus on the fusion of various disciplines or the arcane mastery of one or the other.


Library of Congress Has to Recover Costs
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 27 report on Library of Congress plans cites generalized cries of alarm by Washington interest groups, but our legislative proposal gets lost.
The 1993 Library of Congress fund bill (S.345), sponsored by Senators Claiborne Pell, Daniel Patrick Moynihan and others, should not be confused, as you do, with levying user fees on libraries or researchers who use the library's free basic services -- reference, cataloguing, interlibrary loans, access to the collections.


TRANSACTIONS -- WEEKEND
Baseball  American League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Henneman, pitcher, on a three-year contract.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Named Reggie Jackson special adviser to the general partner.
Sent Brien Taylor, pitcher, and Derek Jeter, shortstop, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
Optioned Mariano Rivera and Ed Martel, pitchers, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Optioned Greg Pirkl, infielder, to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
Sent Shawn Barton, Jim Converse, Dave Masters and Mike Walker, pitchers; Jim Campanis, catcher; Brian Turang and Shane Turner, infielder, and Aubrey Waggoner, outfielder, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Sent Scott Brow, Huck Flener, Aaron Small and Rick Steed, pitchers, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
National League
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Sent Mike Mathile, pitcher, Ottawa of the International League.
Sent Miguel Batista, Archie Corbin, Reid Cornelius and Joey Eischen, pitchers; Rob Fitzpatrick, catcher, to Harrisburg of the Eastern League.
Sent Mike Thomas, pitcher, to Burlington of the Appalachian League.
Sent Rondell White, outfielder, and Derrick White, infielder, to their minor-league camp for re-assignment.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Assigned Toby Borland, Cliff Brantley and Mike Williams, pitchers; Tony Longmire and Cary Williams, outfielders and Ron Lockett, infielder, to Scranton-Wilkes Barre of the International League and Mike Farmer, pitcher, and Jeff Jackson and Tom Nuneviller, outfielders, to Reading of the Eastern League.
Sent Kevin Stocker, shortstop to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Sent Brian Shouse, Victor Cole, Mariano De Los Santos, John Hope and Mike Zimmerman, pitchers, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Sent Allen Watson, Brian Barber, Fidel Compres and Doug Creek, pitchers; Aaron Holbert, Juan Andujar and Dmitri Young, infielders; Eddie Williams, catcher, and Basil Shabazz, outfielder, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
Football  National Football League
DENVER BRONCOS -- Signed Rod Bernstine, running back.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Announced the resignation of Ed Croke, director of media services.
Hockey  National Hockey League
SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Acquired Jon Morris, center, off waivers from the New Jersey Devils.
College
NEVADA -- Announced the resignation of Tommy Gates, women's basketball coach.
TEXAS -- Suspended B.J. Tyler, guard, for Saturday's game against Houston.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
Traders said late Friday that the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.95 percent and the six-month bill was 3.07 percent.


Mike Nichols Plans A Career Finale
At 61, Mike Nichols has embarked on what he terms the final chapter of his directing and producing career.
He has carefully planned and shaped six major projects that will probably last until he's nearing 70.
"None of what I've done in the past has even been a plan," Mr.
Nichols said, seated on a recent day in his airy, comfortable offices at the Sony Studios in Culver City.
"But now, with the end in sight and I'm really dreaming of stopping, suddenly I want to control, to make my own choices, to follow my own dreams and fantasies."


U.S., Seeking to End Angola War, Urges 2d Vote
The Administration has offered Angola a plan to end its civil war, proposing a cease-fire and disarmament by both sides and a runoff Presidential election, officials said over the weekend.
An Administration official involved in Angola said the proposal had been accepted by President Jose Eduardo dos Santos, whose lead in elections last September was challenged by the main opposition leader, Jonas Savimbi.


Executive Will Stay With G.M.
In an abrupt change of heart, a hard-charging Spanish purchasing executive who in nine months saved hundreds of millions of dollars in costs for the General Motors Corporation, decided over the weekend not to leave G.M. for a more prestigious post at Volkswagen A.G. of Germany
G.M. apparently succeeded in persuading Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua to stay on by offering him greater authority over manufacturing operations, said several G.M. executives who spoke on condition of anonymity.


Despite Losing Election, Perot Gains in Standing
WASHINGTON, March 14 --
Four months after his strong maverick showing in the 1992 Presidential election, Ross Perot still has the look of a contender.
He is back on the road and on the talk shows -- he was even on Capitol Hill recently -- pumping out his populist message of fiscal responsibility and Government reform; drawing overflow crowds, loud applause and frequent headlines, and keeping up the pressure on President Clinton and Congress, especially over the Federal deficit.


CHRONICLE
How do you prepare a large family for the grand tour: 10 cities in eight countries over 24 days?
Ask ALLISON VULGAMORE, general manager of the New York Philharmonic, who is in the "intense countdown" stage of preparation for a trip to Berlin, Leipzig in Germany, Paris, Vienna, Madrid, Brussels, Warsaw, Budapest and London from March 22 to April 14.


Popularity of Caller I.D. Service Alarms Women's Groups
Just days after she subscribed to Caller I.D., Louise Benjamin was jolted awake at 2 A.M. by a caller who said Mrs.
Benjamin's house in Stratford was on fire.
The call was a nasty prank, and thanks to Caller I.D., a 16-year-old, who had been making obscene calls to Mrs.
Benjamin for weeks, was arrested.
Not surprisingly, Mrs.
Benjamin, 59, is a fan of the service, which began in Connecticut last month.
But not everyone shares her enthusiasm.


Abroad at Home; Making a Difference
The Mason School in Roxbury, a largely black area of Boston, has problems typical of an inner-city school: not enough money, an old building, children who speak different languages.
But it has a determined principal in Mary Russo, respected teachers and 10 young men and women helping out as aides.
They come from a service group called City Year.
One of the City Year aides, Lucius Graham, is in the first-grade classroom.
Three children -- Andrea, Shamekia and Alvin -- hang on to him, hugging his legs.
He talks with them, then goes to the corner and helps three girls paint T-shirts with colors that glow in the dark.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: Coping; Despite Storm's Fury, Many Delight in Winter's Charms
There was certainly fury in the wind's howl, and some storm victims felt its claw.
But many in the New York region, snugly ensconced before a fire, or, venturing out thrilled by silent city streets, seemed almost to enjoy the blizzard of 1993.
For thousands of New Yorkers, the icy tempest, which brought gusts of nearly 70 miles an hour in many areas, seemed just like an old-fashioned winters-end snowstorm.
The weekend's misfortunes were felt mainly by travelers and those who were caught in surging tides or freak accidents.
Those with foresight and prudence, warned of the advancing threat, laid in provisions and, when the screaming gusts hit the region, simply hunkered down.


World Economies


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: New York Region; A Variety of Emergencies And Yet a Sense of Relief
The storm that paralyzed the East Coast left the metropolitan region with a challenging variety of emergencies.
Along shorelines, houses washed away.
Inland, residents tried to dig out from snowfalls that ranged from 6 to 30 inches.
Thousands lost power.
Thousands more were stranded or delayed at airports, bus terminals and train stations.
It could have been worse, officials throughout the metropolitan region agreed.
But the storm had its killing side -- a motorist buried under an avalanche; a firefighter killed when an oxygen tank exploded; a woman run over by a car; men collapsing while shoveling snow.


Serbs Didn't Make Up Bosnian Majority; A Courageous Stand
To the Editor:
"Don't Let Bosnia Starve" (editorial, Feb. 20) unjustly accuses Sadako Ogata, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, of suspending "all shipments to Bosnia because she felt the risks to relief workers were too high." Mrs.
Ogata suspended many of her agency's operations in Bosnia-Herzegovina "because of the failure of all parties to respect humanitarian principles." She stated Feb. 17 from Nairobi, Kenya:


Long Vigil for Wife of Man Missing in Blast
For more than two weeks now, Olga Mercado has waited and watched, like a child lost in a crowd, as the rest of New York rushes toward recovery after the World Trade Center bombing.
Investigators have arrested suspects and begun netting a plan of international terrorism.
Five families have buried relatives killed in the blast.
A baby was born.
And crews have worked to shore up the damaged center.


Weddings; Hannah Finkelstein, David Schwartz
Hannah Finkelstein, a daughter of Mrs.
Hirsh Finkelstein of Ridgefield, N.J., and the late Mr.
Finkelstein, was married yesterday to David Phillip Schwartz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Schwartz of Holmdel, N.J.
Rabbi Mark Cooper officiated at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Mrs.
Schwartz, 25, is a day-school teacher at the Kfar Saba Absorption Center for Ethiopian immigrants in Kfar Saba, Israel.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father was an architect in New York.
Her mother, Helen Finkelstein, is a kindergarten teacher at the Moriah School in Englewood, N.J.


Review/Pop; Taking Today's Hip-Hop Back to Black Sources
"Hip-hop, be-bop" was a catch phrase in the early days of rap.
Now more groups are beginning to take it seriously, as hip-hoppers search black musical history for ever more esoteric sources.
A Tribe Called Quest and other bands have sampled jazz recordings, but Digable Planets go further.
The three rappers are backed by the usual hip-hop disk jockey and what could be a jazz quintet: trumpet, saxophone, guitar, drums and bass fiddle.
And the first notes that came from the stage on Wednesday night at Irving Plaza were the melody of "Be-Bop," by Dizzy Gillespie.


Review/Music; Solutions to a Partnership Problem
Pianists in recital teams are invariably irked by the not entirely unnatural perception that they are accompanists, and that their partners who play melody instruments are the soloists.
The Fischer Duo -- Jeanne Kierman, a pianist, and Norman Fischer, a cellist and Ms.
Kierman's husband -- offered a few solutions last Monday evening at Merkin Concert Hall.
Their program included two works written for them by composers who understand the collaborative dynamic, and two modern repertory pieces in which the musical materials are distributed equally.
Of the new works, Augusta Read Thomas's "Chant: Sonata" (1991) was the more immediately striking.
Ms.
Thomas puts a spotlight on the differences in the instruments' expressive characters, with lyrical and sometimes doleful cello melodies set against provocative, clustery piano textures.
Mr.
Fischer and Ms.
Kierman made the most of the work's inventive angularity and enlivening interplay.


INSIDE
Odd Couple (Senate Division)
Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Alfonse M. D'Amato have hardly anything in common.
And that may be the secret of a successful relationship.
Page B1.
Can Russia's Center Hold?
The failure of Russia's Congress to find a workable compromise raises questions about the country's very survival.
News analysis, page A6.
Bosnia's Terms for Treaty
The Bosnian Government agreed to conditions under which it would accept an international peace plan.
Its President will attend talks.
Page A3.
Is the Price Right?
President Clinton condemns the cost of vaccines; the industry defends it.
Experts say both are right.
Page A16.


Off the Wall, Around the Clock


Couples, Out of It, Recovers And Wins
Showing the kind of resilience that is the mark of a great golfer, Fred Couples rallied from an apparent collapse today to defeat Robert Gamez in a sudden-death playoff and win the Honda Classic.
Couples, who holed a sand shot for a birdie on the 17th hole and made a spectacular recovery from a fairway bunker on the final hole of regulation, parred the second extra hole to achieve his first victory since last year's Masters.


Books of The Times; Whimsies About a Man in a Hurry and a Cat on the Move
Mr.
Summer's Story By Patrick Suskind Translated from the German by John E. Woods, with illustrations by Sempe.
Alfred A. Knopf. 116 pages. $17.
Felidae By Akif Pirincci  Translated from the German by Ralph Noble.
Villard Books. 292 pages. $19.
For a while in Patrick Suskind's brief, beguiling new book, "Mr. Summer's Story," it looks as if the author has turned away from his dark previous work and indulged himself in a sunny memoir of childhood.


New Jobs Lack the Old Security In a Time of 'Disposable Workers'
Employment agencies call them contingent workers, flexible workers or assignment workers.
Some labor economists, by contrast, call them disposable and throwaway workers.
Whatever they are called, their numbers are climbing.
Federal figures are sketchy, but about half of the jobs people have been getting in the last year are part-time or temporary or involve other unconventional arrangements.
That is up from less than a quarter of the new jobs a decade ago.


Market Place; Despite a low rig count, oilfield service company stocks surge.
THE rig count is a key barometer of oil-and-gas drilling in the United States.
When it plunges, stocks of oilfield service companies usually fall, too.
But not so far this year.
The group has traced one of the more rapid surges on Wall Street in the last 10 weeks, with many stocks rising 20 percent or more, compared with a gain of less than 2 percent for the Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 companies.
Yet the rig count has plummeted close to its lowest recorded level in 50 years, falling by 22 last week, to 600.
The low of 596 was set in June.


Owens-Corning Picks Toledo Agency
The Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation, which is based in Toledo, Ohio, said Friday that it had selected Fahlgren Martin of Toledo as its agency of record, replacing Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York.
Ogilvy, which handled the account for about a dozen years, created the long-running Owens-Corning Fiberglas campaign that featured the Pink Panther cartoon character.


Washington at Work; As Economists Snipe, An Adviser Presses On
Backbiting is a time-honored practice in the nation's capital, but the nastiness that greeted Laura D'Andrea Tyson's appointment to head the President's Council of Economic Advisers surprised even veteran Washingtonians.
Respected academics telephoned each other -- and their journalist friends -- to snipe at her, whispering that she was an ill-advised choice because she was not a free-trader, was outside the economics mainstream and was not one of the brightest stars in her field.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: The Overview; Spared the Worst, New York Area Begins Digging Out
A snowbound New York region emerged yesterday from the Blizzard of '93 with at least 18 reported deaths but surprisingly little damage.
Thousands began digging out of mini-mountains of ice-encrusted snow and authorities prepared for what was expected to be a relatively smooth commuter rush this morning.
As one of the century's most powerful storms swirled into oblivion over the Canadian Maritimes, the East Coast and particularly the southeastern states counted a heavy weekend toll: at least 112storm-related deaths, three million homes without power, tornado damage in Florida and heavy flooding in coastal areas.


Vista Hotel Is Closed Until Summer, Officials Say
The New York Vista Hotel, a luxury hotel whose underground floors were devastated by the bombing at the World Trade Center, will be closed until at least midsummer, Port Authority officials said yesterday.
While construction crews worked to shore up the hotel's damaged basement, investigators continued to search for three more suspects in the Feb. 26 bombing, which killed five people, injured more than a 1,000 and crippled the center's two towers.


I.B.M. Finds Obstacles in Hunt for Boss
At a computer industry conference last month, James Cannavino, an I.B.M. senior vice president, was inevitably quizzed about the company's hunt for a new leader.
The board of the International Business Machines Corporation, Mr.
Cannavino replied, has a tough assignment -- and not only because the company has never before looked beyond itself.
"They are also going to have a difficult time trying to convince the person they select to take the job," Mr.
Cannavino told an audience at the PC Forum in Phoenix.


Baseball Gold Still Eludes Jim Crow's Victims
Players from baseball's old Negro Leagues, barred for decades from the major leagues and then largely forgotten as their achievements faded into the past, are enjoying a revival of interest linked to the boom in baseball memorabilia.
Their faces and team names appear on a growing volume of T-shirts, trading cards, caps and jackets; they attend card shows, and they are flown to Old-Timers' Games at ball parks they once would have been prohibited from playing in.
For many of the former Negro Leaguers -- men in their 70's, 80's and 90's, some poor, some sick, some forgiving, some sensitized by old racial abuses -- the potential revenue from this licensing effort could provide much needed help for things such as rent, medical bills, food and even funeral expenses.


U.S. and Russian Doctors Tie Anthrax to Soviets
One of the mysteries of the cold war was at least partly resolved today with the publication of a paper unraveling some of the secrets of a sudden deadly outbreak of anthrax in April 1979 in Sverdlovsk, Siberia.
Soviet officials at the time said the outbreak, which killed 68 to 300 people over six weeks, had been caused by contaminated meat.
But suspicions were quickly raised that the cause was the accidental release of airborne bacteria used to make biological weapons.


Daily Double: Ice and Snow
Aqueduct, closed Saturday and yesterday by the weekend's storm, will be closed for a third day in a row today.
The nine races on today's slate, originally postponed from Saturday, will now be eliminated, which means that the featured Bay Shore Stakes for 3-year-olds will not be run this year.
"It's too bad to lose a race as important as the Bay Shore," said Glen Mathes, communications director for the New York Racing Association.
"It's one of the steppingstones to the Kentucky Derby. But if we were to postpone it again, it would be run too close to the Gotham, which is scheduled for a week from Saturday and could involve some of the same 3-year-olds."


Reality at Tourney Time: To the Power Conferences Go the Spoils
The power and influence of the elite conferences in women's college basketball were reflected in the 48-team field for the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, when 23 of the positions were occupied by teams from five conferences.
Top-ranked Vanderbilt and Tennessee, the teams that were seeded highest in the Midwest and Mideast regions, respectively, were among six Southeastern Conference teams hoping to play close to home when the Final Four takes place at the Omni in Atlanta on April 3 and 4.


Serbs Didn't Make Up Bosnian Majority
To the Editor:
In "Vance-Owen Plan Offers a Fair Bosnia Solution" (letter, Feb. 21) Sally Howe and John R. Lineweaver offer misinformation in stating that in Bosnia, before the outbreak of war in 1992, "the Serbs were the majority group"; and again, that "the majority of people living there were Serbs."


In School for Poorest, Success Is Not Enough
To hear an after-school music instructor explain it, the only reason the children at the Archbishop Walsh Homes didn't play violins is because nobody showed them how.
Within the brick towers that house some of the city's poorest families, there is now music, along with brightly colored maps on makeshift classroom walls.
Both are part of an upstart children's program, and both have the same goal: Teach a child about the world beyond, and she will strive to make a place in it.


Topics of The Times; Paradise Found
When Communism collapsed, so did Eastern Europe's once-flourishing cottage industry -- the bitter joke factory.
But connoisseurs of political humor can take heart.
A branch has opened its doors in Fidel Castro's Cuba.
A recent visitor heard this specimen:


St. Patrick's Parade Organizers Don't Bar Gays From Marching; Constitution Upheld
To the Editor:
We now have had confirmed by Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy of Federal District Court in Manhattan (news article, Feb. 27) what most people who know anything about the First Amendment to the United States Constitution long ago realized, that is, that New York City's action in withholding a parade permit from the Ancient Order of Hibernians for this year's St.
Patrick's Day Parade was clearly unconstitutional.


Masha Tumarkin, 49, Teacher of Immigrants
Masha Tumarkin, who helped institute a new technique for teaching English to upwards of 50,000 recent immigrants in New York City, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
She was 49 and was a Manhattan resident.
The cause of death was leukemia, her family said.


Essay; The Balancing Czech
The drama is classic: A courageous, charismatic dissident rallies the people behind him to reject the old regime; he brings in an ally to help him handle the reins of power; the trusted ally then either betrays or redeems the revolution.
In Russia, that drama is being played out toward betrayal, as the leader of the rump Parliament seeks to strip President Yeltsin of the power he legitimately derived from the people in an election.
Ruslan Khasbulatov, though disavowed by his separatist home constituency, is reaching for Kremlin control.


Industrial Nations Push to Aid Russia
The leading industrial nations moved today toward providing what one official termed "concrete and visible" new assistance to Russia to support the nation's tumultuous economic changes and the newly threatened leadership of President Boris N. Yeltsin.
The resolve to accelerate and increase assistance came after Russia's Deputy Prime Minister, Boris G. Fyodorov, made an emergency appearance at a meeting here of officials from the Group of Seven leading industrial nations.


THE BLIZZARD OF '93: Connecticut; If It Moves, Attach a Plow
Churches, stores and restaurants were closed across Connecticut as people emerged from their homes to find little damage from the blizzard, but a back-breaking task ahead of them: clearing a foot or more of heavy, ice-crusted snow from roads, sidewalks and driveways.
State highways and most local roads were passable, but some thoroughfares were reduced to single lanes as plows struggled with the icy snow.
Parking lots were treacherous.
And many people couldn't get out of their driveways, overwhelming landscapers and other private plowers with calls for help.


CHRONICLE
The talk show host ARSENIO HALL and the cast of "Star Trek: The Next Generation" were honored by the Starlight Foundation for their work with sick children.
Mr.
Hall received the group's "Humanitarian of the Year Award" and "Star Trek" the "Children's Friendship Award" at a banquet at the Century Plaza Hotel in Los Angeles on Saturday night, The Associated Press said.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected during the week beginning today:
Advanta, Horsham, Pa., 2.725 million common shares. Prudential Securities.


'93 Could Be Williams's Favorite Year
Bernie Williams is the Yankees' center fielder.
He will probably be their leadoff batter, preceding Wade Boggs and Don Mattingly in the lineup.
He does not have to worry about any flights to Columbus, Ohio.
Not anymore.
This is his year.
"It's exciting," said Williams. "I think I can make an impact."


Build Health System on Medicare
To the Editor:
Further to "Opening Up on Health Care" (editorial, March 7):


Bosnia Government Sets Conditions For Accepting Proposal to End War
Driven by fears that thousands more Muslims will die in continuing "ethnic cleansing" offensives by Serbian nationalist forces, the Bosnian Government set conditions today under which it would accept an international peace plan.
President Alija Izetbegovic will return to peace talks at the United Nations this week, several days later than planned, carrying the consensus he promised, but whether his Government's demands of broader guarantees for Muslims are acceptable to the other factions remains to be seen.
In the past, both the Serbs and the United Nations have objected to Bosnian requests.


Disruptions Delay Times
Many subscribers to The New York Times did not receive the newspaper yesterday morning because the fierce storm that lashed the New York region kept workers from reaching jobs at printing plants and prevented trucks from making deliveries.


U.N.L.V. in N.I.T.; Big East Sends 4
The National Collegiate Athletic Association took only three Big East teams.
The National Invitation Tournament, selecting afterward, did them one better.
Providence (17-11), Boston College (16-12), Georgetown (16-12) and Connecticut (15-12) were among the 32 selections for the nation's oldest tournament, which culminates with semifinals and the final March 29 and 31 at Madison Square Garden.


An Amalgam of Styles In Marathon's Second Part
"What's here is a machine to make thought more fluid," Richard Foreman announced on Saturday, as Symphony Space's 12-hour "Off the Wall to Wall" marathon barreled along on its gladsome path.
With these words, Mr.
Foreman, an avatar of avant-garde theater since the late 1960's, provided some theory for the practice that engaged over 60 performers during this annual event, which focused this year on experimental work.
Inconsistency is inevitable in a show like Saturday's, as performers squeeze into brief time slots during a rapidly moving program.
The first half of "Off the Wall to Wall," from noon to 6 P.M., featured many scored works, whose formal structure worked well within the time allotted.
Standouts included Norman Yamada's delicate "In Celebration of Year One"; David Shea's "The Prisoner," which invoked 1960's television soundtracks and post-modern hip-hop within an avant-garde milieu, and a brief piece by Eric Qin, performed on synthesized tape-loop percussion by Christine Bard and James Pugliese, that showed how the rhythm of utterance can alter the meaning of words.


RESULTS PLUS
SKIING  This Isn't So Hard, Is It?


2 Teams in New York Want White
Despite the icy conditions here, the Jets yesterday stepped up their hot pursuit of Eagles defensive end Reggie White, one of the most sought-after free agents in the National Football League.
White was due to arrive in New York from Knoxville, Tenn., last night.
But while this was to be White's first visit here on his traveling "Let's Make a Deal" tour of teams around the league, it apparently was not to be his last.


Washington Talk; On Street Of Doers, Have-Nots Own Night
There are other streets that have more homeless people on them, other places that can be converted into equally vivid metaphors of the fallen national condition.
Still, it is striking to emerge from an office building late on a Friday night to find K Street, Washington's bustling power corridor, littered with slumped bodies.


Olajuwon's Contract Extended by Rockets
HAKEEM OLAJUWON agreed to a four-year contract extension yesterday that will keep the All-Star center with the Houston Rockets through the 1998-99 season.
"I'm glad this is over with," Olajuwon said of the deal, which could be worth as much as $30 million.
The new contract comes a year after Rockets management and Olajuwon began a bitter dispute that started with General Manager STEVE PATTERSON accusing Olajuwon of faking an injury as a ploy to get more money.
Olajuwon denied the accusation.
The Rockets tried to trade him during the off season, and training camp began with Olajuwon and the team owner, CHARLIE THOMAS, criticizing each other.
They began settling their differences during a flight to Japan, where the Rockets started the season.


Q&amp;A
Significant Dots
Q.
What are the three dots I see on the heads of many insects?


Buried In Snow And Calls
"Lopane. No plowing available. Can I help you?"
That's the way employees of Lopane Florist and Garden Center in Scarsdale were answering the phone yesterday.
But plowing, or some way to move snow, was exactly what most of the callers needed.


Peter Dean, Artist; Expressionist, 58, In Figurative Mode
Peter Dean, a figurative expressionist painter, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 58 and also had a home in Elizaville, N.Y.
The cause was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease, his family said.


Agents Stymied In Negotiations With Texas Cult
Negotiations between Federal agents and an armed religious sect slid into a lull today, with little contact between the two sides over the last 24 hours.
No more sect members emerged from the compound 10 miles east of Waco.
And the Federal authorities made it evident that they had begun to tire of debating scriptural lessons with leaders of the sect, the Branch Davidians, and wanted to move on to what they called "substantive issues" of ending the siege.


Michigan Students, Caught in Appalachian Snow, Learn Lesson in Survival
Marcy Paisley left here 10 days ago with a group of 117 students and faculty members from a private school expecting adventure and a character-building lesson in wilderness camping.
Last weekend the adventure took a perilous turn, stranding dozens of the hikers in waist-deep snow on an isolated mountain along the North Carolina-Tennessee border.
Twenty-four were still unaccounted for tonight.


New Finds Suggest Even Earlier Trade on Fabled Silk Road
NEW archeological discoveries suggest that trade across the sweep of Eurasia may have begun in some form many centuries earlier than thought.
The findings, coupled with a widening range of scientific and historical research, could write a fascinating new chapter in the epic of the legendary Silk Road.
The latest and most surprising discovery is strands of silk found in the hair of an Egyptian mummy from about 1000 B.C., long before regular traffic on the Silk Road and a good millennium before silk was previously thought to be used in Egypt.
Other research may extend human activity along this route back even further, perhaps a million years to the migrations of human ancestors into eastern Asia.


Honors
*
Dwight C. Minton, chairman and chief executive of Church &amp; Dwight Co., and Paul Kahn, who recently stepped down as president of A.T.&amp; T.'s Universal Card Services, were named to receive Edison Achievement Awards for innovative marketing from the American Marketing Association.
Also, the late William McGowan, who was chairman of the MCI Communications Corp., was named to receive a posthumous award at the presentation in New York on April 29.


Glen Ridge Jury Asks for Rereading of Testimony
In its seventh day of deliberations, the jury in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial today appeared to be focusing on the first sexual act at issue in the case and whether one of the defendants acted alone in it or received assistance from his co-defendants.
The day's session started an hour and 15 minutes late because some jurors were delayed by traffic tie-ups on roads encrusted with snow and ice from the weekend blizzard.


People
*
Ira Povlin was named to the new position of executive vice president at Spagna Dunn Research, New York.
He was previously president at Market Facts, New York.


Review/Music; Charity and Musicality Contend for a Spotlight
In 1987, a group of managers, record company executives and other behind-the-scenes toilers in the music world noted the heavy toll that AIDS was taking on both sides of the footlights and realized that they had the means to do some good.
They asked some of their star performers to donate an evening to the cause.
They assembled an orchestra using players from the New York Philharmonic, the opera and ballet orchestras and the city's many freelance groups.
And they presented the first Music for Life Concert as a benefit for the Gay Men's Health Crisis, the AIDS educational and service organization.
They raised $1.7 million that night and provided some priceless moments of music making, most notably a performance by Leonard Bernstein and James Levine of the Andante from Mozart's Sonata for Two Pianos in D (K. 448).
The concert was captured on a Deutsche Grammophon recording.
In 1990, a second Music for Life evening raised $1.4 million.


Herbert W. Evans Jr.; Executive, 75
Herbert W. Evans Jr., retired president of Woolsey Marine Industries of Manhattan, makers of paints and finishes for boat builders, died on Sunday at his home in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 75.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Why Italy Finds Itself In a Peculiar Position
To the Editor:
"Don't Blame Fate. Blame the Italians" (Op-Ed, March 9) by Enzo Biagi, instead of merely reinforcing a stereotype image of Italians, should have explained that corruption scandals in Italy were also caused by:


Humidifiers Help Skin
To the Editor:
Jane Brody writes (Personal Health column, March 4) that humidifying one's household air is only "minimally effective" for relieving dry skin.
However, a recent national survey of more than 300 physicians found that 74 percent believe that humidifiers and vaporizers used in the household help reduce dry skin.
Readers can expect relief from these inexpensive devices, along with the other excellent pointers in the column.
W.
STEVEN PRAY Professor, Pharmaceutics, Southwestern Oklahoma State U. Weatherford, Okla., March 5, 1993


Bankruptcy Protection Is Sought for Herman's
After formally taking over yesterday, the first action by the new owners of Herman's World of Sporting Goods was to file for bankruptcy protection for the ailing specialty retail chain.
The company, which will lose more than $18.5 million on sales of about $580 million in the fiscal year that ends May 1, is expected to use bankruptcy protection to sell or close stores outside its core base of operations in the Northeast, where its name is well known.
Bankruptcy protection will enable Herman's, which operates 253 stores in 40 states, to break leases and other contracts without penalty.


Administration to Push For More R.T.C. Funds
The Clinton Administration will make its first big push this week to persuade a recalcitrant Congress to set aside billions of dollars to complete the cleanup of the savings and loan industry.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen and other top financial officials will go before the House and Senate Banking Committees to seek quick action by Congress, which failed last year to finance the operations of the Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency that disposes of the loans and property of failed savings and loans.


Clinton Promises Rabin He Won't Cut Aid to Israel
Despite pressure to cut foreign aid as he reduces domestic spending, President Clinton assured Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel today that he would oppose any attempt to reduce military and economic assistance to Israel for years to come.
Senior aides said that Mr.
Clinton pledged to continue current aid levels not just in the coming budget as Secretary of State Warren Christopher said last week, but in the years to follow.
The aides also suggested that if Israel made peace with its neighbors, it would be compensated even further for its sacrifices, just as both Israel and Egypt were guaranteed hefty American aid packages after the 1979 Camp David treaty.


Nike's Quarterly Profit Exceeds Estimates
Whether it was because of Michael Jordan leaping from one planet to the next, Andre Agassi wearing fluorescent colors to pummel tennis balls or Bo Jackson doing almost anything, Nike made a favorable impression, with a 8.4 percent earnings increase for the fiscal third quarter.
Nike, one of the world's leading marketers of athletic footwear and apparel, said yesterday that sales growth in the United States shoe market helped raise earnings to $89.5 million, compared with $82.5 million in last year's third quarter.


Storm Loss New Blow To Insurers
A leading insurance rating service estimated yesterday that losses to insurance companies from the huge winter storm over the weekend would come close to $800 million.
The storm, which battered property in the Eastern United States, increased anxiety among Florida officials about already rising premiums and lack of availability of homeowners' policies in that state after the destruction by Hurricane Andrew last summer.


A Newsroom Wrestles for Its Soul
The staff of The New York Post took an unusual tack last night in making their case against the stewardship of the paper by two men they clearly dislike.
They put it in writing. All over The Post.


Hilton Casino Approved
The Hilton Hotels Corporation and New Orleans Paddlewheels Inc. said today that the Louisiana Riverboat Gaming Commission approved their proposed 2,400-passenger Queen of New Orleans riverboat casino.
Hilton said the riverboat, which would have a 30,000-square-foot casino with 1,400 slot machines and 60 table games, still needed a "suitability" license from the Louisiana State Police Riverboat Gaming Division.
Construction of the vessel is expected to take 15 months, and the riverboat casino is expected to open in the summer of 1994.
The project's cost is estimated at $55 million.


A Fast-Paced Sport's Fast-Paced Demise
WHEN Bridgeport Jai Alai opened in 1976, its owners enthused about presenting the world's best players in the world's largest arena for the world's fastest game.
Critics complained that it was making too much money.
Today most of the seats are empty most of the time, and its owners are enthusing about tearing it down.
You can argue that all of this might have been foreseen: Who got the idea that Americans were dying to spend their evenings watching Basques in white pants throw a ball against a wall and chase it with baskets on their arms?
But that's not quite fair, because the sport was never the point of it all, at least not in Bridgeport.


2 Suspects Held and 2 Flee in Fatal Bombay Blasts
Two suspects in the explosions that shook Bombay last week were arrested late tonight, and two others escaped in a shootout at the airport as investigators said they were exploring indications that organized crime and international terrorists had roles in the bombings.
Two American investigators are traveling here to join the inquiry and look for similarities with the World Trade Center bombing, officials said.


MCI Service for Canada
Continuing with the Canadian project that is under legal attack by its archrival, A.T.&amp; T., the MCI Communications Corporation said yesterday that it planned to offer a major data transmission service to large corporate customers in Canada.
The MCI service, known as frame relay, is 27 times faster than typical business-telephone lines and is gaining wider acceptance among corporations in the United States.
MCI will begin to offer frame relay in Canada in May, with full service by 1994.


Jackson Safe With Slide
BO JACKSON passed another test yesterday for the Chicago White Sox when he landed on his artificial left hip while scoring a run without injury in a game against Pittsburgh.
"I wanted to slide on my right side but I just instinctively slid on the left side," Jackson said.
"Once I got running, everything went out the window. Every  day, I'm getting better."


North Korea Trifles With Doomsday
North Korea may not yet be in a position to use those nuclear weapons it has allegedly been developing.
But for the past few days Pyongyang has been flirting with diplomatic suicide and scaring a lot of people.
It announced withdrawal from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and, for good measure, partial mobilization of its million-strong military.
In all likelihood, these moves are mostly bluster addressed mainly at a North Korean audience and reflecting hostility to nuclear inspections.
But they have to be taken seriously.
Seoul is just minutes from the North Korean border.
And no one outside North Korea knows how far Pyongyang's nuclear program has gone.


Bridge
In general a defender hopes that the declarer will err in his play of the hand.
But he may, in rare situations, end up regretting the error: If it opens up the opportunity for a brilliant defensive stroke, and it is missed, the other defender may start screaming in the post-mortem.
Consider the diagramed deal from a Regional Knockout Match in Cromwell, Conn., reported by Michael Radin of Manhattan.
North used a variety of the Michaels Cue-bid, showing spades and another suit, and landed in three no-trump.
He won the opening diamond lead with the ace and worked on clubs.
The king and ten were permitted to win, and he finessed the spade ten, losing to the jack. (Finessing the queen would have been wiser.)


Drop in Pay for I.B.M. Chief
John F. Akers, the departing chief executive of I.B.M., was paid $1.3 million last year in salary and bonus, down from $1.58 million in 1991 and roughly half what he received in 1990, according to the company proxy statement mailed to shareholders yesterday.
Still, in a year when the Internatational Business Machines Corporation reported a loss of $4.97 billion, Mr.
Akers did receive a bonus of $375,000, according to the proxy statement.
The bonus payment was down sharply from $650,000 in 1991 and $1.7 million in 1990.


After-Storm Travel
NEWARK AIRPORT continues to have some delays on inbound flights.
La Guardia Airport and Kennedy International Airport are experiencing no delays.
AMTRAK continues to run on normal schedules.


CHRONICLE
The high school benefit will not be the only look into the past this week for Mr.
Wallace.
He is also scheduled to be on a panel on the blacklisting of suspected Communists during the McCarthy era on Saturday at the Brooklyn Museum.
The panel will also include Carl Bernstein, author of a book on his parents' experiences under surveillance for being members of the Communist Party; Art Buchwald, the columnist and satirist; former Gov.
Hugh L. Carey of New York; Jay Presson Allen, a playwright and screenwriter, and Viveca Lindfors, the actress.


Dawson's Latest Rendezvous Is With the Green Monster
Say "Hawk" to veteran Boston Red Sox fans and they will probably smile, recalling the rebellious 60's and a guy with powder-blue Nehru jackets, love beads and a potent bat.
Well, move over in memory lane, Ken Harrelson.
There will be a new Hawk sending baseballs flying around Fenway Park this spring.
Andre (the Hawk) Dawson.


U.N. REPORT URGES SWEEPING CHANGES IN SALVADOR ARMY
A United Nations-sponsored commission that investigated the worst human rights abuses of El Salvador's civil war called today for the dismissal of many senior military officers and the barring from public office of Government and rebel officials implicated in the abuses.
The commission's report was described by diplomats and human rights advocates as a historic step in the effort to account for the causes of violence that claimed an estimated 75,000 lives during the 12-year war.


Burnitz Will Get His Hacks, And Welts
It is the prospect's fate: a B game in what amounted to a Grade C hurricane on a stretch of flat Florida land as pale and empty as the sky.
But Jeromy Burnitz, his hands stuck in his belt, his back turned to the gale, didn't feel put out.
Perhaps the desolate landscape reminded him of his Texas childhood.
Or perhaps any place that had bats and an outfield wall, no matter how makeshift, was close enough to paradise.
"It's baseball, isn't it?" asked Burnitz. "It's what I chose to do."


DIGITAL FINDS PARTNER IN MITSUBISHI
The Digital Equipment Corporation has found a long-sought partner to build and sell its Alpha AXP microprocessors.
It will announce today that Mitsubishi Electric has agreed to make the chips, which Digital introduced more than a year ago.


INSIDE
Hard Line on Airlines
Washington approved a $300 million British stake in USAir but tied further investment to access for American carriers in Britain.
Page D1.
Clinton Assures Israel of Aid
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was met at the White House with a pledge that aid would not be cut.
Page A8.
Lobbying for Insurance
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield spent the second highest amount last year on lobbying in Albany.
Page B1.


No Headline
Some of the older members hope that this reform business is a phenomenon that will pass.
But they are sadly mistaken.
This train won't be stopped. -- ROBERT D. INGLIS, a 33-year-old House freshman from South Carolina.  [ A17:1. ]


Cavaliers, Looking Up at Bulls, Fall Flat Against Lowly Bullets
Bullets 105, Cavaliers 101
The Washington Bullets snapped a six-game losing streak by beating the Cleveland Cavaliers, 105-101, last night in a game that had been postponed on Saturday by the snowstorm.
This was the last of four Bullets games played in Baltimore this season, and Washington's only victory.
Harvey Grant's 15-foot jumper with 1 minute 4 seconds left in the game gave Washington the lead for good.
Cleveland shot 64 percent from the field in the first half and took a 58-46 halftime lead.
In the second half, the Cavaliers slipped to 44 percent, scoring only 19 points in the fourth quarter.
"We sat around for three days, and we just came out not sharp, and we did not have any enthusiasm," said Cleveland Coach Lenny Wilkens.
"We did not play well as far as I was concerned."
In the Central Division race, Cleveland dropped to two and a half games behind first-place Chicago.
In the fourth quarter, the lead changed hands seven times before Washington scored 10 straight points to take a 99-90 lead with 4:21 left.
Cleveland then went on a 9-0 run and tied the game at 101-101 on a basket by John Battle with 2:14 remaining.
Grant hit his go-ahead jumper a minute later.
Tom Gugliotta led Washington with 23 points and 10 rebounds, while Grant added 21 points and LaBradford Smith 20.
Brad Daugherty led the Cavaliers with 22 points and 10 rebounds. Bulls 101, Clippers 94
Because of double-teaming on Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen, B. J. Armstrong took charge and scored a career-high 28 points, 12 in the fourth quarter, as Chicago won at home.
Pippen also finished strongly, scoring 11 of his 15 points in the fourth quarter.
Jordan had 23.
After a layup by Stanley Roberts with 2:56 left cut Chicago's lead to 91-90, Pippen countered with a 3-point field goal.
Armstrong scored the Bulls' last 7 points -- with a 3-pointer and four free throws.
Heat 103, Nuggets 100
Glen Rice scored 30 points, hitting two key 3-pointers in overtime, as Miami rallied from a 7-point deficit in the extra period to win in Denver.
It was the Heat's ninth victory in the last 10 games.
A pair of free throws by Bryant Stith, a 16-foot jumper by Tom Hammonds and a 3-point play by Robert Pack put Denver ahead by 98-91 with 3:25 left in overtime.
But Grant Long hit a pair of free throws, Rice connected on a 3-pointer and Bimbo Coles hit a 14-foot jumper to tie the score at 98-98.
After a Denver turnover, Rice hit another 3-pointer with 1:32 left to put the Heat ahead to stay.
Jackson's 22-foot jumper with 1:15 left accounted for Denver's last points.
Smith hit a pair of free throws for the Heat with 11.6 seconds remaining, and Stith and Reggie Williams both missed 3-pointers before time expired.
Denver's Dikembe Mutombo had a career-high 23 rebounds but only 8 points.
Lakers 92, Spurs 87
James Worthy scored 24 points and Vlade Divac and Byron Scott added 17 each as Los Angeles defeated the Spurs for the Lakers' second victory in San Antonio this season.
Los Angeles, which played three games in four days, finished a five-game road trip at 3-2.
David Robinson led the Spurs with 26 points as San Antonio lost for just the sixth time at home.
But the center was held to just 4 first-half points, and San Antonio's power-forward tandem of J. R. Reid and Antoine Carr combined for only 13 points all night.
The Lakers led by 76-71 with five minutes to play when Anthony Peeler hit a 3-point shot and Divac followed with a free throw to put San Antonio 9 points behind.
San Antonio Coach John Lucas, 28-11 since replacing Jerry Tarkanian, attributed the loss to the 23 turnovers.
Sean Elliott had 17 points but 7 turnovers.
Lakers center Benoit Benjamin was ejected with 9:16 left in the game for flagrantly fouling Sean Elliott on a drive to the basket.
Jazz 109, Mavericks 96
Karl Malone rebounded from one of his poorest performances of the season by scoring 36 points, and Utah won in Dallas to extend the Mavericks' club-record losing streak to 19 games.
The Mavericks have lost the 19 games by an average margin of 20 points.
If Dallas loses to visiting Orlando tomorrow, it will tie the league record for consecutive defeats in a season, held by the 1972-73 76ers.
Malone scored 15 points before being ejected in the fourth quarter of a 104-95 loss to Houston on Saturday.
Against Dallas, he hit 12 of 17 field-goal attempts and 12 of 13 free throws, and added 8 rebounds.
With next season's coach, Quinn Buckner, in attendance, the Mavericks turned in a rare competitive first half, trailing by just 49-44 at intermission.
Utah broke the game open in the third quarter, using a 21-8 run over the first 6:27 to build a 70-52 lead.


Margaret M. Mills; Arts Official, 71
Margaret M. Mills, a former executive director of the American Academy of Arts and Letters, died on Sunday in an automobile accident in Naples, Fla., Hugo Weisgall, the academy's president, announced.
She was 71.
Ms.
Mills was born in England and later moved with her family to Brazil, where she studied animal husbandry and managed her father's cattle farm and eucalyptus plantation in a mountain town above Rio de Janeiro.
She later worked in the Brazilian consulate in London and was transferred to the Brazilian Treasury in New York City.


McGirt Is Undaunted After Shoulder Surgery
It was like an explosion.
That's what the doctor said yesterday about the moment when James (Buddy) McGirt probably injured his left shoulder.
One punch and it was over.
Isn't that just like boxing?


'Today' Producer Called Ready to Drop News Job
Jeff Zucker, the 27-year-old producer of both NBC's "Today" program and the "NBC Nightly News," plans to give up the nightly news broadcast, NBC News officials said yesterday.
"It's kind of impossible even for Jeff Zucker to have two full-time jobs," one NBC News executive said yesterday, speaking on the condition of anonymity.
Since Mr.
Zucker added "NBC Nightly News" to his portfolio less than a month ago, his workdays have frequently stretched to 15 hours or more.


Settlement for Polonia
California Angels outfielder LUIS POLONIA has agreed to an out-of-court settlement with a woman who sued him for having sex with her four years ago when she was 15 and he was with the Yankees.
Polonia served a 60-day jail term in Milwaukee for the 1989 incident.
The settlement reached over the weekend and announced yesterday averted a jury trial that had been scheduled to start yesterday.
The amount of the settlement wasn't disclosed. (AP)


A Big Spender in Albany: It's Blue Cross, the Lobbyist
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, facing major legislative battles amid a fiscal crisis that led it to warn it would shut down, spent more than all but one other organization last year to lobby lawmakers in the State Capitol.
The company, New York State's largest insurer, spent $511,576 on lobbying as the State Legislature enacted major changes in the way health insurance rates are set in New York and approved a plan to infuse the company with $100 million to reduce the severest impacts of a rate increase.


Drug Makers Propose Self-Control on Prices
Under strong criticism from President Clinton that has sent drug stocks tumbling, the pharmaceutical industry last week formally offered to limit average price increases to the general inflation rate.
Similar moves have already been announced by Merck &amp; Company, Pfizer Inc. and eight other large drug companies.


Bosnian Serbs Yielding To U.N. General's Stand
Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon of France, commander of the United Nations military force here, won at least a partial victory tonight: permission from Bosnian Serbs for aid convoys to pass into Srebrenica, a Muslim enclave in eastern Bosnia where he has been encamped with refugees.
He promised the people of Srebrenica on Saturday that he would remain with them, under intensive shelling, until Serbian forces opened corridors to relief convoys and approved the evacuation of hundreds of sick and wounded Muslims.


As Corporate America reorganizes, agencies try to be compatible.
GIVEN the amount of organizational tinkering at many advertising agencies these days, the industry may need to create a new job title: artistic director for organizational charts.
These jobs would go to the people who shake up staffs, prompting head-scratching debates over the most effective ways to structure an agency and, inevitably, creating a rash of new labels like Client Business Units and Business Service Teams.


Let's Simplify Our World Radio Role
To the Editor:
I am pleased that you devoted considerable Op-Ed space March 3 to United States international broadcasting, but dismayed that a balanced picture did not emerge.


Senate in Trenton Rejects Bid To Overturn a Weapons Ban
The New Jersey Senate voted unanimously today not to overturn the state's ban on assault weapons, the toughest in the nation.
Only minutes after the vote, President Clinton's new Attorney General, Janet Reno, called Gov.
Jim Florio to congratulate him.


BRIEFS Debt  * Broward County, Fla., Health Facilities Authority is tentatively offering $47.6 million of tax-exempt hospital revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 5.75 percent for a bond due in 2012, through William R. Hough &amp; Co. Yields on serial bonds range from 3 percent in 1994 to 5.40 percent in 2005, with all the bonds rated triple-A by Moody's and S.&amp; P. because of insurance by the Ambac Indemnity Corp.


Social Worker Arrested in Theft of $30,000
A supervisor in New York City's social-service agency who was responsible for overseeing social workers at a city welfare center in the Bronx was arrested yesterday on charges that she received almost $30,000 in welfare payments and food stamps for more than four years while working for the city.


Computers Make People More Employable; Where the Jobs Are
To the Editor:
Jeremy Rifkin's atavistic reasoning (Op-Ed, Feb. 24) is reminiscent of the labor riots in the 19th century at the start of the Industrial Revolution.
Workers feared permanent displacement by machinery.


Former F.C.C. Chief Joining Hearst
Alfred C. Sikes, who, as chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, pushed to open the communications industry to new technologies, has been named to head the efforts of the Hearst Corporation to marry its journalistic resources with satellite, computer and other emerging technologies.
Mr.
Sikes, who quit as chairman of the F.C.C. the day before President Clinton was inaugurated, will be moving to New York to head Hearst's new Media and Technology Group, the privately held communications company said yesterday.


Accounts
*
The Connecticut Toyota Dealers Advertising Association, Hartford, to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS/Pacific, Torrance, Calif., to handle advertising for Connecticut's 16 Toyota dealers.
The account was previously handled by O'Neal &amp; Prelle, Hartford.
Billings are estimated at $2 million.


Black Film Portrait Back on Screen
When "Nothing but a Man" was first shown, in 1964, it was credited with creating a new sensitivity in its presentation of black life in the American South.
Now, nearly 30 years later, the film has again been released to theaters in the hope that it can speak to a new generation.
Directed by Michael Roemer and written and produced by Mr.
Roemer and Robert Young, the independent production stars Ivan Dixon and Abbey Lincoln in the story of a young black laborer in the South who falls in love with and marries the daughter of a preacher.
The movie follows him as he struggles to affirm his worth in the face of relentless racial prejudice and his own emotional conflicts.
Currently playing at the Harlem Victoria Five theater, 233 West 125th Street, "Nothing but a Man" is scheduled to open in Los Angeles and Chicago later this month and elsewhere in the country later in the year.


Hong Kong Stocks Rebound After Big 2-Session Plunge
The Hong Kong stock market recovered today, regaining some of the ground it lost after a dispute over the territory's future intensified and caused a plunge in stock trading on Monday.
The Hang Seng index, the market's main indicator, was up 86.39 points, or 1.48 percent, to 5,941, as of 2 P.M. local time (1 A.M. E.S.T.).
Brokers said the buying came largely from investors in London.


Fox Said to Be In New York Review
The 20th Century Fox Film Corporation has placed in review its local television, radio and newspaper media-buying account, industry executives said, confirming a report that appeared this week in the trade publication Inside Media.
The account has been handled since 1990 by Young &amp; Rubicam New York.


Where the Unorthodox Gets a Hearing at N.I.H.
WHEN Dr.
Joseph J. Jacobs started out as the director of the new Office of Alternative Medicine late last fall, he had a giddily adventurous way of describing his mission.
He was an entrepreneur, he told everybody, out prospecting for fresh approaches to thwarting intractable ailments.
He had come to the staid halls of the National Institutes of Health to explore the scientific worthiness of unorthodox practices often dismissed by conventional doctors as quackery or near it, from homeopathy to acupuncture, from the use of bee pollen for treating asthma to the laying on of hands to ease unbearable pain.


Woman May Regain Custody of Her Son
Ellen Storck, who was found by a Family Court judge to be suffering from a little-known psychological illness in which she makes her 8-year-old son, Aaron, ill to gain attention, agreed today to undergo psychiatric counseling so that, in time, she could be reunited with her son.
The agreement ended a case that had drawn national attention in the legal and medical professions.


HEAD OF BOSTON U. REBUTTED ON GAIN
Contrary to his repeated public denials, John R. Silber, the longtime president of Boston University, profited by hundreds of thousands of dollars when the university sold a small medical research company four years ago, the State Attorney General said today.
At a news conference this evening a few hours after the Attorney General spoke, Dr.
Silber acknowledged for the first time that he had indeed received a profit from the sale.


Claude Kirchner, 77, Star of Children's TV
Claude Kirchner, a pioneer in children's television, died on March 8 at a hospice in Hawthorne, N.Y.
He was 77 and lived in Greenwich, Conn.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Lynn Lavalette of Cos Cob, Conn.


Hwang Play Closes After 8 Previews
"Face Value," the troubled $2 million farce by David Henry Hwang that was to open on Broadway on Sunday, has closed after eight previews at the Cort Theater.
Sunday's matinee was the last show.
The producers, Stuart Ostrow, Scott Rudin and Jujamcyn Theaters, cited a "lack of box-office interest" in a statement issued by their press representative, Gary Springer.
The producers and the show's general manager, Joseph Harris, did not return phone calls.


North Korea Hit By First Sanctions
Imposing the first of what is expected to be a series of economic sanctions against North Korea, President Kim Young Sam of South Korea ordered today that all South Korean moves to invest in the North's crippled economy be blocked until the North reverses its decision to withdraw from the treaty to halt the spread of nuclear weapons.
At the same time, South Korean officials said they wanted to avoid any action that would corner the Government of President Kim Il Sung or risk military conflicts.
"We must make all efforts to resolve this in a peaceful manner and not to make the situation worse," Han Sung Joo, South Korea's Foreign Minister, said today.


Fight for New York Post Heats Up In Court, in Newsroom and in Print
The New York Post, which has survived the New York newspaper wars since 1801, sought bankruptcy protection yesterday under its current owner, Peter S. Kalikow, after failing to publish yesterday's issue.
The missed issue came amid a battle between The Post's staff and the man who is taking over the newspaper from Mr.
Kalikow, Abraham Hirschfeld.


Speaking In Tongues Becomes Easier
NATIVE speakers of English seldom appreciate how difficult its sounds can be, at least until they hear, say, a Japanese business executive or a Ukrainian librarian stumble over them, perhaps even after years of study.
A software program from Irvine Interactive of Irvine, Calif., takes direct aim at the problem.
The Sounds of English, for the Macintosh, is not, strictly speaking, a language-learning course; you will have to go elsewhere for grammar and vocabulary.
On the screen, a talking head with the digitized voice of a professional actress pronounces up to several hundred common words in a standard American accent.
The word is printed on the screen, and the lip and tongue movements of the little head are seen.
You can also click on individual consonant and vowel representations to hear them in isolation.


Review/Fashion; From Lagerfeld, Legs In Sheer Black Skirts
A tour of the excavations under the Louvre, where the French shows will be held starting with the spring collections in October, and the opening of the Karl Lagerfeld collection that bears his name were the two high spots of the fall fashion events today.
The underground complex will contain four separate areas for fashion shows, holding from 500 to 1,500 viewers, and will replace the tents in the courtyard of the Louvre where the shows have been staged for more than a decade.
Instead of tents, new clothes will be introduced in catacombs.
It is expected that couture houses, which open their collections at a different time, will also use the complex.
So will designers from other countries.
Sheer but Long Skirts
The best styles in the third episode of Lagerfeld's continuing fashion show -- he showed his fall and winter collection for Chloe two days ago and his ground-breaking fur collection for Fendi in Milan last week -- were his very narrow, very long coats shown over slim trousers and a mind-boggling assortment of intricately cut, long fitted jackets.
The jackets, in very pretty bright colors as well as gray, were inevitably accompanied by a sheer black skirt arching over the hips and sliced into petals, or with arch-shaped cutouts over each leg.
These cutouts were filled in with sheer fabric and worked much better for evening than for day.


Yanks' Davis Shows A Smile and a Future
The telephone calls take place almost every night, and Russ Davis has a difficult time hiding his excitement.
The voice on the other end is the voice of reason.
It is his father, absorbing stories from the Yankees' spring training and then telling his son that more work lies ahead.
Davis, a 23-year-old third baseman, cannot even conceal his glee as he wanders around the Yankee clubhouse, after proving for the last three weeks that he belongs in the same room with Wade Boggs and Don Mattingly.
Teammates have teased Davis because his 6 runs batted in and .533 average have impressed Yankee officials and planted a permanent smile on his face.


Critic's Notebook; Television Catches Up To the Era Of Jazz
Jazz is humming these days.
At home, I find myself returning again and again to a Miles Davis CD called "Kind of Blue," evoking memories of 1960's late-night visits to the old Five Spot bar in the East Village, where a typical bill would include Ornette Coleman and Jimmy Giuffre.
Around me, friends are talking enthusiastically about the current jazz series at Lincoln Center.
And perhaps most significant, television is plugging in to the jazz boom, just beginning to make up for its shameful decades-long neglect of this country's major original musical form.
Why now?
Maybe it has something to do with Bill Clinton and his saxophone.
Certainly the Marsalis brothers, especially Wynton and Branford, figure prominently in the renaissance.
Or perhaps the deaths of Miles Davis and Dizzy Gillespie have reminded music lovers of how much they may have been taking for granted about a priceless heritage.


Hayes Takes Cuts
Colorado Rockies third baseman CHARLIE HAYES took batting practice yesterday, just 12 days after tearing a ligament in his right thumb.
Hayes hit the ball solidly and reported little discomfort, and said he hoped to rejoin the lineup late this week.
Manager DON BAYLOR, however, said he was targeting Hayes to return early next week.
The injury originally was expected to sideline Hayes from four to six weeks, but further examination indicated only a partial tear and possibly a quicker recovery. (AP)


Hotel Worker's Body Found in the Rubble Of the Trade Center
After 17 days of painstaking digging through tons of broken cement and mangled steel, construction workers yesterday spotted a black boot, pulled away chunks of concrete and found the body of Wilfredo Mercado, the hotel worker trapped in the underground garage of the World Trade Center bombing.
Authorities said they believe he is the last person missing in the massive explosion.
Mr.
Mercado, whose body had eluded search teams of special dogs and heat-detecting cameras, in part because it was buried so deep in the wreckage, was the sixth person killed in the Feb. 26 bombing.
The first five victims were found within hours of the explosion at the 110-story twin towers.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Chang and Capriati Exit
Defending champion Michael Chang made an early exit from the Lipton championships in Key Biscayne, Fla., yesterday, losing his opening match to the unseeded South African Marcos Ondruska, 7-5, 6-1.
Fourth-seeded Jennifer Capriati, meanwhile, lost her third-round match to Judith Wiesner of Austria, 3-6, 7-5, 6-4.
Top-seeded Jim Courier and Steffi Graf, playing near the top of their game, posted easy victories.
Courier beat Byron Black of Zimbabwe in a second-round match, 6-2, 6-2.
Graf beat Nicole Arendt of Gainesville, Fla., 6-1, 6-0. (AP) N.H.L.
Kings Beat Sabres
Luc Robitaille scored his 50th goal and 100th point of the season last night to lead Los Angeles to a 4-2 victory over the Sabres at Buffalo.  (AP) Nordiques Beat Leafs: Mats Sundin's power-play goal early in the third period at Quebec snapped a tie and led the Nordiques to a 4-2 victory over the Toronto Maple Leafs. (AP)
SKIING  Assinger Wins in Spain
The Austrian Armin Assinger attacked a wind-swept men's downhill course to edge Daniel Mahrer of Switzerland by 0.01 seconds yesterday in Sierra Nevada, Spain, for his first World Cup victory of the season.
Assinger's time was 1 minute 55.64 seconds.
A.
J.
Kitt of Rochester finished fifth in 1:56.06. (AP)


The Cold Facts On TV Skating
The women's finals of the world figure-skating championships on NBC scored a 12.4 overnight rating and a 19 share Saturday night in A.C.
Nielsen's of 27 major television markets.
The rating is expected to fall when national data is released today.
Last year's Sunday telecast of the women's finals fell from an 11.1 to a 10.0.
Friday's telecast of the men's skating had a national rating of a 6.2/11, down 32 percent from the 9.1/16 last year.
Sunday's dance finals had an overnight rating of 8.4/13.


Bright Warblers
Bright bands of yellow plumage enhance the male warbler's ability to attain larger territories in the dark, dense forests of India, a newstudy has found.
By manipulating the color patterns of some of the forest-dwelling male warblers, the study's author, Karen Marchetti, said, she found that the small green birds, which live in dark habitats, may have evolved brighter feathers to compensate for their decreased visibility.
The study by Ms.
Marchetti, a graduate student in zoology at the University of California at Davis, appears in the current issue of the journal Nature.


Rock-Hard Mounds of Snow Dot Landscape


Spotlight Shines Bright, Searching for a Favorite
If the road to the Kentucky Derby was littered with casualties and beaten favorites before they ran the San Felipe Stakes at Santa Anita on Sunday, it is now gridlocked with debris.
The newest victim: River Special.
He won the Hollywood Futurity in December after running third in the Breeder's Cup Juvenile in October, and for most of the winter he had been stalking Gilded Time for the No. 1 spot on the list of Derby candidates.


Changing a Change of Mind, An Executive Quits at G.M.
From the moment Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua arrived at the General Motors Corporation's headquarters from Europe nine months ago, the straitlaced American automobile industry has never seen anyone so driven and so personally eccentric challenging the Motor City's protocol.
Little did anyone guess, until this afternoon, just how eccentric.


Ipalco Seeks PSI In Bid Of $1.5 Billion
Ipalco Enterprises, the parent of the Indianapolis Power and Light Company, said late this afternoon that it would offer about $1.5 billion in cash and stock for PSI Resources Inc., the holding company for PSI Energy, Indiana's largest electric utility.
Ipalco valued the offer at $26.50 a share, about $2.64 a share more than PSI shareholders stood to gain from a pending merger that was proposed in December between PSI and the Cincinnati Gas and Electric Company.


Correction
The Where to Find It column in The Home Section on Thursday, about upholstery cleaning, misstated the telephone number for Fabra-Cleen, in Queens.
It is (718) 776-3564.


After the Fall
Maybe it was all those guilty hours of lounging on the couch while TV reporters suffered sleet in the face and slush over the boots in the name of news.
Maybe it was fear of having no terrible tales to swap in the office on Monday morning.
Maybe it was just cabin fever.
Whatever it was, it had New Yorkers staggering along snow-choked streets on Sunday morning.
They were searching for the Sunday papers because this is a habit too powerful to break.
In Brooklyn, one spirited soul walked a mile through unplowed tundra.
In Manhattan's West Village, residents darted from newsstand to delicatessen to magazine emporium until somebody spotted a cache on West 14th Street.
"The store in the middle of the block," they said.
"Pass it on."


Funeral Is Held for Slain Narcotics Officer


Vernouillet Journal; Riding to Socialists' Rescue, He May Be Unhorsed
For a politician hailed as the only man who can rescue the Socialist Party after its expected drubbing by conservatives in parliamentary elections next Sunday, Michel Rocard seemed strangely dispirited as he campaigned in his district this weekend.
Only last month, he stirred enthusiasm among his dejected Socialist colleagues by promising to lead a broad new movement of reformed Communists, environmentalists, centrists and Socialists.
And they promptly closed ranks around him as their best hope of winning the 1995 presidential elections.


METRO DIGEST
THE BLIZZARD OF '93: THE TOLL CONTINUES TO RISE Rescue teams searched for snowbound victims, hundreds of thousands remained without power, air travel backed up and commuters struggled to work in the aftermath of the blizzard.
B4.
Throughout the New York metropolitan area, people were attacking the frozen remains of the storm with pickaxes, shovels, hammers, chisels and screwdrivers.
B4.


Review/Fashion; For Some With Talent, Small Is Simply Right
Some of the trendiest people in Paris filed onto wooden benches and watched shy Andre Walker read a poem in front of a sheet hung from the ceiling.
One line captured the spirit not only of Mr.
Walker's show but of the moment, at least for his generation: "There's no such thing as an ugly smile." A fitting sentiment for a time when affection for supermodels and ostentatious presentations seems to be waning.
What could be more charming than the seven genial young women who showed Mr.
Walker's fall and winter clothes?
What Mr.
Walker showed in his bohemian presentation today was on no other runway in Paris.
What a treat for the 100 or so in the audience not to be assaulted by overworked transparency.
His simple ideas were cuffed midcalf short pants with jackets, a long turquoise skirt with a peasant blouse, the best take on a Tyrolean jacket of the season and a simple beige corduroy suit for a princess on her first trip into the real world.
It is tempting to name all the outfits; there were only 11.
But how much nicer to see 11 outfits done right than more than 100 with 50 done right.


Colorado Agency's Top Yield Is 5.60%
The Platte River Power Authority, Colorado, tentatively priced $149.6 million of electric revenue and power refunding revenue bonds yesterday with a maximum yield of 5.60 percent, which is for a serial bond due in 2008.
Yields on the remaining serial bonds ranged from 2.60 percent for a bond due in 1994, to 4.3 percent in 1998, 5.10 percent in 2003 and 5.50 percent in 2007.
For investors in a 31 percent tax bracket, the taxable equivalent yields of these securities range from 3.77 percent in 1994 to 6.28 percent in 1998, 7.39 percent in 2003 and 8.12 percent in 2008.


Snow Clearing Could Take Two Weeks
The New York City Sanitation Department encountered so many problems yesterday in clearing icy roadways and removing piles of snow that officials said a full cleanup from the weekend's blizzard could take up to two weeks and cost more than $10 million.
Like ruins littering a battlefield, mounds of snow that had been molded by plows and then turned rock-hard overnight dotted the region's landscape, preventing parking on streets, blocking access to emergency shoulders on highways and turning routine walks into slippery, acrobatic ordeals.


Brinker Recovers and Plans Return to Post
The health of Norman E. Brinker has improved so rapidly that the former chairman and chief executive of Brinker International Inc. has told employees that he hopes to return to his post in time for a regularly scheduled directors meeting on May 4.
Mr.
Brinker, who was severely injured in a polo match in Florida on Jan. 21, "is totally conscious, totally alert and totally aware of what happened to him," Dr.
Phillip E. Williams, a Dallas neurosurgeon who has supervised Mr.
Brinker's medical care, said today.
"It's going to be a very happy ending."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13 U.N. PANEL URGES DISMISSALS
A U.N.-sponsored panel that investigated the worst human rights abuses of El Salvador's civil war called for dismissing senior military officers and barring many Government and rebel officials implicated in the abuses from holding leadership posts in government or political parties for at least 10 years.
A1 Former guerrilla leaders in El Salvador called for punishment.
A12 The State Department wants history to be the judge on U.S. policy.
A13 SOUTH AFRICA CONFRONTS AIDS
The AIDS virus has colonized South Africa as relentlessly as it has the rest of the continent, abetted by apartheid's children: neglect, fatalism and mistrust.
By conservative estimates 300,000 South Africans, mostly black heterosexuals, are infected with the virus.
A1 2 HELD IN INDIA BOMBINGS
Two suspects in the explosions that shook Bombay last week were arrested, and two others escaped in a shootout as investigators said they were exploring signs that organized crime and international terrorists had roles in the bombings.
A3 SEOUL PUNISHES NORTH KOREA
South Korea ordered that all moves to invest in North Korea be blocked until it reversed a decision to withdraw from the treaty to halt the spread of nuclear weapons.
But South Korea also said it wanted to avoid any action that would risk military conflict.
A3 BOSNIA SERBS AGREE TO CONVOY
The commander of the United Nations military force in Bosnia and Herzegovina won permission from Bosnian Serbs for aid convoys to pass into Srebrenica, a Muslim enclave in eastern Bosnia where he has been encamped with refugees.
A8 CLINTON REASSURES RABIN ON AID
Despite pressure to cut foreign aid as he reduces domestic spending, President Clinton assured Prime Minister Rabin of Israel that he would oppose any attempt to reduce military and economic assistance to Israel for years to come.
A8 BRITAIN ASSAILED ON HONG KONG
At the annual opening of the National People's Congress in Beijing, the Prime Minister stepped up attacks on Britain's proposals to increase democracy in Hong Kong.
A10 Vernouillet Journal: Michel Rocard wants to be France's President.
A4 Vietnamese in Cambodia paid final respects to slain villagers.
A11 The Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide remains in the wings.
A13 National A14-18, B5 PLANS ON MENTAL HEALTH
As part of its plan for the nation's health-care system, the Clinton Administration is seeking to guarantee mental health coverage, long relegated to second-class status under private insurance policies.
A1 ROOTING FOR REFORM
In the 103d Congress, righteousness is as fashionable as a dull red tie.
Earnest freshmen are submitting bills intended to root out any remaining truffles of Congressional privilege.
Some of the old-timers are grumbling.
A1 G.M.
RESIGNATION IS OFFICIAL
The on-again off-again departure of G.M.'s eccentric head of purchasing is on again.
Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua announced he was leaving for a post at Volkswagen.
A1 A BIRD'S FATE
A songbird called the California gnatcatcher has emerged as the symbol of a possible new method to save threatened species: officials and developers working together to preserve an entire ecosystem.
A1 PROSECUTION RESTS
Federal prosecutors in Los Angeles wrapped up their case against four white police officers accused in the beating of Rodney King.
A14 INQUIRY ON UNIVERSITY CHIEF
A state investigation has concluded that the longtime president of Boston University profited by hundreds of thousands of dollars when the university sold a research company four years ago.
A14 PUSHING FOR CLOSINGS
Defense Secretary Les Aspin urged a Presidential commission considering a list of proposed base closings to resist efforts by lawmakers to spare installations in their districts.
His comments suggested that the Pentagon would approve of any additions to the list the commission might make.
A16 THE SCENE ON K STREET
The broad, mile-long stretch of K Street that runs through downtown Washington is where the city's lawyers, lobbyists and consultants converge.
It is also where scores of homeless people spend their days and nights.
A16 MAROONED STUDENTS
Two high school students from suburban Detroit, presumed lost in the Smoky Mountains after a blizzard, were found by rescue workers.
B5 Metro Digest B1 BODY FOUND BELOW TOWERS
After 17 days of digging through cement and steel, construction workers found the body of the hotel worker trapped in the underground garage of the World Trade Center bombing.
The authorities say they believe he is the last person missing in the blast.
A1 POST SEEKS BANKRUPTCY AID
The New York Post sought bankruptcy protection under its current owner, Peter S. Kalikow, after failing to publish on Monday.
The missed issue came amid a battle between the newspaper's staff and the man who is taking over the paper from Mr.
Kalikow, Abraham Hirschfeld.
A1 Business Digest D1 Science Times C1-11 The silken strand that joined ancient civilizations.
C1 Which fish is most closely related to our land ancestors?
C1 A researcher with roots in alternative and conventional medicine.
C1 A new way to get good pictures of nerves.
C3 Does U.S. wait until it is too late to list endangered species?
C4 Q&amp;A C5 Science Watch C11 Peripherals C9 Personal Computers C7 Fashion Page B8 From Lagerfeld, legs in sheer skirts.
For some, small is right.
Patterns By Design Arts/Entertainment C13-18 "Nothing but a Man" returns.
C13 Critics and defenders of Akalaitis.C13 Authenticity in Shakespeare.
C13 American Symphony to leave Carnegie Hall.
C14 Music: Classical reviews.
C16 Benefit concert for AIDS.
C18 Word and Image: A first novel by Jill Ciment.
C17 TV catches up to jazz era.
C13 "Today" producer called to cut back.
C18 Sports B9-15 Baseball: Dawson nears rendezvous with Green Monster.
B9 Mets' Burnitz gets hacks and welts.
B11 Basketball: Beware the N.C.A.A. tournament bracket.
B9 Petrovic proving Portland wrong.
B12 Boxing: McGirt fought with torn tendon.
B15 Columns: Rhoden on John McLendon and Tennessee State B9 On Pro Basketball B13 TV Sports B10 Football: Jets to give White the hard sell.
B9 Hockey: Rangers lose to Bruins.
B9 Horse Racing: No favorite yet in Derby.
B11 Sports People B10 Track and Field: Talk of boycott is just that.
B13 Obituaries B6-7 G. Joseph Minetti, chairman of Civil Aeronautics Board.
B7 Michael Kanin, film maker.
B6 John Caldwell, art curator.
B7 Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21 Editorials Truth, lies and El Salvador.
A bad retreat, in the air.
North Korea tempts doomsday.
After the fall.
Letters A. M. Rosenthal: Facing the risks.
Russell Baker: This time of heroes.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide: Set a deadline to avoid a Haitian bloodbath.
Anna Husarska: Both sides in Haiti should retreat.


Critics and Defenders As Akalaitis Leaves The Public Theater
As the board of the New York Shakespeare Festival formally voted yesterday to remove JoAnne Akalaitis as artistic director, a debate was stirring between her critics, who thought the festival needed change, and her supporters, who found the action peremptory.
Ms.
Akalaitis had been the artistic head of the festival and its flagship, the Joseph Papp Public Theater, since August 1991.
She was selected by Joseph Papp, the legendary impresario and founder of the festival, who was ill with cancer, to be his successor.
Papp died in October 1991.


Magnetic Resonance Gives Better Images Of Nerves in the Body
RESEARCHERS have developed a new way of using magnetic resonance imaging that they say allows doctors for the first time to see nerves clearly in the human body.
The new imaging technique, which can be accomplished by modifying existing magnetic resonance scanners in hundreds of hospitals, could improve the diagnosis of such diverse nerve conditions as chronic back pain and carpal tunnel syndrome.


Rutgers Coach Dropped
ARNOLD JETER, the Rutgers associate head coach who was arrested in a drug raid in November and then cleared of all charges, is being dropped from the football staff, the university said.
Jeter, 54, said he was informed "some time ago" that his contract would not be renewed.
The Rutgers athletic director, FRED GRUNINGER, disclosed the decision in a statement released late Friday.


Michael Kanin, 83, Film Writer For Hepburn and Tracy, Is Dead
Michael Kanin, a director, producer, playwright and screenwriter who shared an Academy Award in 1942 for writing the Katharine Hepburn-Spencer Tracy film comedy "Woman of the Year," died on Friday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 83 and lived in Santa Monica.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said John Pavlik, a spokesman for the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, which made the announcement for the family.


Sports of The Times; Many Miles, And Finally A Finish Line
JOHN McLENDON will do his best to be in Orlando on Thursday, but no guarantees.
Not because the weather's too severe or he's feeling the pinch of his years.
It's just that McLendon, at 76, is still busy running those championship miles: He's the athletic adviser at Cleveland State University and he teaches a course called the History of the African American Athlete in Sports.
This week, he's also coordinating a high school basketball tournament at the university.


Classical Music in Review
Verdehr Trio Merkin Concert Hall


A Fan Of Ewing On Foe's Bench
Although it was his team, the Indiana Pacers, that was being crunched by Patrick Ewing and the Knicks, Sunday night wasn't a total loss for Bob Hill.
To watch as Ewing gets his chance, finally, to compete seriously for a championship brings to Hill a gratifying cognizance that there is such a thing as basketball justice.
Perhaps one day it will be served to the 45-year-old coach, who is struggling through another hopelessly mediocre Pacers season.
It is an unusual perspective that Hill offers on Ewing, from the exasperation of trying to devise an effective defense against him to the agony they shared one night during the 1986-87 season, probably the low point of Ewing's eight-year professional career.


COMPANY NEWS
ALBANK FINANCIAL CORP., said its Albany Savings Bank unit had acquired eight upstate branches of Dime Savings Bank of New York.
Terms were not disclosed.


Truth, Lies and El Salvador
A United Nations Truth Commission now confirms what the Reagan Administration sought to cloud -- that terrible crimes were perpetrated in freedom's name by the armed forces of El Salvador.
Its report serves the past by baring the truth, and the future by calling for the removal of accused officers and the banishment from public posts of rebel leaders responsible for human rights crimes.
The report itself is a cathartic memorial to 75,000 victims of a 12-year civil war.
Established under the 1992 accords that ended the fighting, it received direct testimony from 2,000 people.
Its central finding is that the Salvadoran Army, the security forces and death squads committed the vast majority of the atrocities.
This does not lessen the guilt of leftist rebels for killing four U.S. marines in 1985, or their murder of 11 mayors and some 400 other civilians.
But most of the blood was shed by soldiers armed by the U.S.


New York City Goes to Court to Stop Gay Protest
Citing a fear of confrontation on Fifth Avenue, the City of New York unexpectedly went to court yesterday to block an Irish gay group that was banned from the St.
Patrick's Day parade from holding a demonstration on the parade route shortly before tomorrow's march begins.
A judge granted the city's request for a temporary restraining order against the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization and three of its leaders, and set a hearing for today on whether to issue an order that would last through tomorrow.
The parade is scheduled to start at 11 A.M.


G. Joseph Minetti Is Dead at 85; Ex-Leader of Aeronautics Board
G.
Joseph Minetti, who was appointed by five Presidents to help regulate aviation as it flourished into the jet age, died Saturday at his home in Arlington, Va.
He was 85.
He died of heart failure, said his nephew, Thomas J. Donohue.


TV SportsN.C.A.A. Openers Hardly Unbeatable
In one room of his Manhattan hotel suite yesterday, CBS's Jim Nantz was trying to memorize the matchups for round one of the National Collegiate Athletic Association men's basketball tournament, which starts Thursday.
Next door, he said jokingly, Lorrie Nantz was "making disparaging remarks and marking on the wall how many days before she gets her husband back."
The 1993 tournament, Nantz's third as the lead play-by-play announcer, is the culmination of a lifelong addiction.
Born in Charlotte, N.C., Nantz grew up believing "A.C.C. basketball was the best." When he moved to New Jersey as a teen-ager, he regularly angled his rooftop TV antenna to receive Atlantic Coast Conference games emanating from a Philadelphia station.


Damage Assessments Continue to Rise as the East Coast Shovels Out
The rising toll of death and destruction in the Blizzard of '93 has made it the worst winter storm in more than 40 years, and throughout the East yesterday, rescue teams searched for snowbound victims, hundreds of thousands remained without power, air travel backed up nationally and commuters struggled to work over icy roads and limping public transit.
The weekend storm -- a white hurricane that dropped mountainous snows from Florida to Canada, disrupted millions of lives and was one of the century's most powerful blows -- killed at least 168 people, making it the nation's most deadly storm since 1950, when 250 died in an East Coast blizzard.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.37
2.93
4.09
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.00
2.95
4.09
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.12
3.07
4.27
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.81
5.77
7.38
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.89
6.86
8.06
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.80
7.82
9.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.97
5.91
6.78
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Chinese Minister Denounces Britain
Prime Minister Li Peng accused Britain today of "perfidiously" trying to create disorder in Hong Kong and trying to impede the territory's smooth return to China.
Mr.
Li used the occasion of a two-hour policy address, opening the annual session of the National People's Congress, to step up the attack on Britain's proposals to increase democracy in Hong Kong.
His voice rising in outrage, Mr.
Li departed from the advance text of his speech to warn that China would hold Britain fully responsible for the consequences of the dispute.


Computers Make People More Employable
To the Editor:
In "Watch Out for Trickle-Down Technology" (Feb. 24), Jeremy Rifkin maintains that "high technology" like computer networks makes ordinary people unemployable, just as tractors rendered horses unnecessary for pulling plows.


Aspin Tells Base Panel to Harden Hearts
Signaling his support for closing more military bases than he recommended last week, Defense Secretary Les Aspin today urged a Presidential commission to resist efforts by lawmakers and local communities to spare their installations.
"Almost all bases that are going to be appealed to you will have a story to tell and a case to be made," Mr.
Aspin said at the first hearing of the 1993 Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission, which will make the difficult decision.
"If you buy into their criteria, you will agree to take that base off the list. Pretty quick you end up with no bases on the list at all."


Trail Blazers Beat the Nets At Their Own Board Game
Unlike the other games that they played on their four-game trek through the West, the Nets found themselves in a fight for their lives against the Portland Trail Blazers tonight.
New Jersey played with its usual high intensity, but it was matched by Portland, which was fired up by its usual sellout crowd of 12,888 at Memorial Coliseum.
With a big, physical lineup, the Trail Blazers outrebounded New Jersey, 53-40, and outscored them by 110-94.
Not many teams can outmuscle the Nets, who lead the league in rebounding.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
In yet another flip-flop by G.M.'s top purchasing executive, Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua resigned, two hours before General Motors was to hold a news conference to announce that he would become president of G.M.'s North American operations.  [ Page A1. ]
The U.S. approved a British Air investment in USAir.
But the Transportation Secretary said he would not approve further investments unless Britain gave U.S. carriers greater access.  [ D1. ]


Avoid a Bloodbath in Haiti; Declare A Deadline
Last summer, Haitians hungering for democracy were filled with hope when candidate Bill Clinton declared that the U.S. should "use its unique position to support freedom, whether it's in Haiti or China."
Today, I will discuss with President Clinton the plan initiated by Haiti's constitutional Government and endorsed by the U.S., U.N. and the Organization of American States.
It can convert his moving words into an effective policy to "support freedom" by restoring the democratically elected Government, ending more than 17 months of bloody dictatorship and bringing a solution to the refugee crisis that takes my fellow citizens' lives.


Chess
It has to be recognized that the draw is a fundamental part of chess.
No matter how eager to win any two players are, there will be games in which they fight each other to a standstill.
Could they go on playing?
Yes, if they wanted to bore each other and the spectators by waltzing around in a sterile situation, but that is not what the game is supposed to be and not what spectators pay to see.
Of course, there have been events where the draw is abused, where players clearly shirk a battle.
The old defunct series of tournaments in what was then Sarajevo, Yugoslavia, was known for that.
Currently, though, there is much more pugnacity.
The marvelous series in Linares, Spain, sets a good example.


Compuadd Will Close Retail Unit
The jarring pricing and marketing wars in the personal computing industry added a new casualty today -- the retailing arm of the Compuadd Computer Corporation.
Compuadd, a privately held maker of personal computers, announced today that it would close its 110-store retailing unit by the end of the year.
The company estimated that the move would slash its employees from 1,170 to approximately 550 people.


Jackson Arrested at Protest Against H.I.V. Policy on Haitians


Rural Homeless Find Shelter but No Rides
When the woman went into labor early, the couple ran from door to door in the welfare motel, looking for a ride to the hospital 90 miles away.
After her husband had lost his job and then their home in Newburgh, they had been effectively stranded here, seven miles out of town, with no car and no access to public transportation.
Like many homeless people living in small roadside motels in rural and suburban areas across the country, they found themselves penalized by the same system they had turned to for aid.


Price of The Times Will Rise Outside the New York Area
The New York Times announced yesterday that its suggested newsstand price on weekdays in the Northeast -- but outside the New York region -- would increase on April 5 to 75 cents, from 50 cents.
Charles E. Shelton, The Times's vice president for circulation, said the increase would apply Monday through Saturday in the Northeast corridor from Maine to Virginia.
Within 75 miles of New York City, and on all of Long Island, the suggested price will remain 50 cents.


Thrill of Risk
As revenue-hungry state and local officials legalize gambling, investors -- searching for stocks with a story -- turn to betting-machine and casino shares.
Showboat Inc., a casino operator whose shares fell to $3 in late 1990, has recorded gains after signing agreements recently to add ventures in Canada and Louisiana.


Observer; This Time of Heroes
Interview with a survivor:
Question: What was your first reaction upon learning that the storm of the century was coming your way?


Market Place; Time Warner stock shines despite cloud over cable TV.
SINCE December, Time Warner Inc. stock has risen about 25 percent, closing yesterday at $35.375, down 25 cents.
But as the prospect of tighter cable television regulation looms over the company, the question is whether the stock has topped out.
On the positive side, the company is in talks with U S West and other telephone companies about a major investment.
U S West is the most likely new partner with Time Warner Entertainment, which includes film, recordings and HBO and its other cable television businesses.
Several executives with knowledge of the talks said the regional telephone company's investment could range between $1.5 billion and $2 billion.


2 at Cole &amp; Weber To Start Agency
Two top executives at Cole &amp; Weber of Seattle said that they would leave, effective Aug. 1, to start their own company.
Mark McNeely, 40, Cole &amp; Weber's chairman, and Scott Marshall, 42, president, will open a company, called Scattergood, that will help marketers explore new information and communications technologies.


Books of The Times; Dreaming and Scheming With Mom
The Law of Falling Bodies By Jill Ciment 191 pages. Poseidon Press. $19.
It's hard not to compare "The Law of Falling Bodies," Jill Ciment's radiant first novel, with Mona Simpson's "Anywhere but Here" (1986).
Both novels feature impossible, eccentric mothers, who are blinded by the glitter of their own fickle dreams, and their conflicted daughters, torn between filial devotion and a desperate need to make independent lives of their own.
Both take place on the road to and in California.
And both mark the debuts of writers blessed with an uncommon gift for language.
"Falling Bodies" isn't as ambitious a book as "Anywhere but Here": it doesn't tackle a whole slice of contemporary history or attempt to reinvent traditional literary myths, as Ms.
Simpson's remarkable novel did.
Instead, Ms.
Ciment (pronounced sih-MENT) contents herself with telling the whimsical story of a single mother and daughter.
Yet in fulfilling her modest aims, the book completely beguiles the reader.
It is sad, funny and affecting, completely assured in its portrayal of the complicated mathematics of family emotions: one of those novels you want to mail to friends.
Told in first person, "Falling Bodies" is the story of Kimberly and her efforts to come to terms with her mother, Gloria.
Gloria Gail -- the name seems meant to recall Dorothy Gael, who crossed the rainbow to Oz -- is one of those inveterate dreamers, who's convinced that a gold mine lies just beyond the horizon, that a jackpot has just eluded her reach.
She's a kind of female Gatsby, someone eerily attuned to the romantic possibilities of life.
"My mother didn't care about a bigger house or a swimming pool," Kim recalls.
Charming, compulsive and almost endlessly hopeful, Gloria spends her days and nights drinking coffee and dreaming up schemes that run the gamut from insurance scams to pyramid games to the marketing of bizarre new products.
Though she has sold Geiger counters, weight-loss potions and treadmills for pets, Gloria's specialty is an aphrodisiac perfume.
For years now, she has driven from town to town in California and Nevada, selling vials of this magic elixir from her car trunk, and she has dragged her daughter with her.
By the time Kim is 15, she has attended 12 elementary schools and two junior highs.
She has lived in 13 trailer parks and driven over 90,000 miles.
She hopes that when the numbers on the car's odometer reach zero again, "our lives could begin anew."
Fate intervenes in the shape of a 40-something widower, a kind, patient man named Arthur, who one day drives smack into Kim and Gloria's trailer.
Gloria refuses to go to a hospital -- she's wanted for mail fraud and is scared of talking to the police -- and Arthur sheepishly allows her and Kim to recuperate in his house.
Much to everyone's surprise, the three soon settle into a comfortable domestic routine.
Kim feels she has finally found a home.
Arthur feels he has finally found a family.
And Gloria, well, Gloria feels she can still come up with an idea that will bring her hope and glory.
As the weeks and months pass, however, Kim begins to fall in love with Arthur.
Though she knows her mother has already shared Arthur's bed, she makes a clumsy, girlish effort to seduce him.
The following day, Arthur abruptly disappears, leaving Kim and Gloria his house.
By the end of the summer, they realize he is not coming back.
Kim eventually goes off to college, gets a job and tries to begin a new life.
She's tired of her mother's delusions, her self-absorption, her relentless scheming.
Gloria, meanwhile, resumes her itinerant life as a peddler of perfume.
Her ambition now is to become a guest on the new "What's My Line" television show.
She dreams of stumping the panel and becoming a cult figure, a kind of Lucille Ball.
Improbably enough, Kim meets Arthur again, and quits her job to move in with him.
It is only when her mother suddenly resurfaces, desperate, needy and finally, it seems, willing to abandon her dreams, that Kim realizes she cannot escape her past, that she may very well have to choose between her mother and her new bourgeois life with Arthur.
In summary, such events may feel cartoonish and contrived, but as related by Ms.
Ciment, they take on a palpable weight of emotion.
There is a sweetness, as well as an acerbic humor, to her writing, and these qualities burnish the story of Gloria and Kim with a warm, affectionate glow.
Certainly, "Falling Bodies" suffers from a number of mistakes common to first novels, most notably a tendency on Ms.
Ciment's part to let her narrator recount events and emotions she could not possibly know.
Such stumbles, however, never detract from the pleasures of this keenly observed and beautifully written novel.


Henry M. Curran, 75, A Senator in Albany
Henry M. Curran, a former Republican State Senator and chairman of the New York State Harness Racing Commission, died Saturday at North Shore University Hospital in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 75 and lived in Oyster Bay, L.I.
Mr.
Curran, who was born in Lock Haven, Pa., graduated from what was then Pace College.
In World War II, he served with an armored unit in Europe, rising from private to captain, and was recalled to active service during the Korean War.
He began his public-service career as a deputy sheriff and was elected Town Clerk of Oyster Bay in 1953.


Panel Is Chosen to Find a New Chancellor
After weeks of rancorous maneuvering, the New York City Board of Education amicably announced the selection of a seven-member search committee yesterday with the sole assignment of finding a new chancellor to replace Joseph A. Fernandez as head of the country's largest school system.
Mayor David N. Dinkins, who had sought to intervene in the search process a few weeks ago, was described by an adviser as being satisfied with the choice.
He had argued that the committee was becoming politicized -- by his opponents.


P.S.A.L. Has Its Final Two
With three teams from the same division in the final four, the only thing certain about the Public Schools Athletic League semifinals at Long Island University yesterday was that there would be at least one school from Brooklyn in the championship game at Madison Square Garden on Saturday.
It turned out to be Lincoln High School of Coney Island, which defeated Grady, its rival from Brighton Beach, 57-44.
Lincoln's opponent in the final will be Walton of the Bronx, which beat New Utrecht of Brooklyn, 57-56, in overtime.


O.K., So It's a Silly Law, But It Won't Cost a Cent
Every year, creative state lawmakers around the nation draft offbeat bills.
Some are perennials.
Many, like a proposal to mandate a gun in every Oregon household, are offered to make a point and get little legislative attention.
So far this year, state lawmakers have produced bills to exempt armless motorists from paying tolls on the New Jersey Turnpike, to require warnings on West Virginia marriage licenses that domestic violence is a crime, and to allow gambling on rubber-duck races in Nebraska.


Biologists Debate Man's Fishy Ancestors
MANY of us forget that our ancestors were fishes, but among biologists the debate over exactly which class of ancient fish was closest to our forebears remains a hotly disputed topic.
Was it the coelacanth or the lungfish that was more closely related to the family tree of four-limbed vertebrates that led to human beings?
Some new laboratory and fossil evidence seems to favor the coelacanth.
Far from settling the controversy, however, the latest discoveries have inflamed it.
In recent years, the preponderance of expert opinion has shifted toward the lungfish as the closest relative of the tetrapods, a group that includes amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals, including ourselves.
But new analyses of blood proteins and ear structures of present-day lungfish and coelacanths have convinced some scientists that the coelacanth is closer.


American Symphony To Leave Carnegie Hall
The American Symphony Orchestra, which since its founding by Leopold Stokowski in 1962 has been based at Carnegie Hall, is moving all its concerts next season to Avery Fisher Hall.
This season, the orchestra presented concerts at both halls, and it had originally planned to repeat the configuration next season.
The orchestra's executive director, Eugene Carr, cited better attendance figures at the Lincoln Center concerts as one reason for the move.
He also cited practical and philosophical considerations that suggest that Carnegie Hall and Lincoln Center will be taking different approaches to concert presentation, with Carnegie retaining a traditional style and Lincoln Center becoming more experimental.


U.S. Lauds Salvador Report; Ex-Aides Are Critical
The Clinton Administration today praised a United Nations report charging the Salvadoran Army with gross human rights abuses.
But the White House stopped short of drawing the conclusion that the Reagan and Bush Administrations, which strongly supported the Salvadoran military in its war with leftist guerrillas, bore some responsibility.


In Salvador, Amnesty vs. Punishment
Reacting to a United Nations-sponsored report accusing pro-Government forces of committing most of the atrocities in the 12-year civil war in El Salvador, President Alfredo Cristiani called today for a sweeping amnesty and former guerrilla leaders called for punishment.
As had been widely expected, Mr.
Cristiani immediately began urging the passage of a total and general amnesty, which he said was essential if the country were to consummate a national reconciliation that began with the signing of a peace accord between the two sides in January 1992.
"The component of an amnesty is important, because if we really want reconciliation we won't be doing any good by wasting time on the past," Mr.
Cristiani said in a news conference in the Presidential Palace.


William Barnett Owen; Gallery Director, 70
William Barnett Owen, director of the Perls Gallery on Madison Avenue for the last 25 years, died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center of New York in Manhattan.
He was 70 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was complications following open-heart surgery, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Talley Beatty to Receive Scripps Dance Award
Talley Beatty has been chosen as the 1993 recipient of the Samuel H. Scripps American Dance Festival Award.
Mr.
Beatty will receive the award, which includes a cash prize of $25,000, in a ceremony on June 27 at the festival in Durham, N.C.
"Talley created a model for dance theater rooted in the black experience by combining technical mastery with the symbols, beliefs and customs of African-American culture," the festival director, Charles Reinhard, said in announcing the award.


Corps of Engineers Serves Public Interest, Not Port Authority
To the Editor:
"Government Mired in Muck" (editorial, Feb. 23) is off the mark on the Army Corps of Engineers.
As the agency responsible for maintaining more than 240 miles of Federal navigation channels in New York Harbor, we are well aware of the need for dredging at Port Newark-Elizabeth.


Cambodia Village Quiet Again After Massacre
All is quiet again on Tonle Sap Lake.
Hardly anybody, except a few United Nations officials and police officers who had come to investigate, paid heed as the coffins were brought ashore here, at the edge of the water, from the Vietnamese houseboat village a mile or two out on the lake.
Thirty-three Vietnamese fishermen, women and children -- perhaps half of them children -- were shot dead Wednesday evening by Khmer Rouge raiders.
Nineteen others, 10 of them children, lie wounded in nearby Siem Reap Provincial Hospital, a primitive and filthy place, a few miles from the famed monuments of Angkor.


Messier Would Like to Play. Other Rangers Just Don't.
Mark Messier is being cautious this time.
His ribs are sore, he hurts 24 hours a day, and the anti-inflammatory drugs he takes to ease his strained muscles have made him dizzy and lightheaded.
Of course, he wants to play hockey.
Messier always wants to play hockey.
Last night he didn't.
For the third time in six games, Messier sat out.
For the Rangers, this is the thick of the playoff race and Messier -- the man who said recently that he'd play "unless I get hit by a car on the way home" -- is excusing himself from the action.
This means three things:


Patterns
Gaultier Hits Home
After decades of buying up ethnically inspired collections, many fashion industry leaders saw their own roots rifled on Sunday.
Jean-Paul Gaultier is the first major designer to use Judaism as an inspiration.
His show was a campy sendup: menorahs lined the runway; Maneschewitz wine was served; the invitations were lettered in Hebraic script (Hebraic-looking clothing labels, it was decided, were uncommercial and, so, removed), and models' heads were adorned with exaggerated curls and yarmulkes.
Mr.
Gaultier himself came out wearing a blue-and-white-striped one, to match his signature Breton fisherman's shirt.


WHITE HOUSE PLAN WOULD COVER COSTS OF MENTAL ILLNESS
As part of its plan to revamp the nation's health-care system, the Clinton Administration wants to guarantee mental health coverage, long relegated to second-class status under private insurance policies.
Many Administration officials are determined to eliminate what they see as discriminatory treatment of mental illness by insurers.
Private insurance policies often restrict coverage of mental health care, setting limits on the number of days of hospitalization, the number of outpatient visits or the total amount that may be spent for a person in a year or a lifetime.
Wide Range of Services
In addition, under private insurance -- as under Medicare, the Federal program for the elderly and disabled -- beneficiaries must usually pay 50 percent of the bills for outpatient mental health services, compared with 20 percent for physical ailments.


At Service for a Slain Detective, Remembrance of a 'True Hero'
At a gothic church on Staten Island, far from the world of drugs and guns where he worked as an undercover narcotics officer, Detective Luis Lopez was eulogized yesterday as "a true hero in a world that badly needs heroes."
Seven thousand people crowded into the Sacred Heart Church in the West Brighton section for services for Detective Lopez, the first New York City police officer to be killed this year.
He was shot to death on Wednesday in a "buy-and-bust" operation in Manhattan's East Village.


CHRONICLE
MIKE WALLACE is lending a hand to his old school, Brookline High School, at a benefit -- unusual for a Massachusetts public school -- in New York tomorrow evening.
Mr.
Wallace, class of '35, will interview the school's acting headmaster, Dr.
ROBERT J. WEINTRAUB, at a cocktail party that is expected to draw 60 or so Brookline graduates to the University Club on West 54th Street.
The purpose is to help meet the $150,000 goal of a yearlong campaign tied to the 150th anniversary of the school.


Trials for Sepsis Drug Stopped After a Review
Centocor Inc. said today that it would terminate the clinical trials of its flagship drug, Centoxin, for the treatment of sepsis, a fatal bacterial infection.
The trials were halted in January after an interim review of data showed a higher death rate among patients receiving the drug than among those receiving a placebo.
Separately, the Xoma Corporation of Berkeley, Calif., said it would begin clinical trials of a new drug for sepsis, which strikes about 200,000 Americans a year, killing about half of them.
Xoma's first sepsis drug, E-5, failed to get approval from the Food and Drug Administration after two series of clinical trials, and is currently in a third trial.


A Bad Retreat, in the Air
It's easy to see why the Clinton Administration decided to allow a partial merger of British Airways and USAir: The agreement will help financially shaky USAir become a worthier competitor to American, United and Delta.
Yet the decision unfortunately retreats from the Bush Administration's sensible policy to hold up greater British access to U.S. markets until Britain eases limits on U.S. carriers' use of London airports.
Britain hasn't budged.
Neither should the U.S.


Melvin Swig, 75, Dies; California Developer
Melvin M. Swig, a developer and philanthropist, died Sunday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 75.
The cause of death was cancer, his New York office said.


Harvard and Maine Advance
Harvard and Maine, seeded first in their hockey tournaments, swept through the quarterfinal rounds over the weekend.
The Crimson, the ECAC league's first-place team in the regular season, routed Princeton, 8-0, on Sunday to complete a two-game sweep of the series that began on Friday.
Maine, the Hockey East champion and the No.1-ranked team in the nation, scored 15 goals in turning back Northeastern two games to none.


GRACE AGREES TO SELL OIL-DRILLING UNIT
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Company said yesterday that it had signed agreements to sell the Grace Offshore Company, a New Orleans-based oil-drilling unit, to two purchasers for $57 million in cash and notes.
The separate sales of the Grace unit's two divisions, expected to close by the end of June, were to Offshore Rigs L.L.C. and a joint venture between Mike Mullen Energy Equipment Resources Inc. and the Falcon Drilling Company.


By Design; Serious Chic
The sober side of fashion is surfacing with surprising force here, and not just on the runways.
The Parisian avant-garde has always turned out in wraithlike black, but now young women all over Paris are wearing a "uniform" of long, narrow skirts or skinny pants accessorized with chunky, mannish shoes or equally clunky boots.
Meanwhile, at the shows in the Louvre courtyard, many spectators are already sporting their versions of next fall's somber style.
Katell le Bourhis, the curator of the Louvre's costume institute, used to favor short bouffant skirts, bright colors and impressive costume jewelry.
Her look has metamorphosed into the long, narrow and serious silhouette.
Just-above-the-ankle hemlines call attention to her Doc Martens.
And her only jewel is a chaste cross at the throat.


Islanders Hope Road Remains Friendly
Maybe road is where the heart is, or at least where success is for the Islanders.
As their four-game trip begins tonight at San Jose, their baggage includes the ninth-best away record in the 24-team National Hockey League.
It's actually better than the 15-15-4 listed in the standings because one game recorded as a "home" victory was played at a neutral site.
At home, where hockey teams tend to thrive, the Islanders' Nassau Coliseum record is only 16-15-2, following their 3-2 loss to the Pittsburgh Penguins on Sunday, their second consecutive defeat following five victories in succession.


Classical Music in Review
Moscow Synagogue Chorus Merkin Concert Hall


Ed Jurist; TV Producer, 76
Ed Jurist, a prolific television producer and writer for almost 40 years, died on Friday in Los Angeles.
He was 76.
In 1949, Mr.
Jurist produced, directed and wrote "The Aldrich Family," one of the first situation comedies in television.
In 1953, he produced and wrote "Colonel Flack," starring Alan Mowbray.


Twins Reward 2
The Minnesota Twins extended the contracts of General Manager ANDY MacPHAIL and Manager TOM KELLY.
MacPhail now is signed through 1996 and Kelly through 1995.
The two had contracts through 1994 before the extensions. (AP)


Tiny Songbird Poses Big Test Of U.S. Environmental Policy
The Clinton Administration is facing the first test of its promise to save endangered species and serve economic interests.
And the instrument of that test is a four-inch-long songbird that meows like a kitten and lives in what is left of the coastal sage scrub of Southern California.
The blue-gray bird, the California gnatcatcher, has emerged as a national symbol of a possible new method of saving such species while preventing what Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt calls "national train wrecks" like the dispute over the northern spotted owl in the Pacific Northwest.
Looking for Compromise
In a rare arrangement, developers, conservationists and Federal and state officials are working together to preserve an entire ecosystem, rather than haggling over emergency measures prescribed by the Endangered Species Act to save single species.


John Caldwell, 51; Curator's Specialty Was Modern Artists
John Caldwell, the curator of paintings and sculpture at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art and a well-known advocate of contemporary art, died on Sunday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Miami Beach, where he had a vacation home.
He was 51 and lived in San Francisco.
The cause was a heart attack, said Chelsea Brown, the director of public relations and marketing at the museum.


U.S. Rests Its Case Against 4 Officers in Beating
After a two-week presentation in which Rodney G. King emerged as their star witness, Federal prosecutors today rested their case against four white police officers accused in the beating of Mr.
King.
Offering a wide variety of testimony and a generally consistent interpretation of the 81-second amateur videotape in which Mr.
King is shown being beaten, the prosecutors seemed to be taking cues from the omissions of a state prosecution that many legal experts now say helped lead to officers' acquittals on assault charges a year ago.


John Horn; Journalist, 76
John Horn, a former journalist and public relations officer for broadcast networks, died on March 2 at Copper Queens Hospital in Bisbee, Ariz., where he was living in retirement.
He was 76 and a former resident of Brooklyn and Stony Brook, L.I.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Sent Walt McKeel and Scott Hatteberg, catchers; and Peter Hoy and Jeff Plympton, pitchers, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
Optioned Sean Ross, outfielder, to Pawtucket of the International League.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Sent Francisco Gamez, Marshall Boze and Rafael Novoa, pitchers, and Mike Stefanski, catcher, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Extended the contracts of Andy MacPhail, general manager, through 1996, and Tom Kelly, manager, through 1995.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Optioned Lance Dickson and Bill Brennan, pitchers; Kent Anderson, infielder, and Orlando Mercado, catcher, to Iowa of the American Association.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Sent Eric Yelding, infielder; Tracy Jones and Steve Carter, outfielders; Ross Powell, pitcher, and Darron Cox, catcher, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Waived Bill Bathe, catcher, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Reassigned Jay Gainer and Ray Holbert, infielders; Dave Staton, outfielder; Erik Schullstrom, pitcher, and Brian Johnson, catcher, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Sent Chris Hancock, Dan Carlson, Larry Carter, Johnny Ard, Kevin McGehee, pitchers, and Calvin Murray, outfielder, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Agreed to terms with Hakeem Olajuwon, center, on a four-year contact extension through the 1998-99 season.
MILWAUKEE BUCKS -- Signed Derek Strong, forward, for the remainder of the season.
Waived Alex Strivins, forward.
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Placed Thurl Bailey, forward, on the injured list.
Activated Gundars Vetra, guard, from the injured list.


Purists Are Playing Shakespeare With Little Rehearsal or Direction
This winter a troupe of professional actors who call themselves the What You Will Theater Company are traipsing about London in plays by William Shakespeare.
Nothing unusual in that, one might think; London is clotted with Shakespearean actors acting Shakespeare.
But these actors are doing it largely, with a few insignificant compromises, without rehearsal.
Each knows his or her own part, but not anyone else's.
All they have are cues, three-word tags that trigger their own next lines.


Exile Grows, But Aristide Holds to Faith
Perhaps it was the snowstorm that raged outside the Philadelphia church the other day.
Maybe it was disappointment with the pace of diplomatic activity intended to return him to the presidency of Haiti.
Whatever the reason, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide felt the need to lead his audience of about 500 Haitian supporters in a recital of a Creole saying that reflects both a fatalistic view of the present and an expectation of something better in the future.


R. Peter M. Elrick, 47, An Investment Banker
R.
Peter M. Elrick, an investment banker, died on Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 47 and lived in New York.
The cause of death was sudden internal hemorrhaging, his wife said.


Better Late, and Better for Being Late
CENTRAL POINT SOFTWARE, late but great, has introduced a version of its popular PC Tools utilities for computers that use Microsoft Windows.
PC Tools for Windows does all the expected housekeeping chores, including tidying up the hard disk, straightening out the file cabinets and disinfecting the files of viruses.
But it also makes Windows a bit easier, a bit faster and a lot more convenient to use.


Antismoking Effort: Convince Joe Camel
Antonia Novello, the Surgeon General, is collaborating with the American Medical Association on a nationwide contest to increase awareness among elementary school and junior high students of smoking's dangers.
The contest is called "Say no, Old Joe," after the Joe Camel cartoon character that appears in advertising for R. J. Reynolds's Camel cigarettes; Old Joe is the original Camel camel, on which Joe Camel was based.
The character has been the subject of many attacks by antismoking groups.


Opera Stars in Discussion
The tenor Alfredo Kraus and the soprano June Anderson are to be guests in the Lincoln Center Off Stage program tomorrow at 6 P.M. in the Stanley H. Kaplan Penthouse of the Samuel B. and David Rose Building (165 West 65th Street; 10th floor).
They are to talk about their joint concert with orchestra at Avery Fisher Hall on Saturday and answer questions from the audience.
Wine and cheese are to be served at 7 P.M., when the audience may chat with the two artists.
Tickets are $14.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Revenge of the Righteous: Reform Comes to Capitol
Nothing is sacred on Capitol Hill anymore.
First perks were under attack, then pork became suspect.
And now propaganda is getting a bad name.
Representative Porter J. Goss, Republican of Florida, has introduced a bill proposing that his colleagues be forced to pay cash for making extraneous comments in the Congressional Record, the official transcript of what is said in the House and Senate each day.


Women's Bones Appear to Have Become Weaker
A STUDY of old human bones, unearthed after two centuries in a church crypt, offers a possible clue to the mystery of why so many elderly women today suffer hip fractures associated with osteoporosis.
Millions of people develop osteoporosis, a condition in which bones lose calcium and become thinner and more susceptible to fractures in the spine, hip and wrist.
It primarily affects women after menopause when their estrogen levels decline.


Mildred Collins; Promoter, 69
Mildred Collins, president of Mildred Collins Inc., a Manhattan-based sales promotion and publicity company, died on Sunday at Tisch Hospital at the New York University Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 69 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was cancer, her family said.


On My Mind; Facing the Risks
The United States is preparing to pare down the military power created by almost a half-century of American strategy and investment and a national lifetime of industrial growth.
Aside from those whose jobs are threatened, most Americans are paying about as much close attention as to the peeling of a banana.


School Board Challenges Aid Formula
New York City and the Board of Education sued the State of New York yesterday, charging that the state's school aid formula discriminates against city students and has cost city schools at least $274 million this year.
The suit, filed in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, comes as Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the State Board of Regents, acknowledging inequities in the formula, are proposing separate plans to change it.
But there is no guarantee that New York City would fare better under either of the two proposals, which are given little chance of passage in the Legislature.


Dow Rebounds 14.59, to 3,442.41, but Trading is Sluggish
Stocks staged a spirited advance yesterday, as the continued slide of the bond market seemed to dampen only the level of trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 14.59 points, to 3,442.41, arresting a decline of 50 points last Thursday and Friday.
Big Board volume of 195.9 million shares, the weakest this year, suggested that the day's advance was more of a lark than a serious commitment.


As Isolation of Racism Eases, South Africa Confronts AIDS
Three years ago, when words like epidemic, plague and doomsday began appearing in South African newspapers, some experts on AIDS thought South Africa had a unique opportunity to avoid the catastrophe that had befallen other African countries.
The slow sweep of the AIDS virus southward from its equatorial epicenter and the social quarantine created by the sanctions against the apartheid Government, they said, meant South Africa had time to see the menace coming and head it off.


Computers Make People More Employable; Training Holds Key
To the Editor:
Jeremy Rifkin speculates that the Clinton Administration's 36-page plan to rejuvenate the economy by spurring high-tech industries "runs the risk of creating a new and dangerous America -- one in which a small high-tech elite of corporate professionals exist in a nation of the permanently unemployed" (Op-Ed, Feb. 24).


Elderly Care: The Insurers' Role
The insurance industry believes it has one answer to the high cost of health care: policies to cover home and nursing home care for the elderly.
The trick is to get young Americans to buy these policies now, just as they buy life insurance policies, and spread the heavy costs over many years.


U.S. Gives Britain a Warning In Approving USAir Deal
The United States today approved a $300 million investment by British Airways P.L.C. in USAir Group Inc., but warned that the British carrier would not be able to increase that stake unless American carriers receivedgreater access to British airports.
The announcement, by Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena, signaled a tough new approach to foreign investment in America's airlines.


Equator's Breadbasket of the Sea
FROM 15 million to 4.4 million years ago, periodic "blooms" of microscopic ocean life erupted in the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean on a scale undocumented anywhere in more modern times, scientists say.
This prodigious production of marine life, described in the current issue of Nature, ended at about the time that Central America rose from the sea, separating the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans and altering the circulation of the world's oceans.
Such circulation had presumably produced an upwelling of water along the Equator in the Pacific Ocean that was exceptionally rich in nutrients.


Treasury Bond Prices Fall Again
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond fell again yesterday as traders and investors tried to gauge the impact of the unexpectedly large jump in producer inflation reported Friday and waited for tomorrow's release of data on consumer prices.
The price of the 30-year bond dropped 12/32 , and the yield jumped to 6.89 percent.
Earlier in the day the price had been off a full point, with the yield up to 6.93 percent.
In the last two trading days, the price of the bond has fallen almost a point and three-quarters, and the yield has leaped from 6.76 percent.


6 Rivals Seek to Head Off A New Microsoft Challenge
I.B.M., Hewlett-Packard and Sun Microsystems and three other computer companies will announce today steps to standardize their versions of the Unix software operating system to prepare for the challenge of the Microsoft Corporation's NT system, which is expected later this year.
The six companies have agreed to standards intended to give customers a desktop computing environment that will look the same for any of their customers and to allow programmers to design applications for many computers.
They have also agreed to adopt common software products for linking computers in networks, and endorsed standards in the fields of graphics, multimedia and object technology.


Third Party Head in Italy Resigns in Scandal
The leader of the Liberal Party, a member of the four-party governing coalition, resigned today, becoming the third party leader to do so in the bribery scandal in Italy.
Investigators also began detailing the ties between politicians at the heart of government and the organized crime gangs of the south.
In Rome, legislators from right-wing groups outside the Government of Prime Minister Giuliano Amato waved hangman's nooses, tossed colored sponges, donned rubber gloves, waved banners and almost came to blows in the chambers of Parliament.


Mirrors in Night Sky Are Hardly Imminent
To the Editor:
Bill McKibben quotes me in his thoughtful "Light Up the Sky? Are We Crazy?" (Op-Ed, Feb. 20).
Yes, I did describe my observation of the Russian space-mirror experiment as "spectacular" as it tumbled across the predawn sky like a pulsating star, followed by the Mir and Progress spacecraft.
However, that does not mean I am an advocate of the silly notion that reflectors in space should be used to illuminate cities at night or to extend the growing season.


Northern Irish Talks Must Include Sinn Fein
To the Editor:
Your March 3 Dublin Journal reports that Foreign Minister Dick Spring of Ireland considers the situation in Northern Ireland his "highest priority." However, following the British Government's lead, he will not permit Sinn Fein to participate in his efforts until they renounce the Irish Republican Army's campaign against Britain.


Doctor Fined For Violations In L.I. Practice
A Long Island doctor was found guilty today of hundreds of violations in her mammography practice and fined $170,000, the largest amount ever in New York State in such a case.
The doctor, Padma Ram of Floral Park, was also ordered to notify the 225 patients she had treated that they may have received flawed mammograms and should have them checked by another clinician.


The Painful Lessons of Disruption
Among the countless lessons that computer users have absorbed in the hours, days and weeks after the World Trade Center bombing, the most enduring may be the need to have a disaster-recovery plan.
The second most enduring lesson may be this: Even a well-practiced plan will quickly reveal its flaws.
It took Lawrence S. Huntington, chairman of the Fiduciary Trust Company International, only a few minutes after the Feb. 26 blast to order his managers to activate the company's well-rehearsed disaster plan.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.25
3.16
4.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
3.00
4.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.09
3.12
4.22
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.74
5.81
7.32
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.87
6.89
8.00
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.78
7.80
9.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.98
5.97
6.79
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Awards Presented At 2 Ceremonies
Two organizations gave out annual awards last night at separate ceremonies honoring outstanding advertising and promotion campaigns.
DDB Needham New York took top honors at the 1993 Best of New York Addy Awards presentation, sponsored by the Advertising Women of New York.
The agency won 13 Addys, including eight for its New York State Lottery campaign.
Following DDB Needham were Follis DeVito Verdi with nine awards, and Lowe &amp; Partners and Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners, with five each.
DDB Needham's Lottery campaign won best of print; commercials by J. Walter Thompson New York for E.P.T. pregnancy test won best of broadcast, and Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct won best promotion honors for a direct mail campaign for Jaguar.


Bank Yields Mostly Down For Week
Yields offered by banks on money market accounts and certificates of deposit for the week beginning today are down slightly compared with the previous reporting period, with the New York market only a little off the pace of the downticks recorded at 20 major banks nationwide.
According to The Bank Rate Monitor, an interest-rate publication in North Palm Beach, Fla., the average New York market yield for a six-month certificate of deposit remained unchanged compared with a decline of 2 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, in 20 major banks across the country.
The average decline in a money market account was the same in New York as it was across the county.


A New Breed of Hired Hands Cultivates Grass-Roots Anger
The era of electronic vox pop, when radio talk shows help drive out a prospective Attorney General, has meant boom times for at least one species of Washington insider: consultants who deliver populist rage.
Consider Bonner &amp; Associates, which occupies an entire floor of one of Washington's pricier office buildings.
From a distance it looks like the boiler room of any telephone sales company, with fresh-faced young men and women in narrow cubicles reading intently from typed scripts.


Market Place; Grumman has no new contracts but its stock has been a gainer
AMONG military contractors, the Grumman Corporation is not considered a comer.
The Bethpage, L.I., company has won no major aircraft contracts in nearly a decade, and all of its existing aircraft programs are either extremely small or being phased out.
Earnings have been erratic, and the company has been forced to consolidate operations and greatly reduce its work force.
Yet the price of Grumman shares increased in value by 40 percent last year, one of the highest appreciations in the aerospace industry, the company boasts in its latest annual report.
Grumman's stock closed yesterday at $33.25, down 12.5 cents, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange, compared with a 52-week low of $17.375.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; New Campaigns
*
The joint recruiting advertising program of the Defense Department is introducing a print advertising campaign by Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York, featuring Gen.
Colin.
L.
Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
The campaign, the first major work on the account by the agency since it was awarded the assignment in 1991, will appear later this month in Ebony, Life, Newsweek, Time and other national publications.


The Man Who Would Turn Chefs Into Household Names
CHEFS may have the egos of entertainers, but they're usually stuck toiling behind the scenes.
The customers at Spago in Los Angeles do not behave like a concert crowd: there are no hysterical screams or applause at the first bite of Wolfgang Puck's smoked salmon pizza, as there would be for the first bars of "Satisfaction."
Now, Shep Gordon, an agent in California, thinks chefs and restaurateurs should be treated more like rock stars and hopes to put their names in lights.
He's taking them on as clients of Alive Culinary Resources, a new subsidiary of Alive Enterprises, his 27-year-old entertainment-management company in Beverly Hills that lists Alice Cooper and Luther Vandross among its clients.


4 Are Convicted in Sexual Abuse Of Retarded New Jersey Woman
Three former high school football players from Glen Ridge, N.J., were convicted here today on charges of sexually assaulting a retarded friend with a baseball bat and a broom handle after enticing her into a basement with the promise of a date in March 1989.
A fourth defendant was convicted of one count of conspiracy and acquitted of all other charges.
Although the three, Christopher Archer and Kevin and Kyle Scherzer, were acquitted of six charges, the jury returned guilty verdicts on the most inflammatory charges in the case -- that popular high school athletes clustered around a childlike 17-year-old schoolmate who idolized them and coveted their friendship and then thrust a bat and broom into her.


Gumbo, Hold the Okra
THIS one-dish meal could be called a gumbo if it had okra and the butter and flour mixture known as a roux.
Since it has neither, it will have to do with the less winning name of stew.
But gumbo fanciers will recognize some gumbolike flavors: thyme, oregano and hot pepper.


A Wave of Violence Puts Israelis' Nerves on Edge
Leon Blum left his apartment in northern Jerusalem the other morning with a 9-millimeter pistol on his hip, just as the country's police chief had urged Israelis to do.
Then he went to the Magnum 88 gun shop in downtown Jerusalem, bought a box of cartridges and stepped into the store's firing range for target practice.
"You carry a gun now, because you're aware of the internal lack of security in the country," said Mr.
Blum, a businessman who emigrated from Britain 12 years ago when he was 20.
"Not that it's going to prevent something that was meant to happen. It just gives you a different way to respond."


Head of Boston U. Says He Didn't Lie
John R. Silber, the embattled president of Boston University, yesterday launched a vigorous defense of his integrity and his actions regarding profits from a medical research company.
In an interview, he said he had told the truth about his stake in the company during his campaign for governor of Massachusetts in 1990 and had done nothing improper or illegal.
"I didn't lie to the voters or anybody," he said.





U.N. General to Stay in Bosnian Town
The top United Nations military commander in Bosnia and Herzegovina resolved today to remain encamped with 60,000 Muslims in a besieged town in eastern Bosnia until arrangements have been made that will prevent Serbian nationalist troops from killing the Muslim civilians or driving them from their homes under fire.
"We have to avoid a major tragedy here," said the officer, Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon of France.
Speaking over a scratchy radio link from the town of Srebrenica, the 57-year-old general added, "I will stay here among these people until the day that their survival is assured."


Jurors Decided Quickly On Mental Defect Issue
Shortly after deliberations began 12 days ago, the jurors in the Glen Ridge sexual-assault trial quickly reached a crucial finding: the young woman who was lured to a basement playroom four years ago to perform sex acts was mentally defective, jurors in the case said today.
They based their decision on her testimony over four days in December, when the 21-year-old woman with the mental age of an 8-year-old gave simple answers in a child's singsong.
Often using raw sexual language as if it were commonplace in a courtroom, she described how she was persuaded to perform fellatio and masturbation, and how the defendants penetrated her vagina with the handle of a baseball bat and a broomstick.


CHRONICLE
PAT NIXON celebrated her 81st birthday quietly yesterday, at home in Park Ridge, N.J., with her family, but there were events in her honor at the Richard M. Nixon Library and Birthplace in Yorba Linda, Calif.
Several thousand people attended ceremonies that featured children from the Pat Nixon Elementary School in Cerritos, Calif., singing "Happy Birthday," and another group of children performing Irish dances (Mrs. Nixon, whose name originally was Thelma Ryan, was born just a few minutes before St. Patrick's Day).


Aqueduct Cancels Card
Today's racing program at Aqueduct was canceled yesterday because of poor track conditions stemming from the weekend snowstorm.
There has been no racing at Aqueduct since Friday.
Racing was canceled again on Monday, and the track had its normal off day yesterday.
"Unfortunately, because of the storm, the track is partially frozen and partially thawed," Glen Mathes, the director of media relations, said yesterday.
"We felt it was best for all concerned to cancel again."


Philip D. Reed; Environmental Law Expert, 47
Philip D. Reed, a legal expert on environmental law, died Sunday at his home in Darien, Conn.
He was 47.
He died after a heart attack, his family said.
Mr.
Reed was a partner in the law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom and headed its environmental practice in New York, advising clients on Federal regulations like the Clean Air Act.


New Dates for N.H.L. Teams
Last weekend's snowstorm created a flurry of postponements, and yesterday the National Hockey League announced the scheduling changes involving the three local teams.
The Islanders are most affected, having to move three games.
The Devils move two and the Rangers one.
The Islanders' game with the Washington Capitals, postponed Sunday, will be played Thursday, March 25 at Nassau Coliseum.
The game originally scheduled for that date, between the Islanders and the Devils at the Coliseum, will be played instead on Friday, April 16, one day after the regular season was originally scheduled to end.
The Islanders' home game against the Hartford Whalers scheduled for Thursday, April 15, will be played Tuesday, April 13.


15 Killed as Flames Sweep Residence Hotel in Chicago
At least 14 people were killed and more than 25 injured early today when a ferocious fire swept through a transient hotel on the city's Near North Side, trapping tenants and sending others leaping from windows to escape the flames.
The fire spread so quickly that before firefighters could set up ladders, several terrified residents shimmied down bed sheets or jumped from smoke- and fire-filled rooms, two to four stories above the rain-slicked street.


Code of Silence Threatens Trade Center Investigation
The silence that the New York City police said stymied the investigation of suspected Muslim terrorist complicity in the assassination of Rabbi Meir Kahane threatens to undermine the investigation of the bombing of the World Trade Center, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The silence, investigators said, is a secretiveness, or a code of silence, that has surrounded virtually every crime in which a Muslim fundamentalist was charged with terrorism or assassination committed on behalf of the Muslim religious supremacy.


Critic's Notebook; Shopping On TV: Romance And Chat
On a snowbound Sunday my grazer stopped at the QVC (Quality, Value, Convenience) network.
I had often caught glimpses during channel boppings of youngish women and men delivering conversational pitches for clothing, tools, necklaces, pots and pans, dolls, basketball cards and whatnot, but had quickly flicked away to "Nick at Nite" or other meat for the mind.
But this time I resisted the remote and watched for an hour.
I had chanced upon "The Jewelry Showcase." A man in lightly rimmed glasses, blue blazer, white shirt and necktie and matching pocket hanky was celebrating a sterling amethyst three-stone ring, one of the day's special values, reduced from the QVC price of $64.50 (which had been reduced from the retail price of $120) to only $53.82 plus a few dollars for shipping and handling, payable by credit card in installments.
He was as clean-cut as the stones he was showing; his cuticles, which spent a lot of time on screen while his scrubbed fingers displayed the ring, glinted like gems.


Books of The Times; Farming, and Preserving, a Battlefield
Battlefield
Farming a Civil War Battleground  By Peter Svenson  246 pages.
Faber &amp; Faber. $21.95.
You don't have to be an amateur farmer or a Civil War buff to admire what Peter Svenson achieves in "Battlefield," a charming account of a middle-aged man and his wife who buy an old house and 40 acres in a farming community called Cross Keys in the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia.
He's an abstract painter with two children from a previous marriage; she's a college professor who teaches art.
Not much else is revealed about them personally except that both have arrived at a stage where they want to begin a new life.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  VITRIOLIC GREETING FOR POST SUITOR In a perfect marriage of style and content, the first issue of The New York Post published by Abraham Hirschfeld lambasted him with the kind of rank insults and denigrating vitriol that are usually
his
stock in trade.
And, with the offending newspapers selling well yesterday, Mr.
Hirschfeld professed to love it, just as he has always claimed to savor other notoriety that he perceives as good for business. (When it's bad for business, he often sues.) A1.
The employees of The Post essentially took the newspaper over, ignoring the would-be publisher as virtually all of the Post managers he laid off on Monday returned to work.
And Pete Hamill, the editor in chief he dismissed on Friday, returned and took control of the newsroom.
B2.


Canseco Lands on His Feet in Texas
As a player who was traded in the middle of a multiyear contract, Jose Canseco had the right to demand a trade last fall from the Rangers.
"I thought about it; the option was open," Canseco said today.
"But I liked the way the fans and the players treated me. That made me feel good. I liked the weather and the ball park and the atmosphere on the club, too."


Personal Health
AS an unstoppable cancer ravaged my mother's 49-year-old body, she tried twice to hasten her inevitable death, first by slashing her wrists and then by swallowing rubbing alcohol.
Both times she was "rescued," forcing her to suffer further unrelenting insults to her once stalwart figure and boundless energy.
Unable to retain food, she withered to 65 pounds, half her original weight, all the while yearning to be out of her misery.
But instead of heeding her demonstrated wish to die and easing her way with, say, an overdose of sleeping pills, at her doctor's request we allowed her to serve as a "test animal" for possible new drugs against her kind of cancer, causing her to suffer further from the toxic effects of the medications.
It seemed altruistic, even noble, at the time, but in retrospect it was cruel and inhuman punishment to a dignified woman who had already served society as an inspiring teacher for 32 years.


Puff Puff, Toot Toot: Rangers Railroaded
After the Rangers lost a tedious affair to the Boston Bruins by 3-1 at Madison Square Garden Monday night, a few New York players had a new excuse.
Their legs were tired, they said, because the weekend snowstorm forced them to take a six-hour train ride from Washington the day before.
This could be a public-relations disaster for a team that plays in an arena built above a train station, where the sideboards advertise "Amtrak" and the speaker system blares train sounds before the face-offs.


Review/Television; Middle-Aged Romance Amid Dreaming Spires
Every few months on television, there comes along a movie that is usually described as the kind of movie not being made anymore.
A good example is "Foreign Affairs," to be shown tonight at 8, 10 and midnight on TNT.
The list of those likely to enjoy this film begins with Anglophiles, hopeless romantics and those who never again want to watch Michael Douglas playing a psychopath.
Adapted by Chris Bryant from an Alison Lurie novel, "Foreign Affairs" is directed by Jim O'Brien, a Briton best known here for overseeing half the 16 hours of "The Jewel in the Crown." That mini-series was about the English colonialists in India.
This movie is about three Americans in England.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Crime Stoppers Poster Ads
The New York City Police Foundation is taking its Crime Stoppers advertising campaign to the streets, with posters appearing on roughly 400 telephone booths in the city's five boroughs.
The posters -- part of the pro bono campaign developed by Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss of Manhattan -- show a caller whose face is largely hidden by copy that reads, "You don't have to reveal your identity to help solve a violent crime."


The Post Bites Back
"Rage, rage against the dying of the light," Dylan Thomas advised, and reporters and editors of The New York Post have taken the poet at his word.
Hemorrhaging red ink and on the brink of extinction, The Post hit the streets yesterday with a pungent, brassy issue that illustrated just what the city would lose if the paper shuts down.
The front page bore the likeness of The Post's founder, Alexander Hamilton, in tears.
Within were a dozen pages of scalding stories on the paper's newest stewards, the real estate magnate Abraham Hirschfeld and his co-publisher, Wilbert A. Tatum, who controls Harlem's Amsterdam News.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; A Y.&amp; R. Campaign For Women's Aid
New York City's Commission on the Status of Women said it would begin running a public service campaign this week called "Wake Up America" to address the problems of American women.
The spots were created pro bono by an ad hoc group of women at Young &amp; Rubicam New York, which included Helayne Spivak, executive vice president and creative director; Marisa Acocella, senior vice president and associate creative director; Lori Talish, producer; Gretchen Rollins, art director; Claudia Schwartz, copywriter, and Maureen Thompson, music producer.


Film Preview For Movers And Shakers
When Roy Furman, a partner at the investment firm of Furman Selz Inc., told his wife that they might be stranded for several days because of the storm last weekend that shut down the Palm Beach, Fla., airport, Mrs.
Furman was not happy.
She had to get back to New York for a private screening of "Barbarians at the Gate," the movie of the messy takeover battle for RJR Nabisco that is scheduled to be shown Saturday night on Home Box Office.
David Geffen flew in from Los Angeles for last night's preview at the Museum of Modern Art.


Egyptian Museum Bombed
A bomb damaged four buses today outside the Egyptian Museum, one of Cairo's best known tourist attractions, where another bomb killed 3 people and wounded 20 in a coffee shop last month.
No one was wounded in the bombing, but it shattered windows in several empty tourist buses and caused panic in Al Tahrir Square, Cairo's largest, in front of the museum.
Executives in the tourist industry speculated that the incident could wipe out what is left of Egypt's sagging tourism industry, which has suffered severe blows because of attacks and threats against tourists by Muslim militants.


Residents Quiet After Verdict
As news of the verdict reached Glen Ridge today, residents seemed eager to learn details of the jury's decision but many did not want to discuss it.
Camilla Rowe blamed the news media for the verdict.
"I don't think there would have been a trial if it weren't for the attention," she said.


Save Nafta. But Don't Roll Over.
During the Presidential campaign Bill Clinton talked tough, vowing to hammer out bold protections for the environment and U.S. workers before he would approve the North American Free Trade Agreement with Mexico and Canada.
At the time, his demands sounded like potential deal-busters.
Now he's facing up to the difficulty his campaign rhetoric poses for completing negotiations on the trade pact.
In Congressional testimony yesterday the President's chief trade negotiator, Mickey Kantor, took a tougher stance than he did the week before.
But the proposals he outlined were cautious, even timid.
Negotiations on final details begin today with the Mexicans and Canadians; if Mr.
Clinton doesn't stiffen his demands, Nafta might run into trouble among Congressional Democrats.


HOUSE G.O.P. WINS BID TO TRIM STAFF
House Republicans scored their first victory of the year in a campaign to cut Congressional staffs and spending when Speaker Thomas S. Foley conceded that the four select committees with no authority to propose bills would be abolished.
All four committees -- Aging; Children, Youth and Families; Hunger, and Narcotics Abuse and Control -- have been imperiled since Jan. 26, when the House voted 237 to 180 to kill the politically popular narcotics panel.
All 169 Republicans who voted were in the majority on the issue.


VATICAN POST GOES TO BOSTON MAYOR
Mayor Raymond L. Flynn of Boston, one of President Clinton's leading emissaries to Catholic Democrats during the 1992 campaign, said today that he would be named the next Ambassador to the Vatican.
Mr.
Flynn, serving his third four-year term as Mayor, made the announcement after attending evening Mass at the Gate of Heaven church near his home in South Boston.
In a separate statement, the Mayor declared, "As an American Catholic, I was taught at an early age to work for social and economic justice." He said he hoped to continue those efforts in his new post.


CHRONICLE
JAMES GALWAY, the Irish flutist, describes the Irish as "the world's greatest colonizers," and praises the strength of the feeling of being Irish.
He's also willing to do anything he can to perpetuate that feeling.
Which explains why he was on the balcony of Grand Central Terminal yesterday afternoon and evening performing with the Pipes and Drums of the Police Emerald Society of Westchester County; Deirdre Danaher, a harpist; Irish dancers and by no means least, Emmett and Bran, the Irish wolfhounds that take part in the St.
Patrick's Day parade.


A Rough Outing Leaves Yankees' Farr at a Loss
Steve Farr jogged off the mound in the eighth inning today after being blitzed for seven runs by the Minnesota Twins, hopped down the dugout steps and never stopped as he vanished into the Yankee clubhouse.
He did not stop for water or bogus handshakes.
He did not even stop for his pitching jacket.
When Jack Lazorko delivered the jacket to him in the clubhouse after the Twins had completed their 13-1 victory at the Lee County Stadium, Farr, his legs propped up on a chair and his mind suddenly filled with doubt, said: "Thanks. I was too embarrassed to go back out and get it."


HAITIAN IS OFFERED CLINTON'S SUPPORT ON AN END TO EXILE
President Clinton told the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide today that the United States would step up its efforts to negotiate a plan to restore democracy to Haiti.
But Mr.
Clinton refused to set a deadline by which Washington would demand Father Aristide's return to power as President.
Father Aristide's very appearance at the White House was an evident gesture of support from Mr.
Clinton; the ousted Haitian President had never visited the Executive Mansion in 18 months of exile here.


Yeltsin, Asking Aid, Talks of Communist Revival
In his first public appearance since his drubbing at the hands of the Russian legislature, President Boris N. Yeltsin told the visiting French President today that Moscow needed urgent help from the West to block what he described as a threatened Communist comeback.
Describing the results of the Congress of People's Deputies as a "cause for serious worries," Mr.
Yeltsin said he was still considering what steps to take next.


Report Calls Cholesterol Tests in Young Unjustified
National guidelines for routine cholesterol screening of the nation's 80 million young adults may cost the nation billions of dollars a year and could end up harming, rather than helping, the people who are screened, a group of medical experts said in a report today.
In an article published in the Journal of the American Medical Association reviewing and reanalyzing existing data, Dr.
Stephen B. Hulley, an epidemiologist at the University of California at San Francisco, and his colleagues say that there is no justification for routine cholesterol tests before age 35 in men and age 45 in women.
They said that even if a young adult's cholesterol level is elevated, he or she will reap almost all the benefits of cholesterol-lowering if they wait until middle age to start a diet or drug treatment.


'Year of Unity' for Weary Europe Is Splintered by Public Uneasiness
For most of Western Europe, 1993 -- the year the European Community was finally supposed to come into its own as the world's largest free-trade market -- has started off badly, with a dispiriting recession, a spate of scandals and the most serious loss of self-confidence in 20 years.
In almost every European country, polls show that ordinary people no longer believe in the parties that have dominated politics since World War II, concluding that they are not up to the new challenges of the post-cold-war era.
The consensus of a decade ago in Britain, France and Germany has been replaced by seemingly endless bickering and near-paralysis.


Review/Film; A Satirical Inside Look At the Former U.S.S.R.
Oleg Kovalov's "Garden of Scorpions," the 1991 Russian film opening today at the Film Forum, is a giddy, surreal documentary portrait of the former Soviet Union made up of bits and pieces of Russian films from the 1930's through the 60's.
Since it's possible to edit such bits and pieces to support any number of contradictory points, it's too much to describe the movie as an especially profound indictment of totalitarianism, but it's a very entertaining one.
The material is riveting, particularly the clips from "Corporal Kotschetkov's Case," which are used to give "Garden of Scorpions" some dramatic structure.
"Corporal Kotschetkov's Case," made in 1955, is apparently a kind of low-voltage Russian equivalent to "My Son John," Leo McCarey's 1957 inflammatory anti-Communist tear-jerker about an all-American mother (Helen Hayes), whose heart is crushed by the treason of her not-so-all-American son (Robert Walker).


One Loss Can't Dampen Nets' Success
Once, the Nets might have been satisfied with splitting their four-game trip against Pacific Division teams.
But not now, not after going 3-1 and solidifying the idea that they are one of the top teams in the National Basketball Association.
These Nets won't be able to surprise teams anymore.
They believe in themselves, but do many people believe in them?
Other teams do, as the league's elite now talk about New Jersey with respect.
The only nonbelievers seem to be Nets fans -- or lack of them -- because Byrne Meadowlands Arena still often resembles a tomb.


Wider Investment Tax Credits Urged
A council of experts that Congress and President George Bush had appointed to recommend ways of increasing the nation's competitiveness called today for broader investment tax credits than President Clinton proposed, a stepped-up program to spur exports, and a revamping of the nation's high schools.
In a report, the council of business, labor and government officials praised President Clinton's economic package but said stronger measures were needed to increase investment.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Mar. 12
Mar. 5
Mar. 13
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
7.0
6.5
Distillate production, daily
2.8
2.9
2.6
Gasoline stocks
237.4
238.1
225.3
Distillate stocks
103.9
106.2
105.5
Crude imports, daily
7.6
5.7
5.4
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.5
1.9
Crude stocks
343.0
337.4
342.0
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
84.3
84.4
82.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; People
*
Hope Boonshaft-Lewis was named to the new position of senior vice president at Edelman Public Relations Worldwide, Los Angeles.
She was previously chief executive at Boonshaft-Lewis &amp; Savitch, Century City, Calif.
And Seth Jacobsen was named senior vice president of public affairs, assuming the duties of Melinda McMullen, who joined Bob Thomas &amp; Associates, Los Angeles.
Mr.
Jacobsen was previously vice president of public affairs at Oglivy Adams &amp; Rinehart, Los Angeles.


Food Notes
New From Marvin Traub
Marvin S. Traub, the former chairman of Bloomingdale's, is now promoting Thai cooking.
Never one for halfway measures -- he was the man who could turn an entire store into a French fantasy or an opulent maharajah's palace -- Mr.
Traub and his team, which includes some Bloomingdale's alumni, are marketing Thai Chef, a kit that includes an assortment of ingredients, a handsome and properly lead-free brass wok and coconut-shell utensils.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Accounts
*
Reebok International Ltd., Stoughton, Mass., to Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York, for its Boks casual footwear and apparel division, previously handled by Toth Inc., Carlisle, Mass.
Ammirati was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $9 million, after a review that included presentations from Ammirati; Toth; Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, New York, and Hal Riney &amp; Partners, New York.


Shifting the Computer Jobless to Software
In Massachusetts, where more than 46,000 high-tech jobs have disappeared over the last three years, an innovative internship and training program is trying to help workers displaced from the computer, military and electronic hardware industries find jobs in the state's rapidly growing software industry.
At a time when so much of the storied Route 128 high-tech corridor outside Boston has fallen on hard times, the software industry in Massachusetts is expected to add 33,000 jobs in the next three years.


Northern Irish Talks Must Include Sinn Fein; MacBride Principles
To the Editor:
Your March 9 interview with Prime Minister Albert Reynolds of Ireland on the eve of his visit to the United States says that the MacBride principles "seek to discourage American investment in Northern Ireland companies that are deemed to discriminate against the Roman Catholic minority in the province."


Executive Changes
CAMP DRESSER &amp; MCKEE INC., Cambridge, Mass., an environmental consulting engineering firm, named Frederick H. Elwell and Kathleen O. Gill senior vice presidents.
CASABLANCA FAN CO., City of Industry, Calif., a unit of GE Capital Services Inc., named Paul Street interim chief executive.
Mr.
Street retains his title and the responsibilities of chairman of Casablanca, and vice president and general manager of the Corporate Restructuring Group of GE Capital Services Inc..


Notes and Bonds Advance in Price
Prices of Treasury bonds and notes rose yesterday after a little help from the Federal Reserve.
But all eyes were really looking ahead to today, when the Labor Department releases the Consumer Price Index for February.
That report may help settle the question of whether the current rate of inflation is low enough for a continued decline in longer-term interest rates, or whether inflation may be higher this year than some have anticipated, which could slow or even halt any decline of long rates below their recent lows.


Face-to-Face Talks Are Held With 2 Cult Members
Federal negotiators have met with two cult members just outside the group's compound, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said today, in what are apparently the first face-to-face talks since Government agents and members of the group engaged in deadly combat more than two weeks ago.
The meeting, which took place on Monday on a road just outside the compound gates, was not attended by David Koresh, the leader of the sect, who is "claiming to be too sick to move," an F.B.I. agent, Richard Swensen, said at a news briefing.


Lloyd S. Howard; Advertising Executive, 66
Lloyd S. Howard, head of a New York advertising agency, died on Sunday at his home in Millwood, N.Y.
He was 66.
A family member said he had a heart attack.


Northern Irish Talks Must Include Sinn Fein; Everyone's St. Patrick
To the Editor:
St.
Patrick was born in a village named by the Romans Bannevem, which, amid the legend and speculation surrounding Patrick's biography, scholars identify as the city of Dumbarten, 14 miles from Glasgow in Scotland.


U.S. Trade Deficit Widens Under Its Broadest Measure
The current account deficit, the broadest measure of the nation's foreign trade and investment performance, widened sharply last year after having been held down in 1991 by payments from America's allies in the Persian Gulf war, the Commerce Department said today.
The current account deficit expanded to $62.4 billion last year from $3.7 billion in 1991.


One More Time, With Turmoil; True to Tradition, St. Patrick's Marchers Face Controversy
For more than two centuries, New Yorkers have struggled over how to celebrate St.
Patrick's Day, grappling with questions like these:
*Whether anti-Irish effigies could be displayed on St.
Patrick's Day -- no, city officials decided in 1803, and imposed a $10 fine on violators.


Topics of The Times; Indonesia, Deservedly Rebuked
An old injustice was redressed at the United Nations last week, thanks to a timely policy shift by the Clinton Administration.
The U.N.
Human Rights Commission voted to express "deep concern" over human rights abuses in East Timor, the former Portuguese colony that Indonesia invaded in 1975 and then annexed.
That's the first such rebuff administered to powerful and populous Indonesia by the commission.
Last year the Bush Administration joined Australia and Japan in derailing a similar resolution to avoid offending an influential third-world state.
But with a different signal from Washington, Australia voted in favor, Japan abstained and others found their courage.
The result: 22 nations favored, 12 opposed and 15 abstained on a resolution that asks Indonesia to cooperate (which Jakarta says it will) with a U.N. inquiry into charges of torture and secret executions on the island.


Topics of The Times; The Commissioner's Mistake
New York City's Police Commissioner, Raymond Kelly, says his participation in today's St.
Patrick's Day parade has no political meaning.
He's marching, he explains, because he always has and sees "no reason" to break with tradition.
No reason?
The parade's sponsors, the Ancient Order of Hibernians, have banned gay groups from marching under their own banner, a decision the Commissioner says he opposes.
Yet by joining with the parade he lends support to the Hibernians' position.
In other words, he will do what he says he doesn't intend to do: make a political statement, and an offensive one at that.


Bronxville Youth Loses Mayor's Race
Patrick English, an 18-year-old student at Bronxville High who formed his own political party and ran for mayor, last night lost his bid for the post to a Republican member of the village's board of trustees.
Mr.
English received 631 votes and his opponent, Nancy Hand, won with 886 votes, said Peter Woodcock, Bronxville's Deputy Village Clerk.


OTB Restaurant Concession Is Granted Without Bidding
Without competitive bidding, New York City's Offtrack Betting Corporation has granted a restaurant concession to a partnership organized by a financial supporter of Mayor David N. Dinkins at its newest branch that will feature live televised races.
A spokeswoman for OTB, Marjorie Longley, said yesterday that the concession, which will be in the midtown Manhattan branch near the garment center, was awarded in September after private negotiations with a group led by Lee Dunham.
Mr.
Dunham, the owner of a chain of McDonald's restaurants in Harlem, and his relatives have contributed $16,000 to the Dinkins mayoral campaigns since 1989.
Mr.
Dunham also helped raise private funds for a trip by the Mayor to South Africa in 1991.


Food for the Hungry
THE New York State Dietetic Association is conducting a food drive on Saturday from 9 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Representatives will be at 72 supermarkets throughout the state to receive donations, which will be distributed to hunger-relief agencies.


Goal Achieved, 4 Jaspers Set Sights Higher
There weren't many footprints in the deep snow at tiny Manhattan College yesterday, as most of its students on spring break fled for home or warmer climates.
But on the 10th floor of the East Hill dormitory, warm sounds of laughter came from the television room at the far end of the hall.


War on Ice Uses Sun And Muscle
An army of shovel-wielding laborers fanned out across New York City yesterday to liberate sidewalks, intersections, fire hydrants and catch basins from the icy snow left by the weekend blizzard.
Aided by rising temperatures, more than 800 laborers hired by the Sanitation Department at about $8 an hour smashed and scooped and pushed to clear the way for pedestrians and motorists.


Rabin Cuts Short His Visit to U.S. Because of the Violence in Israel
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel said today that he would cut short his visit to the United States and return home Thursday evening to deal with growing violence in Israel and the occupied territories.
At a lunch today on Capitol Hill, Mr.
Rabin told reporters that by Thursday he will have completed the bulk of the official business he had planned on his visit, and that he did not want to stay the extra days in order to deliver an address on Sunday to the American-Israel Public Affairs Committee, a pro-Israel lobby known by its initials.


Irish Food That Won't Turn You Green
IRISH food gets but an annual nod in America, on St.
Patrick's Day, like the fruitcake at Christmas.
It's no wonder, given the inevitable plates of gray stew or sodden cabbage with corned beef.
Food like that does not begin to reveal Ireland's invitingly rustic culinary soul.
Consider instead, for starters, pristine oysters sparkling on a bed of seaweed with slices of earthy hearth-baked brown bread spread with hand-churned butter and accompanied by glasses of rich, dark stout.
Other possibilities: Crusty, butter-browned triangles of potato bread with bowls of pleasantly peppery wild-nettle or watercress soup, thick cuts of poached fresh salmon, casseroles of sausages with potatoes and onions, and desserts drenched in cream.


Reviews/Fashion; Rare Impulses and Splendid Tailoring
Claude Montana's show was moving right along when a model grabbed the sides of her closed black cashmere jacket and they flew apart -- no buttons.
Instead there were Velcro patches in bright blue that served as decoration as well as fastenings.
The model's gesture brought to mind how few technical experiments have been seen on the runways during the week of fall and winter showings here.
Thousands of dresses are paraded by hundreds of designers who rework old dressmaking techniques in wistful new ways.
Sure, clothes are lighter and softer than they have been, but experiments with new techniques are rare.


Review/Music; Jarrett Offers Jarrett, And a Little Mozart, Too
Keith Jarrett, one of the more interesting jazz pianists and composers of the present generation, has been demonstrating his yen for classical forms this past decade.
On Sunday evening he brought himself, three other soloists and the Fairfield Orchestra under Thomas Crawford to a program mostly of his own music, at Alice Tully Hall.
The evening ended with Mr.
Jarrett playing the solo part in Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 21.
Armed with a nice-sounding small orchestra (not counting the out-of-tune brass in the Mozart), Mr.
Jarrett was in a pastoral mood on Sunday.
The Adagio for Oboe and Strings, "Bridge of Light" for viola and orchestra and the Elegy for Violin and String Orchestra all lean toward gentle textures flecked with modal intervals and formed into rolling melodic lines.


'Honeymooners' Isn't Over, As Early Sketches Turn Up
When television viewers on Oct. 5, 1951, tuned into Jackie Gleason's "Cavalcade of Stars," they expected to see such popular Gleason characters as Joe the Bartender, the Poor Soul, Reggie van Gleason.
But this program delivered a surprise.
"You know, friends, that great institution, the honeymoon, is the time when the ship of life is launched on the sea of matrimony," said the show's announcer, Don Russell.
"Well, tonight Jackie Gleason introduces two brand-new characters, Ralph and Alice Kramden -- the Honeymooners -- whose boat has sprung a leak."


John C. Fricano, 62, Former U.S. Prosecutor
John C. Fricano, a Washington lawyer and former litigator for the Department of Justice, died Sunday at his home in Arlington, Va.
He was 62.
Pancreatic cancer was the cause of death, a family spokesman said.


Robert F. Gilkeson, 75, Philadelphia Executive
Robert F. Gilkeson, retired chairman and chief executive of the Philadelphia Electric Company, died Saturday in Sun City, Ariz., where he had moved a few years ago.
A former resident of Wayne, Pa., he was 75.
The company said his death came after a long illness.


Can a Green Candy Make Love Sweeter?
" IT'S not easy being green" is the lament of Kermit the Frog.
Well, cheer up Kermie! It seems Miss Piggy isn't the only one who finds green alluring.


Publicly Vilified by Intended, Post Suitor Still Pledges Love
In a perfect marriage of style and content, the first issue of The New York Post published by Abe Hirschfeld lambasted its would-be owner with the kind of rank insults and denigrating vitriol that are usually
his
stock in trade.
And, with the offending newspapers selling well yesterday, Mr.
Hirschfeld professed to love it, just as he has always claimed to savor other notoriety that he perceives as good for business. (When it's bad for business, he often sues.)


Sports of The Times; Rev. Reggie Visits Needy Jets
PRO football's most feared defensive end is now its most coveted free agent.
Reggie White visited the Jets' complex here yesterday, checked out the coaches and the weight room, hinted that Booomer Esiason's arrival as an experienced quarterback would mean more to him than Browning Nagle's presence, met with the owner, Leon Hess, later, then attended the Knicks game last night.
"It feels good," he said of his pro football liberation.
"You see how much you're appreciated because you set a standard."


SERIOUS POP UPTOWN? THE RITZ GIVES IT A TRY
Walter Durkacz has traded downtown for uptown.
Having created the music scene at Wetlands, the popular live-music club in TriBeCa where the spirit of the 1960's flowers with peace signs, tie-dye and Grateful Dead-style rock, he has now moved to the Ritz, at 254 West 54th Street.


Iranian Is Killed in Rome By 2 Gunmen on a Scooter
An exiled Iranian opposition figure was killed today when two men on a motor scooter pulled up to his car in rush-hour traffic and shot him in the face, the police said.
The official, Mohammed Hussein Nagdi, a 42-year-old former Iranian diplomat who broke with the Teheran Government a decade ago, died on the way to the hospital in what Iranian exiles described as another episode in the underground war between Iran's Islamic leaders and their foes.


In Newsroom Putsch, Employees Grab Reins at Post
The employees of The New York Post essentially took over the newspaper yesterday, ignoring the would-be publisher, Abraham Hirschfeld, as virtually all of the managers he laid off on Monday returned to work without any authorization from him.
After yesterday's extraordinary issue of The Post, which called Mr.
Hirschfeld a "nut" and a "screwball," Pete Hamill, the editor in chief he dismissed on Friday, returned and took control of the newsroom, where reporters and editors worked on a more usual issue today.


Nationsbank Reported Set To Buy a Derivatives Firm
Nationsbank, the huge Southern banking company created in a merger last year, is expected to expand into the growing business of trading derivatives by buying into one of the leading independent derivatives firms, banking executives said yesterday.
A Nationsbank spokesman declined to comment on rumors that the company would buy the Chicago Research and Trading Group.
But Hugh McColl, the bank's chairman, scheduled a news conference for this morning in Chicago.
It was unclear last night whether Nationsbank, which is based in Charlotte, N.C., would buy all or a portion of C.R.T., which is privately held.


Blaze Destroys a Parks Department Building in the Bronx


Poland Revisited -- A special report.; A Polish Thesaurus: Free, Rich, Hungry
At the corner of Jerozolimskie and Marszalkowska, billboards light up the night, burning brightly through the yellowish haze of coal smoke -- Coca-Cola, Marlboro, Hitachi.
Across the street at the foot of the dour Palace of Culture, nicknamed Stalin's Gift, scores of red-and-white kiosks sell everything from pizza to pornography.
In sleek new hotels of marble and mahogany, business executives from Bonn and London sit in plush leather chairs, hatching deals.


Ismail Gets Permission to Talk to Raiders
RAGHIB (ROCKET) ISMAIL has received permission from the Toronto Argonauts' owner, BRUCE McNALL, to talk with the Los Angeles Raiders about playing in the National Football League.
"We are going to see what interest they may have," said BOB WOOLF, who represents the former Notre Dame star.


College Hockey
Tournament Times  It has often been said, and sometimes proved, that a tournament can turn on just one player, a goalie playing beyond his capabilities for a game or two.
Then the seedings, the records, the statistics all become trivia.


Devils Stuck in Reverse After Neutral-Site Loss
The Devils were in second place in the Patrick Division when they left New Jersey eight days ago on a four-game trip.
Now they are tied with the Islanders for fourth place.
They were undefeated in five games (4-0-1) and full of confidence.
Now they are on a four-game losing streak and full of doubts.


Mariners Release Schooler; Felder Injured
The Seattle Mariners yesterday released relief pitcher MIKE SCHOOLER, the club's leader with 98 career saves.
Schooler, 30, led the club in saves for four of the last five seasons and had 13 last year.
But he allowed 7 home runs in 1992, compiling a 2-7 record and a 4.70 earned run average in 53 games and 51 innings.
Until last season, he had allowed just 13 home runs in his major league career.


60-Minute Gourmet
I ADMIT this only one day a year, but the name Franey is actually Irish.
In the 18th century there was a large Irish emigration to France, and many families settled in Burgundy.
The name Franey has been traced to that time, although over the centuries those Irish immigrants became as French as a beret.
All of this lends a historical legitimacy to my St.
Patrick's Day foolishness in the kitchen.
Green mashed potatoes seem such a natural on this day.
Of course, you could use food coloring to make anything green.
But in this case I used a more natural and flavorful approach.
Fresh parsley has plenty of natural food coloring.
To extract it place the parsley, with stems (they are full of green juice), in a food processor; process only until coarsely chopped.
The parsley is then placed in cheesecloth and the juice squeezed out.
This natural dye is added to mashed potatoes with garlic and white pepper.


Knicks Look Flat But Take 7th Straight
With four minutes left in last night's game, the Knicks led by just 2 points.
Greg Anthony was in the locker room with a sprained right ankle and Patrick Ewing had five fouls.
Who said beating the Milwaukee Bucks would be easy?
"Obviously, we were very fortunate to win," said Knicks Coach Pat Riley after New York (43-18) struggled to a 102-99 victory over Milwaukee (24-38), the Knicks' seventh consecutive victory and 12th in a row at Madison Square Garden.
"I sensed sort of a complacent nature today and tonight, not really focused and concentrated."


Review/Film; Superimposing Frills On a Provocative Career
For some time Noam Chomsky, the linguist, author, political activist and outspoken critic of what he sees to be the American power elite, has survived attacks by critics of his radically independent thinking.
Now he survives, though just barely, attempts by some friends to make his views more widely known in a film, "Manufacturing Consent: Noam Chomsky and the Media."
Put together by Mark Achbar and Peter Wintonick, two admiring Canadian film makers, "Manufacturing Consent" nearly smothers the often revivifying Chomsky skepticism under a woolly blanket of fancy graphics, archival material and redundant images.
The film, which runs almost three hours, opens today at the Film Forum.


Dinkins in Albany for 'Big Six' Mayors Meeting


Idleness Frustrates Sore-Toed Gooden
The hurt, Dwight Gooden said, is only a part of it.
Injury brings personal frustration, clubhouse isolation, an air of concern that infects an organization.
Gooden thought all of that was behind him, that four seasons of shoulder trouble and surgery and uncertainty were enough.
"I've been through all of this," Gooden said.


A Meal Together, for Here and Now
IT was no big deal, just people having a good meal together.
Oh yes, everybody at the Quaker Meeting House in downtown Brooklyn knew that the guests were sick with AIDS and dying.
But no one seemed hung up on that.
"Hey, this is the best food in town and the company is terrific," said a big, burly, bearded and bejeweled man who has been coming to the Monday dinners for four and a half years.
He camped outrageously, and heroically, about the food, the cooks, his friends.
"Just once before I die I want to meet someone who'll make me feel like Fay Wray again."


Man Convicted of Misdemeanor in Fatal Assault on Greenwich Village Artist
Nearly two years after a brawl that left an artist dying on a Greenwich Village sidewalk, a man was convicted yesterday of a misdemeanor assault charge for punching the victim in the head.
After a two-day nonjury trial in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, Justice Bruce Allen found Terry Pressley guilty for his role in the fight that killed the 26-year-old artist, Grady Alexis.


No Headline
"I inspire even my enemies to great creativity, like my staff in the paper today. That was the storm before the wedding. Now we are after the wedding, and we have to live together, kiss together, hug together, instead of kill each other." -- ABRAHAM HIRSCHFELD, who may or may not run The New York Post.  [ B2:5. ]


Oregon Health Plan Stalled by Politics
Marina Anttila, an unemployed mother of three, still has no health insurance even though she lives in Oregon, a state that long ago came up with a plan to provide medical care for all its citizens.
The problem is that the Oregon plan has been snagged on the shoals of Presidential politics.
The Bush Administration rejected the proposal last summer.
This week, President Clinton is to decide what do with the Oregon proposal -- the first attempt by a state to provide broad coverage through rationing of medical procedures.


First the Big Chill, Now the Sloppy Thaw
After being trapped for three days in their home in Somers, N.Y. -- behind a barricade of waist-high snow and ice -- Herbert and Edith Schueller toasted their freedom yesterday with two hot dogs and a bag of french fries.
"They hacked us out at 8 A.M.," Mr.
Schueller, 87 years old, said at midday, as he waited on line outside Walter's, a hot dog stand in Mamaroneck, where the weather had a decidedly spring-like feel.
"We're glad we could get out."


In Surprise, Filibuster Of Voter Bill Survives
Senate Republicans kept a two-week filibuster alive tonight by the narrowest of margins, imposing a surprise detour on one of their Democratic rivals' earliest and highest priorities: a bill intended to make it easier and quicker for new voters to register nationwide.
Democratic leaders promised another attempt on Wednesday to get the legislation back on track, but while they expressed official optimism, their prospects for success were uncertain.
The bill would effectively register as voters any citizen over age 18 who applied for or renewed a driver's license or sought welfare or aid for the disabled from government agencies.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Some Picture-Perfect Pitchmen
Dozens of cartoon characters received a drubbing earlier this month when the Federal Communications Commission ruled that "The Flintstones" and the like no longer qualified as "educational and informational" programming.
But while cartoons may be down, they are certainly not out -- not in Adland anyway -- which is creating all sorts of work for cartoon characters of various shapes and sizes.


CLINTON PROPOSES TO CHANGE THE WAY MEAT IS INSPECTED
Prompted by deaths in the Northwest from contaminated hamburger, the Clinton Administration today proposed to overhaul the nation's meat-inspection system to protect against a public health threat that has worsened in recent years: dangerous bacteria in meat and poultry.
The Administration's proposal, which was announced at a hearing of a House Agriculture subcommittee, would completely change the basis for safeguarding the meat supply, by enlisting advanced scientific techniques and monitoring equipment to discover dangerous microbes.
Inspectors now check for tainted meat in most cases simply by looking for discoloration or feeling for disease.
No Estimate of Cost
The microbes, which have been appearing in meat and poultry with increasing frequency, are responsible for killing 150 people and causing 150,000 serious illnesses in the last decade, according to the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.


Universities' Reliance on Companies Raises Vexing Questions on Research
The University of Miami is one of the nation's biggest research complexes, with half-again as much laboratory space in its medical center as the Chrysler Building has office space.
In the last few years it has added even more laboratories to the vast medical center.
But many of those new areas are dark, closed for lack of research grants.
Like dozens of other universities around the nation -- powerhouses of research that have built scientific reputations over the past 50 years by discovering or developing everything from DNA coding to Gatorade -- Miami finds itself in a financial and ethical quandary: With government support leveling off or drying up, where to turn for money?


White's Jet Wish List Goes Beyond Big Money -- A Word on Behalf of Esiason
He came. He saw. He'd like a new quarterback.
After spending today with the Jets, Reggie White, the Philadelphia Eagles' defensive end and top prize in the National Football League's free-agent sweepstakes, said he liked the team's weight room, approved of the early signings of safety Ronnie Lott and defensive end Leonard Marshall and was thrilled about how he would be deployed in the defensive scheme.


Wine Talk
IN Australia, they take it one step beyond.
The passion to learn more about wine leads to a constant round of quizzes and games, all conducted in a spirit of fun but meant to sharpen the players' perceptions and increase their knowledge.
Take, for example, the Chairman's Dinner during the annual wine judging of the Royal Agricultural Society of New South Wales, better known as the Royal Sydney Show.


China Raises Military Budget Despite Deficit
The Government today announced a 15 percent increase in the military budget for this year, adding to a series of increases in military spending that is alarming neighboring countries.
Although China no longer faces a major threat on its borders, its military budget is almost double the figure for 1988.
Other Asian countries fear that China is trying to intimidate its neighbors and resolve longstanding boundary disputes in its favor.
More fundamentally, some diplomats suggest, China is trying to fill a vacuum in the Pacific after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the withdrawal of United States forces from the Philippines.


Mental Disorders Common, but Few Get Treatment, Study Finds
WHILE approximately 52 million adults in the United States -- more than one in four -- suffer from a mental disorder at some point during a year, only 28 percent of them seek help, according to the most comprehensive study of the nation's mental health ever conducted.
The study, based on intensive interviews of 20,000 men and women from households selected to represent the entire population, also reveals that in a given year, close to nine million of those with mental disorders develop the problem for the first time.
Another eight million suffer a relapse.
The remaining 35 million suffer continuing symptoms.


Corrections
A chart in Science Times yesterday showing two diagrams known as cladograms, which classify groups of plants and animals according to their similarities, labeled a group incorrectly in each one.
It was the teleosts, or bony fishes, not the tetrapods, or four-limbed animals.


CHRONICLE
While the First Lady is away, her family will -- dine out.
While HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON was at a health-care forum in Iowa, PRESIDENT CLINTON and their daughter, CHELSEA, had dinner on Monday night at Galileo, an Italian restaurant in downtown Washington.
Along with PAUL NEWMAN and JOANNE WOODWARD, they were guests of LIZ ROBBINS, a Washington lobbyist.
Also in the party were ANNE WEXLER, a Presidential aide during the Carter Administration who is chairwoman of the Wexler Group, a lobbying firm, and her husband, JOSEPH DUFFEY, president of American University.


Centocor Says New Drug Is Effective in Angioplasty
Centocor Inc. said today that clinical trials had shown that its Centorx drug was effective in preventing blood clots in patients undergoing angioplasty procedures to unclog arteries.
Centorx outperformed a placebo by 35 percent in a study of 2,099 patients at 56 medical centers in the last of three phases of human tests, according to results presented today at the annual scientific session of the American College of Cardiology in Anaheim, Calif.


COMPANY NEWS
KLM ROYAL DUTCH AIRLINES N.V., Amsterdam, said it would cut its summer fares for people traveling in business class between Amsterdam and London by 25 percent starting on March 28.
KINDER-CARE LEARNING CENTERS INC., Montgomery, Ala., said yesterday that its prearranged Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization plan had been confirmed by the court.
Under the plan, its creditors will exchange 60 percent of the company's $350 million of debt for about 86.5 percent of the equity in Kinder-Care, the nation's largest operator of day-care centers.


Amsterdam Journal; With an Eloquent Guide, Dutch Discover History
In these days of uneasy debate about Europe's cultural identity, Hella Haasse is behind her 1952 typewriter, pounding out notes, preparing her next novel with the verve that has kept her writing for the last 60 years and today has made her the grande dame of Dutch letters.
But the much-honored writer of historical novels is not joining the public debate about whither Europe.
Rather, the slow coming together of nations has set her thinking along different lines because, even in this early stage, she sees change in Europe affecting her two great loves: language and history.


Macy Shows Small Profit in Quarter
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company, the bankrupt retailer that has struggled for more than a year to stem a flow of red ink and reverse an ebbing sales tide, said yesterday that it had turned a profit, albeit a small one, in its second quarter.
It was the first quarterly profit for the company since it filed for bankruptcy protection on Jan. 27, 1992.
Thanks to a rip-roaring holiday sales season and better management of its inventory that resulted in fatter profit margins, Macy reported income of $8.9 million, compared with a $671.6 million loss in last year's second quarter.


Day Programs for the Mentally Ill Save Money
To the Editor:
Your March 1 report of mounting pressure in New York State to keep outdated psychiatric hospitals open for the sake of jobs in their districts implies the proposed state budget has shifted resources to care for the severely mentally ill in the community.
However, a provision in the budget proposal actually cuts such essential community-based services.


Keough Files Lawsuit Over an Injury
In a lawsuit filed just under a year after he was hit in the head by a foul ball, former California Angels pitcher MATT KEOUGH alleges he was severely injured because there was no protective screen in front of the dugouts at Scottsdale Stadium.
"He has had a serious brain injury," attorney CHARLES M. BREWER said of his client.
"He has double vision and epilepsy. He'll never play ball again."


Lachance Excels in Islander Shutout
The staircase leading to the decrepit Cow Palace locker room is so steep that it makes for a wonderful aerobic workout.
Scott Lachance, an Islanders rookie defenseman, plodded up those steps in his skates before tonight's game, searching for a railing that did not exist.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on March 8 about debt offerings misidentified the guarantor of Student Loan Marketing Association notes.
The Government-sponsored private corporation, known as Sallie Mae, is solely responsible for repayment of its debts.


Bridge
From 1953 to 1989 the American Contract Bridge League produced an annual record of the world championship, featuring deals and analysis.
Since then similar books have been produced in England under the auspices of the World Bridge Federation.
The quality continues to be high, although the American reader must adjust to two British terms: "Love all" for "Neither side vulnerable" and "Game all" for "Both sides vulnerable."
Books for Geneva 1990 and Yokohama 1991 are available for $27.95 each including postage from Baron-Barclay Bridge Supplies, (800) 274-2221.
The 1992 book, dealing with Salsomaggiore, Italy, is in preparation.


U.S. Relents on Korea Chips
In a victory for American computer makers and a setback for American semiconductor producers, the Commerce Department retreated tonight from plans to impose prohibitive import tariffs on semiconductors from South Korea.
In a preliminary ruling in October, the department determined that Korean manufacturers had been selling semiconductors, which are computer chips, at unfairly low prices in the United States, a practice known as dumping.
The department then assessed temporary duties ranging up to 87.4 percent in the case of the Samsung Electronics Company, Korea's top chip maker.


Campus Journal; Students Try to Open Past's Locked Gate to Tower
The 302-foot Spanish Baroque tower in the heart of the University of Texas campus here has long been both a symbol of state pride and a grim reminder of random violence.
But for nearly two decades the observation deck atop it has been sealed to all but a handful of visitors.
The deck was closed in 1975 after several people jumped to their deaths from it.
Nine years earlier, 14 people were killed by a rifleman there.


New NBC Executive Selling ESPN His Sports Programs
Don Ohlmeyer, the president of NBC West Coast and the former producer of ABC's "Monday Night Football," agreed yesterday to sell his personal sports-programming interests to ESPN.
No purchase price was disclosed.
The 200 hours of sports programming, mainly golf tournaments and auto racing, are now part of the Los Angeles-based Ohlmeyer Communications Company.
The programming unit will operate as a separate entity under ESPN, which is 80 percent owned by Capital Cities/ABC and 20 percent owned by the Hearst Corporation.


U.S. Trade Official Talks Tougher on Pact
On the eve of negotiations to begin drafting side agreements to the North American Free Trade Agreement, the nation's top trade official outlined today a tougher American bargaining position than he had presented last week.
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, promised the Senate Committee on the Environment and Public Works that proposed international commissions on environmental and labor issues would have "real teeth." The commissions would have representatives of the United States, Mexico and Canada, the three nations involved in the free trade treaty.


Review/Dance; About Urban Alienation, In Pictorial Structures
"Over the Pavement," Eliot Feld's absorbing 1982 study of urban alienation, was revived with an especially powerful all-male cast by Feld Ballets/NY on Sunday night.
Mr.
Feld's musical selections are apt and include orchestral transcriptions of songs by Charles Ives that are heard here without the lyrics.
Ives's dissonance is ingeniously equated with discordant images of society by Mr.
Feld.
Performed now by a new generation of dancers at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea), "Over the Pavement" has returned with fresh dramatic force.


Roman Catholic Rebel Becomes A Cause Celebre
Matthew Fox had suggested a light Lenten supper, but he wasn't particularly repentant.
The 52-year-old theologian, whose three decades as a Dominican priest ended last week when he was dismissed from the order by the Vatican, unfolded his napkin at Elka, a seafood restaurant in San Francisco, and widened his blue eyes in bewildered innocence.
"I guess I'd be sorry for the things I've done if I wanted to preserve a male-dominated, anthropocentric, essentially white institution that denies its own mystical tradition," he said.


Fred Couples and the Ex-Factor
Even as he was expecting it to be his most enjoyable, 1993 has already been the most complicated year of Fred Couples's career.
After a season in which he was PGA Player of the Year for the second straight time, leading money winner and Masters champion, the 33-year-old Couples had finally become comfortable with his role as one of the world's premier players.


Cal's Bozeman to Shed 'Interim' Designation
Todd Bozeman, who five weeks ago replaced Lou Campanelli as University of California basketball coach and has lost only once in 10 games, will become the team's permanent head coach, according to a school official.
Bozeman, whose team will play Louisiana State Thursday in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, will sign a three-year contract worth an undisclosed amount.
The announcement could be made as soon as Wednesday.


Browns Woo Testaverde; Other Free Agents Watch
The old University of Miami quarterback tandem of Vinny Testaverde and Bernie Kosar came a step closer to being reunited yesterday, thanks to the glittering new world of National Football League free agency.
The Cleveland Browns' owner, Art Modell, said that Testaverde's agent had made a formal contract proposal yesterday.
Testaverde met Friday with the Browns, who want to bring in a quarterback of starting caliber behind the fragile Kosar.
He is recovering from ankle surgery.


Results Plus
N.H.L.  Capitals Alone in Second After Victory
Defenseman Kevin Hatcher scored the go-ahead goal in the third period as the Washington Capitals beat the Detroit Red Wings, 4-2, in Milwaukee.
The Capitals, with 75 points, took over sole possession of second place from the Rangers in the Patrick Division.
Hatcher's 27th goal broke a 2-2 tie at 8 minutes 13 seconds of the third period.
Todd Krygier added an empty-net goal. (AP) Flyers 4, North Stars 3: Rookie Al Conroy's first National Hockey League goal lifted Philadelphia to the victory at home.
Conroy, called up the Hershey minor league club on March 2, fired in a rebound off the stick of Vyacheslav Butsayev past goaltender Darcy Wakaluk at 4:47 of the third period. (AP) Sabres 2, Blues 2: Bill Houlder's goal at 7:46 of the third period lifted Buffalo to the tie in St.
Louis.
Houlder's goal came on a backhander from the slot after a setup from Pat LaFontaine, the league's leading scorer.
Aleksandr Mogilny's league-leading 69th goal had cut the Blues' lead to 2-1. (AP) TENNIS  Sabatini Rallies to Reach Quarterfinals
Third-seeded Gabriela Sabatini began blasting winners from the baseline yesterday just in time to beat Amanda Coetzer, 1-6, 6-2, 6-1, at the Lipton championships in Key Biscayne, Fla.
After the start of their match was delayed three and a half hours because of rain, Coetzer won the first set and led the second by 2-0 before the Argentine rallied and gained a quarterfinal berth.
Top-seeded Steffi Graf defeated Patty Fendick, 6-1, 6-4.
In men's third-round matches, No. 3 Stefan Edberg beat Javier Frana, 4-6, 6-3, 6-3, and No. 8 Andre Agassi routed Jason Stoltenberg, 6-0, 6-1.
Rain forced 10 of the 24 singles matches to be suspended or postponed. (AP) N.B.A.
Rockets Rally for 14th Straight Victory
The Rockets won a franchise-record 14th straight game by rallying to beat the Orlando Magic, 94-93, in Houston last night.
The Rockets' streak matches one by Phoenix as the longest in the National Basketball Association this season.
Orlando led by 20-8 in the first quarter and by 71-54 with 4 minutes 58 seconds left in the third period.
With the Magic ahead by 87-80 with 5:44 remaining, Houston had an 8-2 surge to pull to 89-88 with 3:42 left.
Robert Horry's 3-pointer gave Houston the lead for good at 92-91. (AP) Cavaliers 110, 76ers 98: Cleveland scored 21 straight points early in the third quarter, then held off a Philadelphia comeback in Richfield, Ohio.
The victory was the 856th for Lenny Wilkens, tying him with Dick Motta for third place on the N.B.A.'s career coaching list, behind Red Auerbach (938) and Jack Ramsay (864).
Gerald Wilkins scored 11 points during the Cavaliers' 21-0 run, capping it with a 3-point shot that put them ahead by 80-56 with five minutes left in the third period.
But the Sixers' bench used a 23-5 flurry to cut the deficit to 98-91 with 5:41 left in the game. (AP) Hawks 122, Hornets 107: Dominique Wilkins scored 38 points as Atlanta dominated on the boards in its sixth straight victory, winning in Charlotte, N.C.
Kevin Willis had 20 points and 16 of 50 Atlanta rebounds.
Charlotte had 35 rebounds. (AP) Celtics 114, Warriors 88: Alaa Abdelnaby had 25 points and Kevin Gamble 23, helping Boston beat Golden State in Oakland, Calif.
The Warriors, never in contention after the second quarter, lost their fifth straight game.
The Warriors announced that Tim Hardaway, bothered by soreness in his right knee, would be put on the injured list and would miss at least two more weeks. (AP)


Angels Send Blue Jays a Bill for Gruber
The California Angels have billed the Toronto Blue Jays for KELLY GRUBER's rotator cuff surgery and hospital costs, claiming the Blue Jays are responsible for the third baseman's surgery.
The Angels billed the Blue Jays for the Feb. 16 surgery, DAN O'BRIEN, Angels vice president for operations, said Monday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The Air Force made illegal payments to McDonnell Douglas in 1990, a Pentagon official says in testimony prepared for a House hearing today.
He is expected to recommend disciplinary action against three generals and a former procurement official.  [ Page D1. ]


Pentagon To Act in C-17 Case
The Pentagon's Acting Inspector General is expected to offer scathing testimony Wednesday that the Air Force made illegal advance payments to McDonnell Douglas for the troubled C-17 cargo plane, actions for which he will recommend disciplinary measures against three Air Force generals and a former Government procurement official.
Derek J. Vander Schaff, the Acting Inspector General, is scheduled to appear before the House Legislation and National Security subcommittee, which is conducting oversight hearings in Washington this week on the C-17 project.
The project is behind schedule and $1 billion over budget.


Majors to Schottzie 02: Please Take a Walk
Major league baseball needs a new labor agreement.
It better get busy replacing nearly $1.5 billion in TV contracts pretty soon.
And, isn't it true there's still no comissioner?
Oh, well. At least baseball finally got rid of Schottzie 02.


A Few Dine and Sign; Giants Wait and See
Reluctantly -- some agents might even say sullenly -- the Giants are trudging into the world of football free agency.
As of yesterday, they hadn't signed anyone.
But then again, neither had 19 other National Football League teams.


The Pop Life
Revisiting Curtis Mayfield
There's a lot of music in Curtis Mayfield's mind.
The rhythm-and-blues singer and composer was left paralyzed in 1990 when a lighting tower blew over during a concert in Brooklyn.
Since then, he has been unable to compose.
"Most things are in my mind, and with my being quadriplegic, that's about where it stands until I'm able to bring in new pieces of equipment that may lend me a hand," Mr.
Mayfield said in an interview from Atlanta, where he lives.
"They have voice-activated computers now and maybe with the help of these things I may truly be able to lend some real thought to writing music again."


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about the film maker Michael Kanin, the brother of the writer Garson Kanin, misstated the brothers' relative ages.
Michael was the elder.
The obituary also omitted a survivor.
She is his sister, Ruth, of Montreal.


Stocks Mark Time in More Light Trading
Traffic on the stock exchanges yesterday seemed to move as cautiously as on the nation's icy roads, with the major market averages virtually unchanged in slow-motion trading.
Investors were fretting about today's consumer price report, traders and strategists said.
The stock market's recent gains to record levels have been built on the bond market's strength, which could crumble on clear signs of inflation.
The low yields available on bonds and other interest-bearing investments have prompted investors to seek higher returns from stocks.


Aspin, Hospitalized Again, Will Get a Pacemaker
Defense Secretary Les Aspin was hospitalized tonight because of the recurrence of a bronchial infection, the Pentagon said, and will have a pacemaker implanted.
"He had complained of a cough for two days," the Pentagon said in a statement.
"Examination suggested he apparently suffers from a recurrence of a bronchial condition."


Topics of The Times; Time to Get Real on Haiti
Nearly 18 months have passed since rampaging soldiers ousted Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's first democratically elected President.
At the time of the coup, the Bush Administration solemnly pledged that it would act to help President Aristide swiftly regain power.
That pledge turned out to be so much empty rhetoric, as did Bill Clinton's later vow to halt the forcible return of Haitian refugees without a hearing.
Through all this backpedaling, Father Aristide has carefully refrained from direct criticism of U.S. policy in the hope that Washington would eventually do the right thing.


A Search for a Prophet Where Anything Goes
No matter what you're wearing at this moment, count yourself among the stylish set.
The message this season in Paris: what your parents wore is fashionable, what your older siblings wore is fashionable, what you wore in high school is fashionable, and what you wore a year ago is fashionable.
This is why designers with a point of view are being greeted like prophets, with even the most intractable members of the press and buyers trudging to every quartier of Paris to see what might be new.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday with an article about drug prices misstated an increase by Pfizer Inc. for its heart drug Procardia XL.
The increase on Feb. 1 was 4.5 percent, in line with Pfizer's voluntary limit on price increases in 1993.


Eating Well
FOR years, public interest groups have complained that school lunches are filled with fat and salt and are undermining the health of the nation's children.
Now, the United States Department of Agriculture, which is responsible for the school lunch program, reports that their complaints are justified.
And the new Secretary of Agriculture, Mike Espy, says he plans to do something about it.


Will British Airways Control USAir?
Now that the Federal Government has given British Airways permission to buy a portion of USAir, the question that remains at the heart of the debate on foreign investment in the airline industry is how big a portion would give it control.
Seth E. Schofield, chairman and president of USAir, said today that even if British Airways received more than the legal limit of 25 percent of his company's stock it would still lack effective control of the American carrier.
But some legal experts are not so sure.


James Dickman, 66, Contract Negotiator For Shippers, Is Dead
James Joseph Dickman, retired president of the New York Shipping Association, died on Saturday at Englewood (N.J.) Hospital.
He was 66 and lived in Tenafly, N.J.
The association said the cause of death was heart and lung failure.


Key Officer Of Next Inc. Is Resigning
The executive hired by Steven P. Jobs to help revive Next Inc., his ailing computer company, is resigning in the wake of the company's decision to leave the computer hardware business and that Mr.
Jobs wanted to take the position of chief executive officer.
Peter van Cuylenburg, a British manager whom Mr.
Jobs named last March to run Next's day-to-day operations, will leave the Redwood City, Calif., computer maker next month, the company said today.
The move follows layoffs by Next and a rash of management defections in the company's shift to become solely a software maker.


Get the U.S. Out of Land Management
To the Editor:
Re: "Bruce Babbitt's Landscape" (editorial, March 1): The new Interior Secretary and the preservation lobby feel compelled to impose new taxes, one way or another, on mining and other commercial activities on Federal lands.
Their legitimate goals appear to be three: rectify 19th-century prices, protect the environment and raise money for the Government.


How New Law Makes Car Thief's Life Hard
To the Editor:
"New York, Car Theft Capital of the World" by Lucy Danziger (Op-Ed, March 3) vividly expresses the helplessness many of us feel when we are victims of a car thief, as I was a few years ago.
While I understand her frustration with the police, I also understand the police's frustration.
Thousands of cars are stolen each month in New York, overwhelming auto theft investigators.


Wang Plans to Cut 3,300 Jobs by End of April
Calling it the "reinvention of Wang," Joseph M. Tucci, president and chief executive of Wang Laboratories Inc., disclosed a plan today to reorganize the company and emerge from Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
The plan calls for eliminating more than one-third of Wang's remaining work force, a cut of 3,300 jobs, by the end of April.
Ownership of Wang, based in Lowell, Mass., will be transferred to its creditors -- the largest of which include I.B.M., Microsoft, the GE Credit Corporation and Intel -- which have agreed to accept stock in the reorganized company to pay off Wang's $2 billion in unpaid claims and unsecured debt.
All other creditors and stockholders will be issued new securities by the reorganized company.


BURLINGTON GIVES CONTRACT TO G.M. AND SIEMENS
The Burlington Northern Railroad awarded a contract valued at more than $650 million to General Motors' electromotive division and Siemens Transportation Systems Inc. to supply 350 high-performance diesel freight locomotives using an alternating current electric system.
Eight of the 4,000-horsepower locomotives will be delivered this year, and 60 to 100 locomotives will be delivered in following years until 1997.
The freight locomotives are expected to be the first to use alternating current traction systems, rather than direct current technology, in North America.


Book Notes
Signing Canceled  A day before the Lipton Championships began on Friday in Key Biscayne, Fla., Crown Publishers was told that the scheduled sale and book signing for "Ladies of the Court: Grace and Disgrace on the Women's Tennis Tour," by Michael Mewshaw, had been canceled, and Mr.
Mewshaw was told that his credentials to cover the event had been revoked.
The double cancellation came two days after a Florida newspaper published an article about the book's report of sexual abuse on the women's tour.
Both sides agree on what happened, but they disagree on why.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the transportation problems of homeless people misstated the distance between Newburgh, N.Y., in Orange County and Valhalla in Westchester County.
The cities are about 40 miles apart, approximately a 90-minute cab ride.


Richard Tucker Award Is Conferred for 1993
The Richard Tucker Music Foundation has given its top award for 1993 to Ruth Ann Swenson, an American soprano from Bronxville, N.Y.
The honor includes a $30,000 cash award and participation in the Tucker Foundation's annual gala concert, to be held this year on Dec. 12 at Avery Fisher Hall.


2 Girls Accused of Arson In Fire That Guts Church
Two young girls ran away from a home for troubled children here Monday night and sought sanctuary from the cold in a church, where they stole money and set a fire that gutted the building, the police said today.
The girls, 11 and 14, were so frightened by the flames that they returned to the children's home, but with church property that later led to their arrest on arson and burglary charges, the police said.


Clinton Budget Faces a Debate In House Today
With the first votes in Congress scheduled later this week, supporters and opponents of President Clinton's economic program spent today assessing their voting strength and jockeying for advantage.
The House of Representatives plans to begin debating the program on Wednesday and to vote on Thursday on the overall budget framework, as well as on the President's proposal to spend $16 billion in the next two years to stimulate the economy.


Metropolitan Diary
BACK THEN
Spring meant  playing potsy  with a key  skipping rope  or executing  a successful freeze  at just the right moment  in a game of statues,  and at the same time  managing to keep  your navy coat  pristine  and navy patent Mary Janes  scuff-free.
HARRIET BERNSTEIN


BLAST IN CALCUTTA KILLS AT LEAST 45
In what may have been a second major attack on an Indian city in less than a week, a huge explosion went off in a crowded central Calcutta residential area shortly after midnight this morning, killing at least 45 people and destroying two apartment buildings, reports from that eastern city said.
The blast came four days after a series of explosions ripped through Bombay, killing 232 people and wounding 1,432, as well as severely damaging two major office complexes, including the stock exchange.


Albany Budget Cuts Slow Innovative Drug Treatment
A midyear state budget cut forced an innovative treatment program for addicted drug dealers to stop taking new clients this week, and officials with substance-abuse groups warned that other programs would follow suit if the Legislature approves budget cuts proposed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
Lawmakers and drug treatment providers said the cutback in the program, which was started two years ago by Charles J. Hynes, the Brooklyn District Attorney, was the clearest sign to date that New York could face a decrease in capacity in its drug treatment system.
That possibility has long been considered unthinkable in Albany from the standpoint of both policy and politics.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  CLINTON MEETS WITH ARISTIDE  President Clinton told the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide that the United States would step up its efforts to negotiate a plan to restore democracy to Haiti, but he refused to set a deadline for Father Aristide's return as President.
A1  A VASTLY CHANGED POLAND  For a correspondent who left Warsaw 11 years ago with the smell of tear gas still in the air, returning to Poland means visiting a country that is in some ways unrecognizable.
Signs of prosperity are pervasive, but there is open poverty, too, as the benefits of pervasive socialism fade away.
A1


INSIDE
45 Killed in Calcutta Blast
A week after a series of bombs tore through Bombay, a huge explosion went off 1,000 miles away in Calcutta, killing at least 45.
Page A3.
Aspin Enters Hospital
Defense Secretary Les Aspin was hospitalized with a bronchial infection and will receive a pacemaker, the Pentagon said.
Page A16.
Cholesterol Tests at Issue
A group of medical experts says there is no justification for routine cholesterol tests before age 35 in men and age 45 in women.
Page B8.
Plucked From the Snow
Campers from an exclusive Michigan school, stranded in the Smoky Mountains by the weekend blizzard, were rescued by helicopter.
Page B8.
Chicago Hotel Fire Kills 15
A fire swept through a Chicago transient hotel, killing at least 15 residents and injuring a score of others.
A dozen or more are missing.
Page A14.


Last Michigan Campers Are Lifted From Snowy Forest
The last 24 of 117 campers from an exclusive Michigan boarding school, stranded by the blizzard that swept the East last weekend, were rescued by helicopter today from the Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
All of them -- 21 students and 3 adult leaders from the school -- were in good health after their outing of a week and a half, the last four days of which were spent in a snow-blanketed wilderness.
Some even expressed surprise that they had been the object of an intensive air and ground search by the Tennessee and North Carolina National Guards and a unit of the Army's 101st Air Assault Division.


Drug Force Supervisor Removed After 2 Arrests
The New York City Police Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, announced yesterday that he had removed a supervisor from an elite drug enforcement team after two officers who were on the team were arrested last week on charges of selling heroin.
The Commissioner stopped short of holding the supervisor, Deputy Inspector Kenneth E. O'Brien, responsible for not being aware of the officers' conduct.


A Slain Track Star's Unhappy Road
In mid-January, Shilie Turner, a 17-year-old high school senior who was one of the nation's most promising young female track stars, vanished from her neighborhood in the Overbrook section here.
Her mother made a series of emotional public appeals for her safe return, but a month later Miss Turner's body was found, hidden by bushes in a local park.
She had been beaten and then shot six times.
Now her mother, Vivian King, has been charged with her murder, and acquaintances of the family have been left to wonder whether they should have paid closer attention to Miss Turner's complaints of an unhappy home life, and to her loud quarrels with her mother.


Classical Music in Review
Pinchas Zukerman, violinist Marc Neikrug, pianist Avery Fisher Hall
The recital that Pinchas Zukerman and Marc Neikrug played on Sunday afternoon was very much an equal collaboration and showed both players in a flattering light.
They brought a measure of Classical grace and balance to carefully shaped, expressive readings of Schubert's Sonatina No. 2 in A minor (Op. 137) and Mozart's Sonata in C (K. 303).
In these, Mr.
Zukerman allowed his sweet, rounded violin sound free reign, and Mr.
Neikrug spun out the piano lines with a level of warmth and character that has not always been evident in his playing.


Decision Is Delayed on Bird
The Fish and Wildlife Service took no action today on deciding whether to list the California gnatcatcher as endangered in a case that has emerged as a symbol of the Clinton Administration's efforts to deal with protecting wildlife without hindering the economic.
The delay, which was expected to be short, would allow the Secretary of Interior, Bruce Babbitt, more time to study the issue.
The Natural Resources Defense Council, which petititoned to list the songbird, said it would not sue for now.


COMPANY NEWS
ALLIED SIGNAL INC., Morristown, N.J., tentatively agreed to a venture with Knorr-Bremse A.G. of Germany to provide air-brake controls and other products to the truck industry.


U.S. Rebukes North Koreans For Scrapping Nuclear Pact
American diplomats met with North Korean officials in Beijing today to express their displeasure with North Korea's intention to withdraw from the treaty to halt the spread of nuclear weapons, a State Department official said.
Neil Silver, the United States political counsel in Beijing, met with his counterpart from North Korea to discuss Pyongyang's announcement last week that it will pull out of the treaty, State Department officials said.


Home Video
A Bigger Blockbuster
You know about Blockbuster the video store, but what about Blockbuster the movie studio?
Last week, the video chain, the country's largest, announced plans to acquire 48.2 percent of Spelling Entertainment, the television and motion picture production company.
That sparked speculation that Blockbuster might become a cable network operator and a film and television producer.
"We have no plans for Blockbuster movies," said Ron Castell, a senior vice president of the company.
Mr.
Castell said Blockbuster would leave the film and television production to Spelling, concentrating instead on distribution.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Administration called for auctioning the nation's airwaves, a proposal that could affect everything from new wireless phone services to emerging technologies for transmitting radio and television programs.  [ Page D1. ]
Consumer prices climbed a moderate three-tenths of 1%, but "core" inflation rose an unnerving five-tenths of a percent.  [ D1. ]


Did Someone Say Boggs? Not in Boston
There were no hints of Wade Boggs in the Boston Red Sox clubhouse today, no signs he had played 11 years for them.
No one was wearing No. 26 on his uniform in mourning.
No one had Boggs's baseball card taped to his locker.
And no one, repeat no one, mentioned missing him.
The player who has often told a bizarre tale of willing himself invisible when threatened with a knife outside a bar in Gainesville, Fla., four years ago seemed invisible again as the Yankees opposed the Red Sox for the first time since signing the free-agent third baseman to a three-year, $11 million contract.


Foundation for Press Is Subject of Inquiry By New York State
The New York State Attorney General's office is investigating the spending practices of a charitable organization that promotes free-speech issues and is headed by Allen H. Neuharth, the former chairman of the Gannett Company, state officials said yesterday.
Leslie Gersing, a spokeswoman for Attorney General Robert Abrams, said the investigation of the Freedom Forum, a group that is based in Arlington, Va., but is registered in New York State, concerns possible fiscal irregularities.


White House Expected to Back Oregon's Health-Care Rationing
The Clinton Administration is expected to approve Oregon's novel proposal to ration health care for poor people in the state, Federal officials said today.
The proposal would expand eligibility for Medicaid there while eliminating coverage of some treatments.
But President Clinton and Donna E. Shalala, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, will impose stringent conditions on Oregon to try to limit Federal costs and at the same time prevent sharp reductions in services for poor and disabled people, the officials said.


CHRONICLE
PETE WILLIAMS, who was Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs from 1989 until January, is returning to what might be called his roots.
As of March 29, he will be a Washington-based general assignment correspondent for NBC News.
Mr.
Williams described his appointment as a dream come true.
"I'm well aware I'll be the new kid on the block, and that carries with it its own challenges," he said.


Rangers Trade Weight For Oilers' Tikkanen, Then Take a Loss
Esa Tikkanen did not have to move his skates and his sticks very far.
Neither did Doug Weight.
A few hours before the Rangers played the Edmonton Oilers last night, Rangers President and General Manager Neil Smith announced that he had traded Weight, a 22-year-old center, to the Oilers for Tikkanen, a gritty player with four Stanley Cup victories to his credit.
Weight moved his things, and a heavy heart, to the visitors' dressing room at Madison Square Garden.
Tikkanen brought his belongings and an ever-present grin to the home hallway, where he chatted cheerily with his new teammates while working on his sticks.


Kisangani Journal; With Artery Severed, Heart of Africa Grows Still
For nearly a century, since the slaving days of Belgian colonialism, riverboats have made the thousand-mile voyage upstream between Kinshasa and this port city deep in the immense tropical bush of Central Africa.
But five months ago, the two ancient and dilapidated Government-owned steamers still working the route, twice a month each way, ceased operating.
Port officials said they could no longer afford to buy fuel or spare parts for the journey, which took eight days to two weeks.


NATO Drafts Plans For a Bosnia Force
As the warring sides in Bosnia and Herzegovina prepare for a new round of peace talks, NATO has stepped up planning to send at least 50,000 peacekeeping troops to Bosnia as soon as a settlement is reached, Western officials say.


Classical Music in Review
Sacred Music in a Sacred Space  Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola  Kent Tritle, who has quickly and quietly been building one of the city's more interesting choral programs at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola, conducted Bach's B-minor Mass for the first time on March 10, with excellent success.
Mr.
Tritle's chorus of 21 and orchestra of 22 seemed just about right for the richly resonant acoustic, though the organ was small and, partly as a result, bass lines were weak.


Market Place; Hilton tries a balancing act with its hotels and gambling casinos.
THE stock of Hilton Hotels traded at $115.50 in 1989, when the company put itself on the auction block.
But when no one bid for it the stock plummeted and has been trading at about half that value ever since.
It has traded between about $42 and $53 in the last year and closed yesterday at $48.375, down $1.75, on the New York Stock Exchange.
"We have it rated a hold," said Margo L. Vignola of Salomon Brothers, "mostly because it still derives close to half its sales and operating profits from its hotels." Many of those properties are in big cities plagued by overcapacity and where room rates have been depressed for several years.


Spooked Over Intelligence Cuts
Judging by his budget presentation, R. James Woolsey, President Clinton's chief spymaster, seems well on his way to becoming a captive of the old-boy bookkeepers in the intelligence agencies.
Mr.
Clinton, who needs to save every dollar he can, would be a sucker to let that happen.
The immediate issue is the annual intelligence budget of $29 billion.
The larger issue is whether America needs an intelligence apparatus of cold war dimensions.
Mr.
Woolsey told the House Intelligence Committee that he could absorb a $1 billion cut in next year's budget but not much more -- a snub of Mr.
Clinton's campaign pledge to find $7.5 billion in cuts over five years.


Kaye Is Unanimously Confirmed as Chief Judge


Sears Ratings Are Lowered
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation has lowered its credit ratings on $17 billion of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company securities, citing doubts about the retailer's revitalization plan.
The credit rating agency on Monday lowered its ratings on the senior debt and preferred stock of Sears, Roebuck, and the ratings on the senior debt of Sears Overseas Finance and the Discover Credit Corporation.
All the securities were lowered to BBB+ from single-A.


Leaving Only Grief
Her employer says that when a fearful Danielle Almonor separated from her husband, Max, last year, she fled with little besides the clothes on her back.
The Federal probation officer had not accumulated much more than that when she died last week -- gunned down, the police said, by her estranged husband, while awaiting a custody hearing in Brooklyn Family Court.


Bracket Is a Numbers Game That's as Easy as 1-2-3
The seedings of the eight teams in the Midwest Regional games to be played here on Thursday and Saturday project that Kansas (seeded second in the region) and Duke (seeded third) will advance to the regional semifinals in St.
Louis next week.
Then, the reasoning goes, Kansas will topple Duke and play the No. 1-seeded team in the region, Indiana.
That way, No. 1 and No. 2 will claw for Middle America's Final Four entry and accompanying trip to New Orleans and to glory.
It is as easy as 1-2-3.


Hollywood's Oscar Fever This Time Is Lukewarm
Unless your name is Clint or Barbra or Arnold, unless you're viewed as Somebody Important, you're usually relegated to the back room of Spago, the restaurant off Sunset Boulevard that has long been a movie colony hangout, and treated like a tourist from North Korea.
But last night, Hollywood's writers, who view themselves as outsiders anyway, took over Spago's back room to celebrate some of their brethren nominated for the coming Academy Awards, to be presented on March 29.
Neil Jordan, the director and writer of "The Crying Game," huddled in a corner with David Webb Peoples, who wrote "Unforgiven."


Critic's Notebook; Selling Art to Save Historical Society: A Painful Remedy
The first painful but necessary step toward salvaging the New-York Historical Society came late last week.
An independent advisory committee, formed by the board in February when the 189-year-old institution on the verge of bankruptcy was forced to close, prescribed tough medicine: dramatically refine the society's mission, cut the staff and sell off $20 million worth of its collection as well as a chunk of property adjacent to its building on Central Park West.
The ultimate goal is to rebuild, to a total of $40 million, an endowment that has been all but exhausted.
"Extreme self-help" is the phrase used by the head of the committee, Wilbur L. Ross Jr., the senior managing director of Rothschild Inc.


No Superstar, but a Superb Season for the Cavaliers
There it was, in clear black print, on another post-game quote sheet.
One more person who intended to say something nice about the Cleveland Cavaliers had insulted them instead.
"They have no flair," said Fred Carter, coach of the Philadelphia 76ers.
"They have no superstar. They have no swagger. They just come out and methodically get the job done."


Sports of The Times; Vermont's Underdogs No Longer Unbeaten
THE only undefeated team entering the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I basketball tournament this year didn't have a starting player 6 feet tall or over.
It wasn't even ranked in the Top 15 in any of the polls.
And the head coach is a woman.
We speak of that remarkable band of women athletes from the University of Vermont, the Catamounts.
They were hosts last night to the Lady Knights of Rutgers in the first round of the East Regional, putting their season record of 28-0 on the line.


College Chief Is Reported Picked to Run U.S.I.A.
President Clinton has selected Joseph D. Duffey, president of American University and an old friend, to head the United States Information Agency, Administration officials say.
No date has been set for the appointment.
But it is expected that when Mr.
Duffey, long active in the Democratic Party, is named, the appointment will be coupled with an announcement that his deputy will be Penn Kemble, a conservative Democrat, the officials said.


Timber Industry Wants You to Hate Owls
To the Editor:
Re "Lumber Prices Are Soaring on Shortages and Owl Feud" (Business Day, March 11): According to all the timber industry sources you cite, an 8-inch, 22-ounce owl is responsible for one of the greatest stampedes the lumber market has ever witnessed.
In reality, there is no evidence that environmental protection measures are driving up lumber prices.
Lumber prices today are lower than in 1975, when adjusted for inflation, as a new analysis of lumber prices by the Congressional Research Service confirms.


Bronzing Memories Happily
SIXTY years ago, parents who got the notion to preserve Susie's or Timmy's first walking shoes besought the local trophy maker or auto-body specialist to electroplate the shoes in between making loving cups or car parts.
The process consisted of stiffening the shoe with a lacquer-based -- and water polluting -- solution, then coating the leather with a conductive material, usually copper, which adhered when voltage was applied in a plating bath.
Polishing, the final step, gave the shoes an antique finish, from which came the term bronzing.


In the World of Bacteria, a Behemoth
Flouting the scientific canon that all bacteria are microscopic, researchers have discovered a strain so huge that it can be seen with the naked eye.
The single-celled organism, plucked from the bowels of an Australian fish, is about the size of a hyphen in a newspaper article, making it by far the largest bacterium ever detected.
In measuring more than one-fiftieth of an inch in length and possessing a volume a million times that of the common E. coli microbe, the newly discovered bacterium seems to defy laws of biology that limit how big a simple bacterial cell can grow.
So outsized is the creature that researchers may soon be able to use it to begin exploring the intimate details of bacterial innards, a task impossible with the tinier species of microbes.


Let's Applaud the Dutch for a Merciful Law; For the Few
To the Editor:
"Help for the Helping Hands in Death" (The Week in Review, Feb. 14) asks why voluntary euthanasia is supported in opinion polls but rejected in voting booths.
The answer is that once the public is informed about the implications of legalizing euthanasia, common sense takes over.
It would be nice if we could control death so that we could all go in a timely, peaceful, painless way.
Legalized euthanasia might make that possible for a few, but at what cost to the many who would be dispatched unwillingly or unwittingly?


Corrections
An article in Business Day on March 10 and a report in the Business Diary column last Sunday about the 1991 compensation of Roberto C. Goizueta, chairman and chief executive of the Coca-Cola Company, characterized the public reaction to his pay package incorrectly.
Mr.
Goizueta's compensation drew attention in news articles but no protests from Coca-Cola stockholders.


Kaye Confirmed as Chief Judge Amid Albany Senators' Praise
Judith S. Kaye was unanimously confirmed as Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals today after gliding through her confirmation hearing with almost no opposition.
As they took up her nomination on the floor of the full Senate, legislators from both parties clambered to lavish praise on the 54-year-old judge, who is the only woman ever to serve on the state's highest court.


Escobar Offers to Yield and Colombia Likes Terms
The fugitive drug trafficker Pablo Escobar has proposed a new set of conditions for his surrender, and Colombia's chief prosecutor said today that they were acceptable.
In a message delivered to the Roman Catholic Bishop of the city of Bucaramanga by one of Mr.
Escobar's lawyers this morning, the drug trafficker said that to avoid being poisoned he wanted private cooking facilities when in prison.
He also asked that he be allowed to call family members three times a week and that they be given Government protection.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Brian May  Beacon Theater
Halfway through his show on Sunday night, the guitarist Brian May went onstage and performed alone with his electric guitar.
That's Rule 13B for hard-rock shows, the filler portion of the concert, when the audience can sit down and relax a bit.
This time, it didn't.
Then Mr.
May's drummer, Cozy Powell, took up an interminable solo, Rule 13C.
The audience didn't sit down for that, either.
Mr.
May, the guitarist for the group Queen and the writer of the rock anthem "We Will Rock You," not only has fans, but also has fans who adore the memory of Queen.


Bridge
While several thousand enthusiasts head for Kansas City, Mo., today, to play in the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals beginning there tomorrow, about 100 are already in action.
They are qualifiers from district play in the North American Open Pairs, which concludes today.
Representing the New York area are: Alex Pollenz of Rockville Centre, L.I., and Mitchell Pollenz of Wantagh, L.I.; Jon Greenspan and Michael Moss, both of Manhattan; Steve Weinstein of Upper Montclair, N.J., and Fred Stewart of Andes, N.Y.; Joel Friedberg of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Michael Ranis of Peekskill, N.Y.


Iran-Backed Terrorists Are Growing More Aggressive, U.S. Warns
Iranian-backed militant groups have expanded their bases of support well beyond the Middle East and represent the greatest threat in a likely increase of terrorism around the world, senior United States officials say.
The officials said the assassination on Tuesday in Rome of an Iranian opposition figure was merely the most visible step in a pattern in which terrorist organizations backed by the Iranian Government appear to be adopting a more aggressive posture.
But they added that there was no apparent link between the Iranians and the bombing of the World Trade Center in New York last month.


Price War Traps Smaller PC Makers
Gregory E. Herrick believes he is doing all he can to survive the costly war in prices and customer services that has roiled the personal computer industry since last June, forcing some of his competitors, namely Nippon Steel's Librex brand and Philips Electronics' Magnavox, to abandon the personal computer market in North America and changing the nature of the business for even the strongest.
The Minneapolis-based company he heads, Zeos International, hired a new president, won applause from the trade press for three of several new machines, slashed costs by auctioning small operations and paring inventories, attracted new financing and opened gleaming new assembly lines.


South African to Lobby for U.S. Impartiality
South Africa's Foreign Minister has cautioned the Clinton Administration against a sentimental tilt toward the African National Congress, saying that playing favorites in South Africa could increase tension in the country.
The Foreign Minister, Roelof F. Botha, also endorsed "the framework" of a new Washington peace plan for Angola, but appeared to differ with some elements of the proposal.


First to Plunge: Holt Takes Falcons Up on Their Offer
Barely two weeks after the National Football League hopped onto the uncertain merry-go-round of wide-ranging free agency, Pierce Holt, a hard-charging San Francisco defensive lineman, grabbed the first gold ring yesterday.
He signed an offer sheet for a guaranteed three-year contract with the Atlanta Falcons that would pay him a total of $7.5 million, including more than $4 million immediately.
For Holt, who made $875,000 with the 49ers last season, the only question left unresolved by the multimillion-dollar deal was who will pay the millions.
Because the 49ers designated him a transition player under the N.F.L.'s complicated new labor agreement, the team has a week to decide whether to match the Falcons' contract terms or let him go.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Optioned Paul Swingle, pitcher, to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League; Ron Watson and Jose Musset, pitchers, to Midland of the Texas League; and Pete Janicki, pitchers, to Cedar Rapids of the Midwest League.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Optioned Robert Eenhoorn, shortstop, and Randy Cook, pitcher, to Columbus of the International League.
Sent Billy Masse, outfielder; Don Sparks, infielder; and Ray Sanchez, catcher, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Announced the retirement of Mike Marshall, first baseman.
Released Brian Fisher, pitcher.
Sent Carmelo Martinez, outfielder; Mike Fitzgerald, catcher; and Jim Converse, pitcher, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
Sent Kevin Coffman, pitcher, outright to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Sent Willie Greene, third baseman, and John Roper, pitcher, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
Waived Jamie Quirk, catcher, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Optioned Albert Bustillos, Mike James and Greg Hansell, pitchers, to Albuquerque of the Pacific Coast League and Jim Daspit and Javier Delahoya, pitchers, to San Antonio of the Texas League.
Claimed Ricky Trlicek, pitcher, off waivers from the Toronto Blue Jays.
Sent Chris Nichting, pitcher, outright to Albuquerque.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Optioned Ray Holbert and Jay Gainer, infielders; Dave Staton, outfielder; Erik Schullstrom, pitcher; and Brian Johnson, catcher, to Las Vegas of the Pacific Coast League.
Released Bill Bathe, catcher.
Sent Mike Linskey, pitcher, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
Football  National Football League  ATLANTA FALCONS -- Signed Pierce Holt, defensive end, to an offer sheet.
BUFFALO BILLS -- Signed Greg Paterra, fullback, and Jim Gray, defensive end.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Traded Boomer Esiason, quarterback, to the New York Jets for a 1993 third-round draft choice.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed David Viaene, offensive lineman, and Leslie Shepherd, wide receiver.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Sent Bobby Holik, center, to Utica of the America Hockey League.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Traded Doug Weight, center, to the Edmonton Oilers for Esa Tikkanen, forward.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Lifted their suspension of Brian Fogarty, defenseman, and assigned him to Cleveland of the International Hockey League.
TAMPA BAY LIGHTNING -- Recalled Matt Hervey, defenseman, and Jason Ruff, left wing, from Atlanta of the International Hockey League.


CHRONICLE
It might be said that Sister MARY BEATA GERRITY is given to understatement.
"I'm unusual, I suppose, for a sister," she said.
In fact, she is.
She is known as the Singing Nun, not the original, of course, but as far as she knows, the only professional now in that category.
Last night, she made her debut as the headliner at Red Blazer Too, a nightclub on West 46th Street, singing Irish songs ("Hello, Patsy Fagan," "Danny Boy") and ragtime ("Alexander's Ragtime Band").
Sister Mary Beata, who has been a nun for 33 years and is a member of Brooklyn Regional Sisters of Mercy, has made six albums and sung at benefits, festivals, on television and at a comedy club with Morty Storm, a Jewish comedian, in an act called "Bagels and Blarney." If that sounds like a television-sitcom title, it just might be: she's been approached about the idea.


Sprained Right Ankle Sidelines Anthony
Greg Anthony will miss the Knicks' game tonight against the Cleveland Cavaliers with a sprained right ankle, and it is possible he could miss a week or more.
Doc Rivers will start at point guard in place of Anthony.
According to Knicks trainer Mike Saunders, Anthony has a Grade 1 sprain, the least severe, which means Anthony has not suffered torn ligaments.
Saunders said Anthony left Madison Square Garden on crutches after Tuesday night's 102-99 victory over Milwaukee, but that Anthony was walking gingerly without crutches yesterday.


A New Skatelike Shoe Gives Runners a Lift
IMAGINE a cross between a pogo stick and an in-line roller skate, and you have an Exerloper, a fitness device that takes jogging to new heights.
At first glance, an Exerloper looks like a skate.
The footwear is made of a molded plastic boot with laces.
But underneath the sole, convention gives way to the unexpected.


Essay; Islam Under Siege
Islam, one of the world's great religions, is under attack from within.
The nations with the firmest tradition for the protection of religious liberty and a free press -- Britain and the U.S. -- have become the bases for extremists seeking to turn Islam into an aggressive political movement.
In Washington this week Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin told President Clinton that fundamentalists incited by Iran were infiltrating Muslim institutions in the West.
The Israeli informed journalists yesterday that "the intelligence community here is showing a growing awareness of the threat."


2 Arrested in Brooklyn Case Suspected in TriBeCa Slaying
Two men arrested in an attempted robbery in Brooklyn on Feb. 23 are considered suspects in the fatal shooting of a graphic artist in lower Manhattan earlier the same day, the police said yesterday.
Although a handgun recovered by the police in the Brooklyn robbery has been linked to the slaying of Bonnie Bear, the men have not been arrested in the case because no witnesses have identified them in lineups, said a police official who spoke yesterday on condition of anonymity.


Home Improvement
BUILDING a corner closet begins with marking the outline of the closet on the floor and then erecting the longer wall, containing the doorway's framework or rough opening, as described in last week's column.
To fasten the wall in place, tilt it upright and align the top and bottom with the lines marked on the ceiling and floor.
Then hammer shims -- thin wooden strips -- beneath the soleplate (the wall's bottom horizontal piece) to raise the wall tight against the ceiling.


Foreign Affairs; Asian Arms Races
Westerners barely noticed the announcement last month that Indonesia had bought a third of the former East German Navy at a bargain-basement price.
And perhaps only stockholders paid attention as McDonnell Douglas and General Dynamics scrambled to Malaysia recently to hawk discounted fighter aircraft in a losing price war with Russia, which was willing to be paid partly in palm oil.
Eyebrows raised only at the specter of nuclear war in Korea this week.
If the end of the cold war produced a geostrategic peace and a rush to cut military spending in Europe, it prompted new uncertainty and anxiety in East Asia -- and set off a colossal shopping spree for arms.


Youth Loses Bid to Be Bronxville's Mayor
Patrick English, an 18-year-old student at Bronxville High in Westchester County who formed his own political party and ran for mayor, has lost his bid for the post to a Republican member of the village's board of trustees.
In the election Tuesday, Mr.
English received 631 votes and his opponent, Nancy Hand, won with 886 votes, said Peter Woodcock, Bronxville's Deputy Village Clerk.


Hong Kong Shrugs as China Fumes; A City Shrugs
Officials here initially responded with surprising calm to China's latest denunciation of Britain's plans for political change and its rejection of talks on the sensitive matter.
The colony's governor, Mr.
Patten, said he remained eager to open discussions on his proposed changes.


Charles Egan, 81; Art Gallery Owner Helped de Kooning
Charles R. Egan, a gallery owner who fostered early Abstract Expressionism by exhibiting the works of Willem de Kooning, Isamu Noguchi and other major artists, died on March 1 at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was pneumonia, his family said.


Classical Music in Review
Concordia  Alice Tully Hall
Some new American music -- the product of a composers' competition held by Concordia and supported by American Express -- took up the orchestra's program on Friday night.
To these first-, second- and third-prize entries was added David Balakrishnan's "Spider Dreams," a highly agreeable synthesis of American pop, ethnic and country music featuring the Turtle Island String Quartet.
The mixing of popular styles with classical formats also occupied the competition's winning piece, "Fantasy on Mr. Hyde's Song" by Donald Grantham.
Mr.
Grantham's use of bright colors, jaunty syncopation and extreme highs and lows (from bass clarinet and trombone to squealing upper-register oboe) was a pleasing example of American vulgarity slyly and affectionately observed.


Saks Brochure Offers Peek At Company's Performance
For the first time since it was purchased by a low-profile investment group in 1990, Saks Fifth Avenue is giving its suppliers, employees, the financial community and the press a peek at the company's performance.
A glossy brochure detailing the retailer's achievements, strategy and five-year plan shows a turnaround in the company's business last year.
The brochure is a pre-emptive strike against the press leaks and rumors about the company's sales and profits that circulate every so often, and it shows that Saks managed to drive more of its sales dollars toward the bottom line last year than it did in 1991.


NATO Steps Up Planning for Bosnia Force of 50,000
As the warring sides in Bosnia prepare for a new round of peace talks, NATO has stepped up its military planning to send at least 50,000 troops to the region as soon as a settlement is reached, Western officials said today.
United States officials had been pressing for preliminary planning to begin, and at a meeting at NATO headquarters in Brussels today, military officials were told to make plans to send troops quickly to enforce a peace agreement as soon as it is reached.


Irish March Up the Avenue, Gay Protesters at Bay
Declaring that political correctness is not worth "one comma in the Apostles' Creed," John Cardinal O'Connor triumphantly reviewed a St.
Patrick's Day Parade kept tightly secure from homosexual intruders yesterday on a raucous, rain-drenched day in which more than 200 gay and lesbian protesters were arrested in sit-ins on Fifth Avenue.
"Yo, Kelly! Love ya!" one Irish lesbian shouted to another as the latter was passively carted off under arrest when the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization, barred from marching by the courts, resorted to civil disobedience before the parade began.


Article Hits a Nerve
To The Home Section:
Enid Nemy  [ "To Clip, Perchance to File (Not Likely)," March 11 ]  has hit my nerve endings.


Helen Hayes, Flower of the Stage, Dies at 92
Helen Hayes, the tiny actress whose big-hearted portrayals of Queen Victoria and other regal women helped make her one of the century's best-loved stars, died yesterday at Nyack Hospital in Nyack, N.Y.
She was 92 and lived in Nyack.
The cause was heart failure, said John Springer, her longtime press agent and friend.
Miss Hayes was admitted to the hospital on March 9 suffering from congestive heart failure and irregular heartbeat.


USG Files Prepackaged Plan To Emerge From Bankruptcy
In what is likely to be the next-to-last step in a financial restructuring that began more than two years ago, the USG Corporation said yesterday that it had filed a bankruptcy reorganization plan already approved by most of its creditors.
The plan, known as a "prepackaged" Chapter 11 reorganization, applies only to the holding company and will have no impact on the day-to-day operations of USG's subsidiaries.


Robinson (14 Assists) Shows Off Against Hawks
Rumeal Robinson showed his former teammates the same scintillating play he has been showing the entire league.
Finishing with a season-high 14 assists tonight, Robinson helped the Nets cruise to their sixth victory in their last seven games, a 114-93 verdict over the Atlanta Hawks.


Explosion in Calcutta Adds to Fear Gripping India
After a wave of bombings in Bombay last week and an explosion this morning in what appears to be an underworld bomb factory in Calcutta, India is jittery over the possibility of new acts of terrorism, particularly here in the capital.
Security at Parliament and other government buildings, the airport, train stations, newspaper offices and public places like markets and movie theaters was increased.
Police patrols were more numerous on the capital's streets and paramilitiary forces could be seen in some parts of the city.


Sports of The Times; Jets Lower Boomer On Nagle
WITH only about 3 minutes remaining in Super Bowl XXIII, the advertising agency people and a cameraman surrounded Boomer Esiason on the Cincinnati Bengals' sideline.
"Do you know your lines?" one of the agency people asked.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  IRISH PARADE SOGGY BUT SPIRITED The 232d St.
Patrick's Day parade was notable for the sit-ins by and arrests of members of a gay Irish organization, for the few major politicians in sight and for the sparseness of the crowds along rain-spattered Fifth Avenue.
But John Cardinal O'Connor watched from his usual spot on the steps of St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
A1.
DINKINS MAY BE BUILDING BUDGET SURPLUS The Dinkins administration appears to be building a surplus in the current budget year, independent fiscal experts say.
And while it is too soon to know just how large the surplus will be, it could be a political boon for the Mayor.
B3.


Events: A Series Of Lectures
City's Buildings
Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street; (212) 534-1672.


Classical Music in Review
Speculum Musicae Merkin Concert Hall  One thing that Speculum Musicae demonstrated in its program of recent British works on March 10 is that it is entirely possible for composers with a sense of humor to convey light-spiritedness, irony and even zaniness in atonal, seemingly abstract music.
The success of such an effort depends partly on the way the music is written and partly on the way one listens to it, of course, but the incongruities in a humorous work are not likely to come through without performers who are both insightful and accomplished.
Speculum's flexible roster can claim both qualities in ample measure.
Colin Matthews, in his "L, Bent" (1993), sends a spiky theme racing through a filigreed texture.
The humor, if not exactly subtle, is at least wry: it emerges from both the speed at which the piece proceeds and from the interplay between the instruments.
Oliver Knussen conducted the piece at the start of the program and repeated it just before the intermission.


For the Best of the Big East, the Big Show Gets Under Way -- St. John's First Goal: Reaching 2d Round
Somewhere close to the finish of a season that has been as rewarding as it has been surprising, the St.
John's Redmen have reduced their year to two questions.
When will it end?
And how?
They have come to a place where nearly everything is new -- the abruptness of tournament play, their dark blue warmup suits, the surroundings, the opponent, everything except the goal:


CHRONICLE
MAE JACKSON knows exactly what she's going to do with the $20,000 check she'll be getting at the end of the month.
She's going to take her daughter, Njeri, 22, out for a Thai dinner, and she's going to buy some toys, maybe a couple of rubber mice, for her three cats.
"They put up with me when everyone else is gone," she said.
Well, even after those expenditures, there's bound to be something left and where is it going?
No surprise there: Ms.
Jackson said it would go to the Creative Learning Center for Children, a project of Art Without Walls, an organization she's been active in since 1972 and of which she is executive director.


Melville to Sell Chess King To Merry-Go-Round Chain
The Melville Corporation, which operates Kay-Bee Toys, Marshalls, Linens and Things and several other specialty store chains, said yesterday that it plans to sell its Chess King men's clothing chain to Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc., another specialty store company.
Gilbert Harrison, chairman of Financo Inc., which is a financial adviser to Melville, said terms of the sale would not be final until May.


TALKS ON SOMALIA SUSPENDED BY U.N.
Somali reconciliation talks that began here this week were temporarily suspended today after one warlord refused to take part to protest renewed fighting in the southern Somali port city of Kismayu.
United Nations officials said they had suspended the talks, widely viewed as the Somalis' last chance for an internationally brokered reconciliation, to prevent the collapse of the negotiations and to allow American and United Nations officials time to fully investigate the violation of a cease-fire agreed upon by all factions in January.


Books of The Times; All About the Oscars, Down to the Minutiae
Behind the Oscar  The Secret History of the Academy Awards  By Anthony Holden  Illustrated. 672 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster.
$25.
At the end of his lengthy "Behind the Oscar: The Secret History of the Academy Awards," Anthony Holden ponders the meaning of it all.
He asks, "What does the roll-call of the victorious tell us about the history of the movies, about the growth and development of the major art form to have emerged from the United States in the 20th century?"


Pop and Jazz in Review
Suzanne Vega  The Academy
Suzanne Vega gained fame by sketching the view from life's corners.
Her first two albums, which established her as a literate folk chanteuse in the early 1980's, offered delicate attempts to articulate the awkward and the painful.
Ms.
Vega's voice, prim as a china teacup, made her seem unduly coy at times, and as her career wore on, her songs became frustratingly oblique.
But with her new album and a tour that stopped at the Academy on Thursday night, Ms.
Vega demonstrated a willingness to try new musical and thematic encounters.


Jay E. Raeben, 67; Made Videos to Help Doctors Stay Current
Jay E. Raeben, who devised a twice-monthly video service to help doctors keep their medical expertise up to date, died last Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 67.
The cause was heart failure, according to Visual Information Systems Inc., the firm he founded in 1962.


Auctions Urged for Airwaves
Looking for new ways to reduce the budget deficit, the Clinton Administration today called for a broad new program to auction the nation's airwaves, a proposal that could affect everything from new wireless phone services to emerging technologies for transmitting radio and television programs.
The Administration proposal goes further than proposals now circulating in Congress, because it would require virtually any company that wants a new radio license to outbid competing applicants.
Although the Administration has previously proposed raising money by auctioning portions of the airwaves, today's statement was noteworthy in urging that all applicants for new frequency allocations -- even broadcasters -- compete in auctions.
Effects Would Vary
The plan would probably not affect existing radio and television stations, most of which were licensed many years ago.
But it could affect broadcasters seeking to bring out new technologies, like a digital format for transmitting radio programming that offers the crisp, clean sound of compact disks.


Corrections
A film review yesterday about a documentary at Film Forum 3 devoted to the writer and critic Noam Chomsky rendered the title incompletely in the heading of the credits in some copies.
The film is "Manufacturing Consent: Noam Chomsky and the Media."


Assembly Plan on Transit Would Put Issue to Voters
With the state's budget deadline two weeks away, Assembly Democrats have proposed a new transportation financing plan that would require voter approval to borrow money for road, bridge and mass transit construction.
Assembly aides said the plan, which would raise the money through the sale of general-obligation bonds, had only recently been floated in closed-door negotiations with aides to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and with the Republicans who control the State Senate.


Clinton Will Not Fight Toxic-Waste Incinerator
More than three months after Vice President-elect Al Gore vowed to block the opening of the nation's newest hazardous-waste incinerator, the Clinton Administration said today that it would not oppose the owner's plan to begin commercial operation of the plant, probably next month.
The decision, which was disclosed today by top officials at the Environmental Protection Agency, came a day after a Federal appellate court in Cincinnati cleared the way for the incinerator in East Liverpool, Ohio, to begin accepting tons of toxic wastes.


One Tower Is to Reopen After Blast
Officials of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said yesterday that tenants would begin returning to one of the World Trade Center towers today, and may begin returning to the other one by the end of the month.
The announcement yesterday, after 18 days of intense efforts to move tenants, install new security systems and clean up layers of soot from the towers, came after the agency has repeatedly said that no part of the towers would be ready until April 1, or at best a few days before that.
Tower Two will be reopened first.


Let's Applaud the Dutch for a Merciful Law; Freud's Last Days
To the Editor:
Walter Reich, a psychiatrist, severely criticizes the Dutch Parliament for having made the practice of euthanasia easier for physicians (Op-Ed, Feb. 27).
No matter what the circumstances are, he writes, killing a patient is still killing.
Sigmund Freud, father of psychoanalysis, would not agree, as readers of Peter Gay's "Freud: A Life for Our Time" (New York, 1988) know.


Suspect in Blast Believed to Be in Pakistan
A fourth suspect described as a possible ringleader of the World Trade Center bombing has disappeared overseas and may have fled to Pakistan, Federal law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
They said Pakistani authorities had not been particularly helpful in the search but the Pakistani Embassy in Washington condemned the attack and promised full cooperation.


Timber Industry Wants You to Hate Owls; Supply Drives Prices
To the Editor:
It's hard to know who Richard Manning finds more at fault for higher lumber prices: the industry or the consumer ("Chainsaw Logic," Op-Ed, Feb. 25).
The forest products industry has never had a problem noting that 15 percent of timber comes from Federal lands, but we have also said that the 15 percent is equivalent to nearly half the softwood lumber produced in the United States.
That's the lumber used for construction, lumber now in short supply because of environmental restrictions on harvesting.


Results Plus
TENNIS Flu Sidelines Becker in Florida
So far the main players at the Lipton Players International Championships in Key Biscayne, Fla., have been the wind and the rain, and yesterday the tournament lost another legitimate headliner, Boris Becker, who was felled by an impromptu case of flu that may or may not be weather-related.
The German, given a first-round bye because of his position as the event's fourth-seeded player and a second-round walkover because Gianluca Pozzi had an appendicitis attack, never played a match.


Joyce Carey, 94; Actress Excelled In Coward Plays
Joyce Carey, a British stage actress known for her performances in plays by Noel Coward, died on Feb. 28 at a London hospital.
She was 94 and lived in London.
Miss Carey came from a theatrical family.
Her mother, Lilian Braithwaite, was a star on the London stage, and her father, Gerald Lawrence, was a matinee idol who began his acting career as a juvenile in the company of Sir Henry Irving.
In 1916, Miss Carey appeared as Princess Katherine in an all-female production of "Henry V." She made her professional debut in a revival of "Mr. Wu" and went on to play ingenue roles.
In the 1920's she appeared in numerous Shakespeare plays and drawing-room comedies.


People Who Live In a Glass House (And Like It)
IN John and Ann Hauberg's new house, a sleek, modern version of an Italian villa, all that glitters -- in the occasional rays of the elusive Seattle sun -- is not gold but glass, used in a myriad of inventive ways that include but hardly stop with windows and skylights.
Here, glass doesn't just illuminate the architecture -- it
is
the architecture, used for pedestals, sinks, shelves, balcony rails and even mantelpieces.
The glass is blown or cast; it comes clear or filled with tiny, carefully placed bubbles, flecked with 24-karat gold, or in brilliant shades of ruby, cobalt, amber or orange.


Review/Dance; Cunningham Makes Earth and Air Interchangeable
"Doubletoss" is what Merce Cunningham called the magical new work that the Merce Cunningham Dance Company presented in its New York premiere on Tuesday night at the City Center.
He could just as easily have called it "A Midsummer Night's Dream."
Of course, Mr.
Cunningham would probably do no such thing.
He is not interested in choreographing stories, by Shakespeare or anyone else, and he did not tell one here.
Nevertheless, he did bring to mind Shakespeare's comedy about encounters between mortals and spirits.
Both the play and the dance show the intersection of two realms of being.


Mets Put Stock in Off-Season Additions
They were minor deals the Mets regarded as major steals.
Mike Maddux, journeyman reliever, and Joe Orsulak, consummate role player, were added to the roster this winter.
As parts, they would make the whole greater, the organization proclaimed.
Orsulak, a 30-year-old left-handed batter with great instincts and intangibles in the outfield, offered insurance against an injury to Vince Coleman or a flop by Ryan Thompson.
Maddux, having rescued his career from a near washout, was the kind of pitcher who could answer any number of bullpen emergencies -- setup right-hander, spot starter, long relief.


Settlement on Reynolds Seems Near
The Butch Reynolds case is moving quickly toward its climax, with a settlement likely soon to head off a potentially embarrassing confrontation on Friday at the International Olympic Committee meetings.
Reynolds was awarded $27.3 million last December in his lawsuit against the International Amateur Athletic Federation, and talks recently between the two sides have led to considerable pressure on Primo Nebiolo, president of the I.A.A.F., for a compromise agreeement.


Core Inflation Climbs 0.5% For 2d Month
Consumer prices climbed a moderate three-tenths of 1 percent in February, the Labor Department said today, but "core" inflation rose an unnerving five-tenths of a percent for the second straight month.
Many analysts considered the results, combined with last Friday's report of the biggest jump for producer prices in two years, fairly solid evidence that inflation was no longer on the wane.


Corrections
A report by Reuters in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday about investors' purchases of stock in the Gitano Group Inc. misstated its relationship with the makers of Guess jeans.
They are rivals; Gitano is not affiliated with Guess.


Ex-F.B.I. Chief Chosen For G.M. Safety Inquiry
The General Motors Corporation has hired William H. Webster, a former director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, to conduct an inquiry into the company's handling of safety documents related to its troubled pickup trucks.
Mr.
Webster, a Washington lawyer, will investigate charges by consumer groups and others that G.M. lawyers destroyed fire-safety records, said William J. O'Neill, a G.M. spokesman.
At issue are records pertaining to full-sized Chevrolet and GMC pickup trucks made from 1973 to 1987 that have fuel tanks mounted outside the vehicles' frames.


Yet another agency will handle accounts for two different auto makers.
FOR the second time in a month, an understanding client is permitting a fortunate agency to begin building a two-car garage.
Porsche Cars North America Inc. in Reno said yesterday that it would move its estimated $10 million account, which had been at Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis for the last five years, to Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein in San Francisco, effective immediately.
The sleek, expensive sports cars will share space in the Goodby garage with American Isuzu Motors Inc., an estimated $95 million account that the agency has handled since August 1991.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Paul C. Barkley, a retired executive of the old Pacific Southwest Airlines, misstated his employment record in some editions.
He joined the airline in 1967 and became its president in 1979.


Clinton Delays Taking a Role in Ulster Talks
President Clinton, who promised during the Presidential campaign to help solve the civil unrest in Northern Ireland, indicated today that he would not send a special envoy there anytime soon.
Mr.
Clinton did announce his nomination of Jean Kennedy Smith as Ambassador to Ireland, and said he would consult with her before deciding what participation by Washington would be needed in the British province.


Aspin, Feeling 'Pretty Good,' Is to Get a Pacemaker Today
Defense Secretary Les Aspin will have a pacemaker implanted Thursday and will probably be well enough to return to work next week, his doctors said today.
Mr.
Aspin was placed in intensive care on Tuesday for the second time in three weeks after complaining of a cough and shortness of breath that doctors said today were caused by a mild congenital heart condition.


Paramedics Never Stop Training for Crises
To the Editor:
Re "New York Can Take a Bow" (editorial, March 4): As a New York City paramedic and instructor on both the emergency medical technician and paramedic levels, I take objection to your description of those who helped maintain order and patient care at the World Trade Center blast as "ambulance attendants."
The Department of Transportation in Washington categorizes levels of emergency care responders as "emergency medical technicians" and "paramedics." We go to school, learn about medical and trauma emergency care, spend countless hours at continuing medical education programs.
We take, and are mandated to retake, certifying state exams to maintain our status.


Who's Lilly Schmidt?; To 5th Ave., Suspect Is Femme Fatale
Her current name is Lilly Schmidt.
But even though she has been convicted of trying to engineer her prison escape from Rikers Island by arranging to have two Federal agents killed, and even though she is being held in a Federal jail, the authorities know virtually nothing about her real identity.
Nor do they know what she and a partner did with almost $1 million they are accused of fleecing from Manhattan banks, boutiques and art galleries -- the charges that orginally landed them in Rikers.


Let's Applaud the Dutch for a Merciful Law
To the Editor:
In "Shame on the Dutch" (Op-Ed, Feb. 27), Walter Reich deplores the Dutch Parliament's passing legislation permitting physicians to perform mercy deaths.
In essence, this law will confer upon patients whose pain and suffering cannot be ameliorated a choice of when and how they die.
The Dutch Parliament imposed strict regulations on physicians who administer mercy deaths.
Patients must state that they can no longer endure the pain, must understand their medical options and must not be depressed.
Another physician must agree to the death, and the death must be justified to the authorities.


Women Ponder the Rodham Question
WITH the additions of Rodham and Tucker to their signatures, Hillary Rodham Clinton and Marilyn Tucker Quayle have moved the subject of surnames for married women from the society pages to the front page.
With later marriages and more women in professions like medicine and law, the use of maiden, or family, names has been more common, if not commonplace.
Or has it?
A poll showed that the public felt overwhelmingly that Mrs.
Clinton, who was only adding her own name, not dropping her husband's, should go solely by Clinton.


Officer Kills Wife and Himself, Police Say
An off-duty New York City police officer, who said on Monday that he had accidentally shot himself in the arm, killed his wife this morning and then fatally shot himself in the head in their home in Bay Shore, the police said.
Their deaths shocked residents of the South Shore village, where the officer, Sgt.
Paul Hughes, 34, liked to go fishing and skateboarding with neighborhood children.


Senior Officials See Dismissal as Likely For F.B.I. Director
Senior Clinton Administration officials have concluded that William S. Sessions, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, has lost support at the White House, at the Justice Department, at his own agency and in Congress and stands little chance of keeping his job.
A scathingly critical report issued in January on his use of official perquisites badly wounded the head of the bureau.
The finding of ethical lapses was made by an internal ethics unit and was adopted by William P. Barr, the Attorney General under President George Bush.


Turcotte Loses Arbitration
Darren Turcotte was not the center the Rangers traded.
That was the good news for Turcotte yesterday.
The only good news.
Turcotte, seemingly mentioned in every trade rumor from here to Vancouver, remained in New York when the Rangers made a deal with the Edmonton Oilers yesterday.
He will not, however, be getting the salary he wanted from the Rangers.
Early yesterday evening, the National Hockey League arbitrator, Richard McLaren, awarded Turcotte a $500,000 salary for this season and the same for next season in what was a clear victory for the Rangers.


Radio Slot for Berman
WNBC, Channel 4's LEN BERMAN is expected to be named the co-host of WFAN Radio's 10 A.M.-2 P.M. slot today, teaming with MIKE LUPICA, The Daily News columnist.
They replace DAVE SIMS and ED COLEMAN.
Berman's hiring came after WWOR, Channel 9, denied the sports broadcaster, RUSS SALZBERG, permission to take the job.
Neither Lupica nor Berman are known as radio personalities, but the station is looking to them to utilize their high profiles to engage the listeners and advertisers who did not flock to Sims and Coleman.
Whether they will have the chemistry and flair for controversy to follow DON IMUS and precede MIKE FRANCESA and CHRIS RUSSO remains to be seen when Berman-Lupica make their debut in early April.


Jets Make a Left Turn With Deal for Esiason
It was coincidence, wasn't it, that Boomer Esiason became a Jet today?
Barely 24 hours after Reggie White told the team it would have a better chance to land him by signing Esiason, the club did exactly that.
The Jets acquired Esiason, one of the National Football League's most productive and skilled quarterbacks of the 1980's, from the Cincinnati Bengals and immediately announced that he would compete with the inexperienced Browning Nagle for the top spot.
The Jets' former starting quarterback, Ken O'Brien, will be traded, said General Manager Dick Steinberg.


A Shop to Make Opera Lovers Sing
At the Metropolitan Opera Shop, which recently opened at 835 Madison Avenue, just below 70th Street, an opera buff will find not only favorite recordings of operas but also ways to decorate a home in a style that can only be called opera.
In a shop measuring 1,100 square feet, there are 15,000 different recordings of opera, in the form of CD's, tapes, videotapes and laser disks.
Seventy-five percent of the space is devoted to music, with single CD's selling for $15.98.


Clinton Plan's 2 Aces: Fed and the Bond Market
As the House of Representatives prepares to vote Thursday on President Clinton's deficit-cutting plan and stimulus package, Republicans are still trying to shoot down the stimulus program, contending that it would be a waste of money and may give the economy too much of a push.
But many economists say the biggest problem about the President's package is not that it will speed up growth dangerously, creating fears of inflation, but that it will slow growth too much.


Cruelty and Justice in Glen Ridge
In March 1989, lured by the promise of a date with one of them, a young woman accompanied a group of young men into the basement playroom of a house in Glen Ridge, N.J.
By one measure, her birth date, she was 17 years old.
By another, her mental capacity, she was -- and always will be -- 8.
This week a Glen Ridge jury decided which of those females suffered the insertion of a baseball bat, a broom handle and a stick into her vagina.
It was the child.


Dinkins Building Surplus In the Budget, Experts Say
The Dinkins administration appears to be building a surplus in the current budget year, independent fiscal experts say.
And while it is too soon to know just how large the surplus will be, it could be a political boon for the Mayor, if it enables him to avoid trimming city services before this year's mayoral election.
One fiscal expert said the figure could be as large as $300 million.


A Full Recovery Expected for Unitas
Doctors at the University of Maryland Medical Center in Baltimore said yesterday that they expect the former Baltimore Colts' quarterback JOHNNY UNITAS to recover fully from his emergency heart bypass surgery.
The Hall of Fame quarterback suffered a heart attack while undergoing physical therapy March 5, the day after a knee operation at James Lawrence Kernan Hospital, said Dr.
JOSEPH S. McLAUGHLIN, head of cardiac surgery at the University of Maryland Medical Center.
Unitas, 60, was transferred to the medical center where his condition was judged so severe that doctors performed an emergency triple-bypass.


Lilco's Emissions Sale Spurs Acid Rain Concerns
The Long Island Lighting Company wants to sell the right to emit pollution to a fuel supplier that would resell the pollution rights to any of a dozen utilities scattered around the Midwest, South and West, according to documents made public yesterday and people involved in the deal.
Disclosure of the name of the buyer, Amax Energy Inc., opens a new chapter in a mystery that has concerned environmentalists for weeks.
Many people upstate worry that if the ultimate buyer is a company upwind of New York, a result could be an increase in the acid rain that blows into sensitive areas, especially the Adirondacks.


Saving Lives and Money Too: Doctors Say It Can Be Done
Dr.
James C. Blankenship, a cardiologist with a health-maintenance organization in central Pennsylvania, performs costly, risky procedures in which tubes are pushed to the heart to help find whether coronary vessels are clogged.
In his catheterization laboratory, he studied X-rays revealing a partly blocked artery in a 55-year-old man.
"What are the chances this will shut off, causing a heart attack, versus the risks of surgery?" he asked.
"The studies differ."


New Group Considering Bid for Post
A group of investors with access to hundreds of millions of dollars could provide the first serious alternative to Abraham Hirschfeld or Steven Hoffenberg as the buyer of The New York Post.
The group, which includes an investment banker and a former New York City Deputy Mayor, Kenneth Lipper, and the real-estate multimillionaires Larry and Zachary Fisher and other major investors, was assembled by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Mr.
Lipper said yesterday.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.37
2.72
3.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.96
4.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.07
3.09
4.23
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.68
5.74
7.32
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.86
6.87
8.00
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.78
7.78
8.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.98
5.98
6.79
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Guilty, Guilty, Guilty
To The Home Section:
A confession: I did indeed clip Enid Nemy's article "To Clip, Perchance to File (Not Likely)," but that was because I planned to read it "later." Then I pass these clipped items on to my husband for sharing comments.
Many (too many?) times I've clipped and mailed stuff to my friends, children and other family members.


6 Are Killed as Train Hits Gasoline Truck in Florida


A Leg Injury Forces St. Jovite to Retirement
St.
Jovite, the champion thoroughbred in Europe last year, was retired today before making his American debut because of a tendon injury suffered in a recent workout.
A 4-year-old son of Pleasant Colony, St.
Jovite was setting out on a campaign to make history by becoming Horse of the Year in North America.
He apparently suffered the leg injury while running a light mile during a public workout after the seventh race at Gulfstream Park on March 7.
He had been expected to appear in a prep race sometime before the Pimlico Special on May 15.


INSIDE
Tenants to Begin Return To World Trade Center
Port Authority officials said tenants would begin returning to one of the towers at the World Trade Center today.
The announcement came after 18 days of intense efforts to install new security systems and clean up layers of soot caused by the Feb. 26 explosion.
Page B1.
Way Cleared for Burning
In a setback for Vice President Al Gore, the E.P.A. says it will not block the opening of a hazardous-waste incinerator in Ohio.
Page A20.
Selling the Right to Pollute
The Long Island Lighting Company wants to sell pollution rights to a fuel supplier that would resell the rights to other utilities.
Page B1.
Upturn in Inflation
A key measure of consumer prices rose again last month, providing fairly solid evidence that inflation is no longer on the wane.
Page D1.
U.N.
Effort Lags in Cambodia
With elections in Cambodia two months away, the United Nations effort to bring peace is falling far short of its goals, officials say.
Page A3.


Agent Injured by Cult Gunfire Blames Texas Newspaper in Lawsuit
A Federal agent injured in the Feb. 28 shootout with a religious cult filed a civil lawsuit against a local newspaper today, contending it had alerted the group about the impending raid.
The suit says the newspaper should pay the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms agent, John T. Risenhoover, for his injuries.
Mr.
Risenhoover, who was shot twice in the ankle and once in the hip, did not specify the amount of money he is seeking.


Economic Scene; Foreign aid may be the glue that will keep Russia in one piece.
WILL Russia negotiate the tortuous path to capitalism without a detour through hyperinflation and depression?
Can outsiders do much to keep it moving in the right direction?
Fatalism, tinged with skepticism, seems to be the fashion of the day.
While Bill Clinton and his counterparts in Europe and Japan are certainly rooting for Boris Yeltsin to pull off a miracle, most of the technocrats working in the trenches scoff at the idea that Western cash and know-how can make much difference.


Hong Kong Shrugs as China Fumes
China, reacting to recent proposals in Hong Kong for democratic reforms, threatened today to set up a shadow government in Hong Kong before it takes control of the British Crown Colony in 1997.
But business executives in Hong Kong largely shrugged off the threats, convinced that the fundamental outlook for the economy there was unchanged.
Many executives say they are optimistic that Britain and China will reach a compromise in the long run, partly because both sides have too much to lose if they do not.
China has invested billions of dollars there.
A Window on Prosperity
"They hope by rhetoric and bullying and shouting at the present time to bring about a result more acceptable to China," said James D. McGregor, a Hong Kong legislator and chairman of Asia Securities International Ltd.
"At the same time, I don't think they have any intention of seriously damaging the great capability of this place to deliver the golden eggs for China."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Jimmy Heath  Colden Center Queens College
One of the better things about Jimmy Heath's orchestrations is their garrulousness.
Mr.
Heath has composed a handful of jazz standards, from "C.T.A." to "Gingerbread Boy," with a firm mathematical structure, logical and straightforward.
When he orchestrates them, they blossom and become encrusted with ideas, subplots, asides, whispers and echoes, all elbowing one another for attention.
None of this creative effusion backfires; Mr.
Heath is one of the finest big-band writers working, if that's the word for somebody whose orchestrations are heard in public once a year or so.
Mr.
Heath spends half his time as a gunslinging saxophonist and half as a music professor at Queens College; Friday night's show at the Colden Center allowed an audience to hear music he has been perfecting over the last 40 years, most recently with the help of a student band.


10 Pay Fines for Excessive Campaign Donations
Ten political donors have agreed to pay penalties totaling $64,000 for exceeding the legal limit on their contributions, the Federal Election Commission announced today.
Among them were Donald J. Trump, the New York developer; Dwayne O. Andreas, the Illinois commodity tycoon, and Henry R. Kravis, the New York financier.
The 10 signed agreements admitting that they had violated the $25,000 annual limit on total Federal campaign contributions, mostly in the late 1980's.


For the Best of the Big East, the Big Show Gets Under Way -- Momentum Is Strong For Seton Hall
Criticized early in the season for failing to live up to its lofty billing, Seton Hall is now being viewed as a key player in the N.C.A.A. tournament.
The Pirates will take their first step toward New Orleans and a possible Final Four spot when they face 15th-seeded Tennessee State University here Thursday night in the opening round of the Southeast Regional.
With Seton Hall coming off a blistering performance in the Big East tournament, the Pirates are being considered along with Kentucky as one of the teams to beat.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  CAMBODIAN PACT UNRAVELS
With elections just two months away, the United Nations effort to bring peace to ravaged Cambodia is falling far short of its goals, United Nations officials, Cambodians and foreign diplomats say.
A3  INDIA JITTERY OVER TERRORISM
After a wave of bombings in Bombay and an explosion in what appears to be an underworld bomb factory in Calcutta, India is jittery over possible new acts of terrorism, particularly in New Delhi.
A6  U.S.
AIRS KOREA CONCERNS
American diplomats met with North Korean officials in Beijing to express their displeasure with North Korea's intention to withdraw from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, a State Department official said.
A6  SOMALI TALKS SUSPENDED
Somali reconciliation talks that began in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, this week were temporarily suspended after one warlord refused to participate to protest renewed fighting in Kismayu, the port city.
A7  IRAN NAMED AS TERRORIST THREAT
Iranian-backed militant groups have expanded their bases of support well beyond the Middle East and represent the greatest threat in a likely increase of terrorism around the world, senior U.S. officials say.
A8  GERMAN RACISM SAID TO DECLINE
Officials who deal with the problems of foreigners in Germany said at a conference in Weimar that racist sentiment had sharply declined in recent months.
A13  NATO PLANS FOR BOSNIA TROOPS
As the warring sides in Bosnia prepared for a new round of peace talks, NATO has stepped up its planning to send at least 50,000 peacekeeping troops when a settlement is reached, Western officials said.
A14  GEORGIAN APPEALS FOR ARMS
The Georgian leader, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, appealed for citizens to donate guns to fight separatists in Abkhazia, and said his country was in a virtual state of war with Russia over the region.
A14  Head of American University named to run U.S.I.S.
A12  Clinton delays taking an active role in Ulster.
A15  South African warns U.S. on playing favorites in his country.
A9  Kisangani Journal: Traffic halts on a river highway in Zaire.
A4  National A16-20, D22  VOTER BILL CLEARS SENATE
After two weeks of partisan sniping, the Senate passed the "motor voter" bill.
But provisions that would have permitted voter registration at welfare and unemployment offices were removed under Republican pressure.
A1  CLINTON TO BACK OREGON PLAN
The Clinton Administration is expected to approve Oregon's novel proposal to ration health care for poor people in the state, Federal officials said.
The proposal would expand eligibility for Medicaid there while eliminating coverage of some treatments.
A1  THE QUALITY OF HEALTH CARE
As Americans consider a more frugal medical future, possibly dominated by competing "managed care" plans that limit consumer choice, urgent questions are rising about the quality of care and how to protect it.
A1  F.B.I.
CHIEF IN PERIL
Administration officials say the F.B.I.
Director has lost support at the White House, the Justice Department, his own agency and Congress and stands little chance of keeping his job.
A1  SUIT IN CULT SHOOTOUT
A Federal agent injured in the shootout with the Branch Davidians filed a civil lawsuit against a local newspaper, claiming that it had alerted members of the group to the impending raid.
A16  DEATH IN MISSISSIPPI JAILS
Civil rights groups and black officials started an unusual hearing into a series of deaths in Mississippi prisons.
Some contended that the deaths, officially classified as suicides, were jail lynchings.
A16  RUNNER'S SAD STORY
Friends of a high-school track star in Philadelphia who was shot to death say they were not surprised to learn who was the main suspect in the case: her mother.
A16  TOO MUCH MONEY
Donald Trump and the New York financier Henry Kravis were among 10 donors who have agreed to pay penalities because they violated the $25,000 annual limit on total Federal campaign contributions.
A17  WAY CLEARED FOR INCINERATOR
In a setback for Al Gore, the Clinton Administration said it would not oppose the opening of a hazardous waste incinerator in Ohio.
A20  IT'S HUGE, FOR A BACTERIUM
Flouting the scientific wisdom that all bacteria are microscopic, researchers have discovered a strain so large that it can be seen with the naked eye.
D22  Studying how women are treated for heart disease.
A18  Metro Digest B1  SOGGY SALUTE TO ST.
PATRICK
Declaring that political correctness is not worth "one comma in the Apostles' Creed," John Cardinal O'Connor triumphantly reviewed a St.
Patrick's Day Parade kept tightly secure from homosexual intruders on a raucous, rain-drenched day in which more than 200 gay and lesbian protesters were arrested in sit-ins on Fifth Avenue.
A1  Obituaries B9-10  HELEN HAYES DEAD AT 92
The actress whose portrayals of Queen Victoria and other regal women helped make her one of the best-loved stars of the American stage died in Nyack, N.Y.
A1  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-14  People who live a glass house (and like it).
C1  In the classroom with Mary McDonnell.
C1  Woman ponder the Rodham question.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C17-24  Sports B11-17  Basketball: Two key questions for St.
John's in N.C.A.A. tournament.
B11  Seton Hall must be reckoned with in Southeast Regional.
B11  Football: Jets obtain Esiason from Bengals.
B11  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  Spooked over intelligence cuts.
Cruelty and justice in Glen Ridge.
Gideon's promise, still unkept.
Letters  William Safire: Islam under siege.
Leslie H. Gelb: Asian arms races.
Christopher Layne: Pox Americana, not Pax Americana.
Jack Bass: Impeached, then elected.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Old-Fashioned Berries
Q.
I would like to grow some old-fashioned berries: gooseberries and currants.
What are their needs, and where can I buy them? -- Krystyna Plochocki
, Scotch Plains, N.J.


Review/Fashion; Eccentrically Or Lushly, All of It Fits
Vivienne Westwood was possessed of a divine lunacy, while the Christian Dior collection expressed an irresistible urge to decorate everything in sight, including sportswear.
The Westwood collection was lovable in a slightly batty way; Dior's was awesome.
The two represent the extremes to which fashion has gone in the fall and winter shows here.
There is something for everyone, including clothes nobody ever thought they wanted.
Ms.
Westwood was followed by John Richmond, swelling the number of British designers who show their clothes here instead of in London.
Valentino, the Italian designer, who also showed here, comes from the same couture tradition as Dior, but his clothes are less elaborate.


For Medical Students, There Is No Matching a Perfect Match


Computer Stocks Lead Steep Nasdaq Drop
A break in computer technology stocks yesterday shook the Nasdaq market, which fell 1.2 percent, a more severe setback than the broader market's.
An adverse trade decision and some hints of weak earnings persuaded many investors to cash in their huge gains on computer stocks, analysts said.


Rahal to Test Engine
BOBBY RAHAL, whose team has long been rumored as the one that will use Honda's Indy-car engine if and when the company enters the sport in 1994, will begin testing that engine next month.
But in announcing the deal yesterday, TOM ELLIOTT, an American Honda Motor Company official, said the company still hasn't made up its mind about entering races with the motor next season.
IndyCar, the sanctioning group for most of the series, recently enacted a rule that would require companies like Honda to supply a minimum number of teams with motors in the first and second years that they compete in the series.


As Strife Recedes, Germans Breathe Easier
Officials who deal with the problems of foreigners in Germany said at a conference this week that racist sentiment here had sharply declined in recent months.
Their conclusion was supported by new statistics showing that attacks on foreigners are now far less frequent than they were last year.


When Publishers Unite, Authors Must Worry
To the Editor:
"In a highly unusual marriage of convenience and commerce, Random House and Simon &amp; Schuster will jointly publish the joint campaign memoirs of James Carville, President Clinton's chief strategist, and Mary Matalin, a top political aide to President George Bush" (Business Day, Feb. 23).
This joint purchase is a great marketing gimmick.
But the publishing deal is bad news for writers and ultimately for the reading public.
This deal was reportedly conceived by bidders in the middle of an auction in which they were bidding against each other and other parties.
Why should this practice not be considered a restraint of trade?
Doesn't this kind of deal avoid competition between two competitors and permit them to cut, if not set, a price?


As Japan Chip Talks Near, U.S. Turns Up the Pressure
The semiconductor trade agreement between the United States and Japan has reached a critical juncture, and once again Japan is being criticized for a failure to live up to the goal of opening 20 percent of its market to foreign-made computer chips.
But for Japan, the real concern might not be that the agreement has failed to increase foreign companies' share of the market, but that it has worked so well.


Corrections
An article yesterday about cholesterol screening rendered a statement by Dr.
Claude Lenfant, director of the Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, incorrectly.
He said: "Are we going to tell people, 'Don't worry about your cholesterol because you may not be able to do something about it?' I just don't accept that as a philosophy. Every individual is entitled to be informed about his or her condition."


Hartford Regulators Delay Cable Plans
State utility regulators hit the pause button today on plans by a cable television company to eliminate Connecticut stations from the cable menu for Fairfield County residents.
Under a ruling by the Department of Public Utility Control, the company, Cablevision, must provide the stations until at least May 2.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Chris Cochrane  Knitting Factory
One of the worst aspects of the musical experimentation that took place on the Lower East Side in the early 1980's was a reluctance on the part of composers to embrace pleasure.
American popular music, which was usually lurking in the background of the performances, has always been there to dispense something rich, either rhythmically or harmonically.
It hasn't had to do so stupidly, whether represented by James Brown or Duke Ellington.


Hillier Krieghbaum, N.Y.U. Professor, 90
Hillier Krieghbaum, a journalism professor at New York University for 25 years, died on Sunday in Mishawaka, Ind., where he was living in retirement.
He was 90 and was a former resident of Mamaroneck, N.Y.
The Association for Education in Journalism and Mass Communication in Columbia, S.C., said his death followed a fall a week earlier.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Tuesday referred incorrectly to an advertising account that the 20th Century Fox Film Corporation has placed in review.
The media buying account under review includes advertising on local television and radio nationwide, not just in New York.


Series of Deaths in Mississippi Jails Prompt Call for Federal Investigation
The interim chairman of the United States Commission on Civil Rights today called for a Federal inquiry into a series of deaths in Mississippi prisons and jails that are the focus of an unusual two-day hearing organized by civil rights groups and black officials.
In accounts that ranged from poignant to dark and eerie, the families of eight jail and prison inmates presented grim statements of how the prisoners allegedly died behind bars in Mississippi in recent years and they accused local officials of failing to adequately investigate abuses by law officers.
The hearing has no legal status but organizers hope it will attract local and national attention on the cases.  46 Hangings Since 1987
For the most part, the hearings did little to document a pattern of racially motivated jail lynchings alleged by the civil rights groups that convened the hearings into approximately 46 jail hangings since 1987.


Arnie And Jack, Jack And Arnie
For more than 30 years, Arnold Palmer and Jack Nicklaus have been keeping score.
On the course -- and later as course designers, tournament hosts, equipment manufacturers, product spokesmen and television producers -- their sense of overall success has been inextricably intertwined with their private competition.


Parent &amp; Child
IT is the theme of numerous Hollywood movies: a child led astray, at least temporarily, by spending time with a "bad influence." Although many parents feel such fears deeply, the reality of these relationships is usually quite different, say psychologists who study children's friendships.
Most of those potentially harmful peer relationships are short-lived and may actually serve a useful purpose for both children.
"Parents often think peer influence is more powerful than the research shows it really is," said Dr.
Thomas J. Berndt, a professor of psychological sciences at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Ind.
"They overlook the fact that kids pick friends with whom they share interests and attitudes."


Bronx Couple Finds Son Dead in Hallway
A Bronx couple returned home yesterday and found their 14-year-old son lying dead in the hallway, the police said.
The youth, Andrew Rivas, had suffered blunt trauma to the head, said Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a police spokesman.


Review/Music; A '58 Opera That Tested Mildly Dissonant Tonality
The search goes on for an American operatic tradition.
True to its habit of reviving one American opera each year, the Boston Lyric Opera has staged Carlisle Floyd's "Wuthering Heights," which appeared to great acclaim in 1958 and then more or less dropped from sight.
The company devoted considerable talent and energy to the production, which had its premiere on March 10 at the Emerson Majestic Theater here, but the opera's obscurity unfortunately proved to be deserved.
In the 1940's and 50's, as America basked in its postwar dominance, many composers were determined to construct a native school of grand opera.
Mr.
Floyd had scored a huge success with his tuneful "Susannah," and for his first serious opera he turned to a certified Great Classic.
In flirting with "advanced" musical language, he ventured no further than the angular lines common in film scores of the period and also the dissonant tonality of Puccini's "Turandot." The aim was to be serious yet entirely accessible.


Review/Dance; A Harsh Yet Poetic Elegy on Indian Life
Social protest ballets have not been in fashion lately.
But that, too, may change with Dance Theater of Harlem's spectacular production of "A Song for Dead Warriors," Michael Smuin's raw, poetic and harsh meditation on the plight of the American Indian in urban life.
The work, a company premiere, was greeted with a roaring ovation at the opening of the Dance Theater of Harlem's two-week season on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater.
Potentially one of the season's hot tickets, it is a ballet that pushes all the right buttons, and the dancers plunge into its raw emotions and shrewd theatrical excess as if there were no tomorrow.


Calendar: Museum Choices
Building a Collection
Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6862.


Bonds Gain Despite Inflation Data
The prices of Treasury bonds and notes moved higher yesterday as traders and analysts dismissed bad news in the consumer inflation report for February as an aberration.
The chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, helped with his interpretation of the three-tenths of 1 percent rise in the Consumer Price Index.
In response to a question at a Congressional hearing, Mr.
Greenspan said, "While we must clearly remain vigilant, my inclination is to view the latest data as aberrations."


Cambodia Election Snared as Peace Pact Unravels
With elections two months away, the United Nations effort to bring peace to this ravaged country is falling far short of its goals, United Nations officials, Cambodians and foreign diplomats say.
The goals, defined by the Paris Agreement of October 1991, are to achieve a "comprehensive political settlement of the Cambodia conflict," "restore and maintain peace" and "promote national reconciliation."


Money Market Funds Show Mixed Changes in Yields
Changes in the yields offered by tax-exempt and taxable money market funds were mixed in the latest week, according to the most recent survey by IBC's Money Fund Report.
Walter S. Frank, IBC's chief economist, expects that rates will remain stable for some time to come.


Theater in Review
The Best of Sex  and Violence  Village Theater Company 133 West 22d Street Chelsea By Thomas Hinton; directed by Henry Fonte; lighting by Douglas O'Flaherty; costumes by Marj Feenan; set by Mr.
Fonte; sound by Richard L. Sirois; scenic painter, Terry Starr; stage managers, Susan M. Kelleher and Lisa Jean Lewis; technical director, Zeke Zaccaro.
Presented by the Village Theater Company, 133 West 22d Street, Chelsea.
Through March 20 WITH: Christopher Bailey, Julia McLaughlin,  Michael Curran, Bill Christ, Barbara Berque and Michelle Berke.
Jarret (Christopher Bailey), the central character in Thomas Hinton's comedy "The Best of Sex and Violence," is a sour milquetoast of uncertain sexual orientation who teaches medieval history at a Connecticut college.
In the course of a single evening, he is visited by his ex-wife, Karen (Barbara Berque), by his quarreling neighbors, Marion (Julia McLaughlin) and Randell (Bill Christ), and by the neighbors' 20-year-old son, Robert (Michael Curran), who wants to live with Jarret as his lover.
The play aspires to be a latter-day drawing room comedy descended from Oscar Wilde through Noel Coward to Harvey Fierstein.
The dialogue is nonstop pronouncements trying desperately to be epigrams but ending up merely hysterical.
Among these one-dimensional mouthpieces for varying sexual attitudes, the most outspoken is Randell, the chauvinistic coach for the college debating team, who declares, "I want to be buried in a sea of women I made pregnant."


SENATORS APPROVE A BILL THAT EASES VOTE REGISTRATION
In an effort to encourage voter registration, the Senate today passed legislation that would allow a person to register to vote when applying for a driver's license.
The quick and relatively lopsided approval of the bill, by a vote of 62 to 37, belied the two angry weeks of partisan sniping that preceded it.
Passage came only after the Senate's 57 Democrats conceded that they lacked the 60 votes needed to halt a Republican filibuster against the bill, and after they gave in to demands for small but politically important changes that must now be negotiated with the House before the bill can become law.


Soggy Saga Of Freezes And Thaws
With the Blizzard of '93 inching toward meltdown, a rain-soaked slop rose perilously close to galosh-top level at street corners throughout the metropolitan region yesterday.
And making conditions even more unpleasant for pedestrians, the slush was turning back to ice last night as temperatures dipped below the freezing point.
Snow began falling in New York City last night about 7 P.M., but forecasters were not expecting significant accumulations.
"It's just adding a little more snow cover to the lumps of snow we already have," said Thomas Grant, lead forecaster for the National Weather Service.


Chip Alert
Now that American chip makers have beaten back their Japanese rivals, here come the Koreans.
A Government decision to impose only light tariffs on Korean chip imports sent computer chip stocks reeling.
Texas Instruments and Micron Technology have paced the market, but each dropped a few points yesterday.


Sharp Reaction
To The Home Section:
Re Enid Nemy's "To Clip, Perchance to File (Not Likely)":


Sense of Family Helped Jury in Sex-Assault Case
Most days Donald Murray brightened the jury room with a stream of jokes.
Laurence Handel often brought homemade cookies and other goodies.
During recesses and breaks in testimony in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial, the jury played cards, mostly whist, and regularly squeezed in games of bingo or Uno.
On Nov. 14, three jurors had birthdays and they all celebrated with cakes, fresh fruits and cold cuts around the long rectangular table in the sparse, biege jury room.
This triple birthday celebration, one month into the trial, was a large first step in the transformation of jury into family, some of the Glen Ridge jurors recalled today.
Daily, as a trial predicted to last six weeks stretched into five months, they said they worked to include everyone in common activities and to cultivate an atmosphere of unity and belonging.
In the end, when the anger and shouting of deliberations came, the sense of family served them well.


Initial Offering By Ethan Allen
Ethan Allen Interiors Inc., a manufacturer and retailer of home furnishings, made an initial public offering of stock on Tuesday
Underwriters led by Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company priced the 7.35 million common shares at $18 a share.
The shares closed yesterday at $20.25 a share, up 25 cents for the day.
The stock is trading on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol ETH.


No Headline
"Neither respectability nor political correctness is worth one comma in the Apostle's Creed." -- JOHN CARDINAL O'CONNOR.  [ B8:5. ]


Gideon's Promise, Still Unkept
For all its importance, the rule the Supreme Court announced 30 years ago today was simple: "In our adversary system of justice, any person haled into court who is too poor to hire a lawyer cannot be assured a fair trial unless counsel is provided for him." The principle was widely accepted, even praised in most of the states obliged to pay lawyers for defendants too poor to hire their own.
Yet after three decades America is far from delivering on the promise of the case called Gideon v.
Wainwright.
In courts across the land, judges must beg the private bar to step up and take on criminal cases for which many lawyers are poorly equipped and grossly undercompensated.
Public-defender systems are soft targets for budget cutters, state and Federal.
Congress, which must pay for counsel appointed in the Federal courts, is perennially guilty of late and inadequate funding.


People
*
Dana Anderson was named to the new position of a senior partner in the account management department at Tatham Euro RSCG, Chicago.
She was previously a senior vice president and account director at J. Walter Thompson Chicago.


Theater in Review
The Toothbrush  Puerto Rican Traveling Theater 304 West 47th Street Manhattan By Jorge Diaz; English translation and direction by Alba Oms; set design, Miguel Lopez-Castillo; lighting, Bill Simmons; sound, Sergio Garcia-Marruz; stage manager, Fernando Quinn.
Presented by the Puerto Rican Traveling Theater.
WITH: Maria Cellario and Chris de Oni.
The only threat to the lifelong happiness of two lovers in "The Toothbrush," by the Argentine playwright Jorge Diaz, is the possibility that they might run out of ingenious ways to puzzle, stimulate and ignite one another.
But after an hour and a half in the company of this bubbly married couple, one has to doubt that that will ever happen; sheer enjoyment will make them endlessly inventive and eternally competitive.


Fourth Suspect in Bombing
A fourth suspect described as a possible ringleader of the World Trade Center bombing may have gone to Pakistan, Federal law-enforcement officials said.
Article, page B4.


Mike Marshall Retires
Outfielder/first baseman MIKE MARSHALL announced his retirement and veteran right-hander BRIAN FISHER was released by the Seattle Mariners yesterday.
The Mariners also reassigned veteran outfielder CARMELO MARTINEZ and catcher MIKE FITZGERALD to their minor league camp.
Martinez is the cousin of Mariners third baseman EDGAR MARTINEZ, the 1992 American League batting champion.
In eight exhibition games, Marshall, 33, hit only .188 with no home runs and two runs batted in. (AP)


Review/Television; Those Good Old Takeover Days
Going back at least as far "The Hucksters" in 1947 and coming up to "Wall Street" in 1987, American movies, those glossiest artifacts of capitalism, have taken periodic swipes at big business.
Not too many, mind you, and hardly any at all in those made-for-television movies on commercial networks beholden to advertisers.
So it's hardly surprising that "Barbarians at the Gate," a factual account of the takeover madness of the 1980's, has been made for sponsor-free pay cable.
The flawed but fascinating production, starring James Garner, has its premiere on HBO on Saturday at 8 P.M.
Based on the exhaustive, and sometimes exhausting, best seller by Bryan Burrough and John Helyar, "Barbarians at the Gate" chronicles the multi-billion-dollar battle in 1988 for RJR Nabisco, which at the time was working feverishly on developing a "smokeless cigarette." The machinations were incredibly complex, requiring bankers galore and backfield lawyers for the lawyers on the front lines.
Condensing the story into a movie running less than two hours, Larry Gelbart, the creator of television's "M*A*S*H," has eliminated the players in the middle layers to focus almost entirely on the top-level principals, most notably F. Ross Johnson, chairman of RJR Nabisco, and Henry Kravis, the master of leveraged buyouts at the Wall Street concern Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Company.


U.S. Partners Say President Shows Two Faces on Trade
America's trade partners, bracing for the Clinton Administration's first set of trade sanctions, are angry and confused.
Which Bill Clinton are they dealing with, they ask: the President whose policy addresses sketch a broad commitment to free trade?
Or the confrontational politician whose Administration has repeatedly hit hard?
"Sooner or later, the U.S. will have to clarify its policy," said Sir Leon Brittan, the European Community's commissioner for External Affairs.
"You cannot use the language of free trade with one voice and engage in damaging pin-pricks with another."


HORSE RACING: Notebook; Storm Tower to Start in Middle of Florida Derby
In a year with no dominant horse traveling the road to the Kentucky Derby, a large field of 13 colts was entered today in the 42d Florida Derby, which will be run at a mile and an eighth Saturday at Gulfstream Park as the East's major test for the racing classics.
None of the high choices gained or lost any edge when the draw was held for the $500,000 purse.
The 3-1 favorite, the undefeated Storm Tower, drew the No. 8 post in the center of the track.
The second choice at 4-1, Ogden Mills Phipps's Living Vicariously, drew the No. 2 spot to the right of the horse on the rail, the long shot Kissin Kris.


Diner's Journal
A Sign of the Times
Le Cirque, that fortress of power and privilege, is advertising a discount lunch for the first time in its 18-year history.
Called the "business lunch," the $29 three-course meal includes dishes like grilled salmon with capers and potatoes, warm chicken salad with asparagus, roast chicken with vegetables, stuffed saddle of rabbit with gnocchi in a sage sauce, and navarin of lamb.


Hello, This Is Harazin: Let's Make a Deal, Maybe
For all their apparent stability, the Mets have said for weeks that they would not rule out making a significant trade before the season.
Patience was going to be their operating strategy.
But the itch to explore options has evidently become great enough that General Manager Al Harazin has begun working the telephone.
Harazin's motives chiefly involve concern about the adequacy of the left-handed alternatives in the bullpen, the versatility of their bench players and the health of second baseman Jeff Kent.





U.N. Moving to Toughen Yugoslav Flight Ban
In a sudden outburst of frustration with the Serbian onslaught against the Muslims of eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Security Council began preparing today to authorize immediate military enforcement of its ban on military flights over the former Yugoslav republic.
The decision to push through a new resolution ordering NATO warplanes to patrol Bosnian airspace and shoot down violators was made by the United States, Britain and France today after France abruptly changed sides and joined the Clinton Administration in advocating immediate enforcement of the ban.


A World of Serenity Offers a Place to Heal; Haven Given to Ex-Convict Mothers
For more than a decade now, New York City's power to adapt to hard times has been quietly advanced by a gritty, unusual ghetto community -- half underworld and half otherworld -- made up of adventurous nuns, female ex-convicts and the women's prison-born babies.
More than 5,000 ex-convicts and infants, in parallel with the modern increase of women in penitentiaries, have been given readjustment shelter of a year or more in old Roman Catholic convents and rectories around the city that the religious sisters have saved from urban erosion and converted to a new church mission.
The living arrangements represent a revolution for nuns as much as for ex-con mothers.


Sharp Criticism For Head Start, Even by Friends
At the moment of its crowning political success, Head Start, the lavishly praised preschool program, is suddenly being subjected to quibbles, criticisms and outright assaults.
President Clinton has extolled the program as an example of Government at its best and is asking Congress to increase financing by more than $9 billion over the next five years, which could double the program's size by then.


South Korea, Wary of the North, Debates Building a Nuclear Bomb
More than a decade ago the United States stopped South Korea from building its ultimate deterrent against the threatening Communist Government of the North -- an atomic bomb of its own.
A year ago, the South even went further, pledging that to "denuclearize" the Korean Peninsula it would renounce the production of plutonium, a potential bomb fuel.
But over the past few days, as the country has reacted first in fear and then in frustration to North Korea's declaration that it is withdrawing from the treaty to halt the spread of nuclear weapons, a vocal, hard-line minority of South Korea's legislators are starting to argue that their country has made a huge mistake.


Review of Towers Financial Leaves Trustee Pessimistic
A court-ordered financial review of the Towers Financial Corporation, whose chairman is among the prospective suitors for The New York Post, paints a bleak picture of the company's prospects and raises serious doubts that investors can recover the hundreds of millions of dollars they are owed.
"Towers as presently constituted is not equipped to weather the storm which now engulfs it," said Jess Fardella, a former Federal prosecutor appointed as trustee for Towers's financial operations in the wake of a civil fraud suit filed last month against Towers and its chairman, Steven Hoffenberg, by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
That suit accused Towers of fraudulently raising $415 million from nearly 3,000 investors across the country.


Ah, Spring: It Rhymed, Once, With Sing; The Aim Is No Aim
Spring is the season that can't quite make up its mind.
The struggle to throw off the dead hand of winter seems to last much longer than the script calls for, and the month of May flirts indecently with hot and clammy summer.
No wonder the season calls forth complex responses.
It's a highly conflicted three months.
Here 10 New York Times writers give suggestions on where to spend the first weekend of spring 1993, free of charge, in the New York metropolitan region.


TACTIC UNCHANGED IN BEATING TRIAL
The defense in the Federal trial of four officers charged in the beating of Rodney G. King seemed to get off to a slow start this week while prosecutors mounted an aggressive counterattack and continued to set the tone in the proceeding.
Prosecutors presented a much broader case than the one in a state trial last year, which ended in acquittal.
The defense so far showed little that was new.


Sheik Emerges on TV to Deny Link to Bombing
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, ending more than two weeks of silence about reports linking him to the bombing of the World Trade Center, began a media offensive yesterday denying any involvement in the attack and condemning the media for reporting that he is a suspect in the case.
In a somewhat bizarre twist, the sheik emerged on live television before millions of Americans, ending the mystery of his whereabouts since the bombing and speaking out on the arrest of several suspects who have been portrayed as his followers.


Glen Ridge Verdict May Be Milestone for Retarded
In 1985, the Supreme Court summed up the legal system's record of dealing with the mentally retarded as a "grotesque history of mistreatment." In a ruling that denied retarded people special protections against discrimination but criticized a Texas town for prejudicial application of its zoning laws, Associate Justice Byron R. White warned that "vague fear" and "irrational prejudice" should not hold sway in the nation's courtrooms.
In the recent case of sexual assault on a retarded 17-year-old in a basement in Glen Ridge, N.J., those fears and prejudices were on display once again.
In particular, defense lawyers repeatedly depicted the young woman as a sexual predator.
But the prosecution, determined to spin court history on its head, challenged the stereotypes and won convictions of all four defendants.


We Can Have Faster Justice and Due Process; Not a Major Problem
To the Editor:
I am a Civil Court judge assigned to the New York City Criminal Court.
Having presided over some 50 misdemeanor trials in the Bronx and Manhattan over the last three years, I take issue with Eliot Spitzer's contention (Op-Ed, March 1) that jury selection significantly contributes to trial delays and to case backlogs.
Like most judges, I do the initial questioning of prospective jurors and then permit the lawyers 10 or 15 minutes to do their own questioning.
The Court of Appeals has approved such judicial control of jury selection, and it is codified in court rules.
When this practice is followed, rarely does jury selection take two hours, much less two days, as Mr.
Spitzer states.


F.C.C. Help Is Requested By Teleport
When the Federal Communications Commission voted last fall to encourage competition in local telephone service by letting smaller communications companies connect directly to the nation's local phone network, the idea was to cut the smaller carriers' costs.
But one small carrier yesterday accused the local phone companies of thwarting competition by planning to charge exorbitant connection rates.


On Stage, and Off
Change at Playwrights Horizons
In the wake of the changes in the New York Shakespeare Festival hierarchy this week, another of the city's prominent nonprofit theaters, Playwrights Horizons, announced that its longtime executive director, Paul S. Daniels, would be leaving the organization when his contract expires in June.
A statement released by the theater said Mr.
Daniels, who has been the managerial and administrative head of Playwrights Horizons since 1981, was leaving "to pursue other opportunities."
Neither Mr.
Daniels nor the chairman of the board of trustees, Judith O. Rubin, returned phone messages this week.
But the artistic director of Playwrights, Don Scardino, said in a careful phone interview that the move signaled a shakeup in the organization's two-pronged management structure.
It was a year ago that Mr.
Scardino, an actor and director in theater and film, replaced Andre Bishop, who had moved on to become artistic director at Lincoln Center Theater.
Together, Mr.
Bishop and Mr.
Daniels had established a leadership team that apparently foundered after Mr.
Bishop's departure. (Mr. Bishop, who remains a member of the Playwrights board, declined to comment on the matter, pleading awkwardness.)
Mr.
Scardino said the search for Mr.
Daniels's replacement had begun, but he added that two people might be hired: an executive director with fund-raising responsibility and a company manager whose bailiwick would be the administrative end of the theater's stage productions.
"One of the things in question is whether the two-headed team is the best structure for us or not," Mr.
Scardino said.
"I'm very much a group person. I'm a director who comes out of the rehearsal hall. I like a group dynamic and I'm not insecure about having someone disagree with me. One of the reasons I want to investigate the triumvirate is that you always have a tiebreaker."
It was already a somewhat tumultuous year at Playwrights Horizons, a 22-year-old group with two small theaters on West 42d Street that is dedicated to the development of new American plays and musicals.
Mr.
Scardino brought in a new associate artistic director, Nicholas Martin; as head of the board, Ms.
Rubin is a recent replacement for Anne G. Wilder, who died in September.
Mr.
Scardino's first year has been without any successes equal to the many renowned projects that have been born there in the past, including "Driving Miss Daisy," and "Sunday in the Park With George." It is, of course, early in his tenure, and he said the dismissal of JoAnne Akalaitis by the New York Shakespeare Festival board after only 20 months was baffling and troubling.
"She's not Joe Papp, and I'm not Andre Bishop," he said.
"How many years did it take for them to establish their identities?"
In considering Mr.
Daniels's departure, his own board, he said, had "decided to let it happen and go with the art." He said he did not find the Shakespeare Festival situation comparable to that at Playwrights Horizons because "one was about artistic change, and the other is about managerial change."
Asked if he and Mr.
Daniels had clashed, Mr.
Scardino said: "There's a different sensibility guiding the company," and compared himself to a person who inherits someone else's wardrobe.
"This color was good for him," he said.
"This length was good for him. I'll wear it for a while, but eventually I've got to take it in. I like the suit, but I want it in blue." Speak No Evil
Reviewers (and a sampling of the few other people who saw it) tended to say they couldn't tell if the show was a farce that wasn't funny or a serious play with too many goofy jokes.
Indeed, one source who was aware of the play's problems in Boston said that Rocco Landesman, a co-producer and president of Jujamcyn Theaters, had tried to persuade his colleagues, Mr.
Ostrow and Scott Rudin, to close the show before it got here.
Mr.
Rudin and Mr.
Ostrow said at the time, however, that they were undaunted, buoyed by the knowledge that Mr.
Hwang's previous play, "M. Butterfly," which became a Tony-winning hit, was also clobbered out of town.
And Mr.
Hwang (who, through the show's publicity agent, also declined to be interviewed) spent his days rewriting furiously, with the play changing nightly.
One viewer who saw it in both cities said: "In Boston, the first act was funny, and the second act was too serious." In New York, he added, they tried to prepare the audience for what was going to happen in the second act, and as a result the first act wasn't funny anymore.
From the point of view of a reporter who didn't see the play at all, the person who comes out of this best is the star, Mark Linn Baker.
Mr.
Baker, now an out-of-work actor possessed, apparently, of comic humility, donned a waiter's apron to introduce himself during one lunch hour at the West Bank Cafe on 42d Street this week. (It turns out he's part owner of the place.)
"My understanding is they just ran out of money," Mr.
Baker said.
"It was such an ambitious play. We knew before we started in Boston we had a lot of work to do."
He said there had been a celebratory wake, of sorts, for the show on Tuesday night at Wally and Joseph's, the steakhouse on West 49th Street.
But he hadn't had a steak.
"I was drinking kamikazes," he said. An 'Arf' for Off Broadway?
The corpse is twitching, though as Charles Strouse would rather put it, "the body is breathing." Mr.
Strouse, who wrote the music for the apparently ill-fated and moribund sequel "Annie Warbucks," confirmed this week that many producers had come forward with an interest in resuscitating the show, the scheduled Broadway production of which was, pardon the expression, orphaned when it was shut down three weeks ago.
"There are people who know there is money to be made on this," Mr.
Strouse said.
"Even the stingiest investor knows there was profit of $300 million on 'Annie.' "
Interestingly enough, among the offers is one to present the show Off Broadway.
Though he refuses to acknowledge it publicly, Ben Sprecher, who operates the Variety Arts theater on Third Avenue and 14th Street, has been approaching investors with a proposal to open the show there.
The Variety Arts, a 499-seat venue, is Off Broadway's most capacious theater.
"I've been approached to produce 'Annie Warbucks' Off-Broadway," said Kenneth D. Greenblatt ("Catskills on Broadway"), adding it was Mr.
Sprecher who did the approaching.
"It's under consideration. I like the project. Creatively I think it's wonderful. I'm just concerned about doing it Off Broadway for financial reasons."
Mr.
Strouse said he'd definitely be interested.
"A way to get into the New York marketplace is something I want very much," he said.
Mr.
Sprecher, when asked about his plans, said, "I don't know what you're talking about."


Art in Review
Lewis Baltz
Janet Borden Gallery  560 Broadway, at Prince Street  SoHo  Through March 27
Lewis Baltz's nighttime color photographs of Milan and Verona, Italy, are not likely to make it into tourist brochures.
His pictures are bright with the lights of the darkened cities, but they have little of the sense of romance that characterized the work of earlier photographers of the city at night, from Alfred Stieglitz to Brassaito Louis Faurer.


Art in Review
Joan T. Washburn Gallery  20 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through March 27
Alice Trumbull Mason (1904-1971) was a founding member of the American Abstract Artists, a group formed in 1936 to establish abstract art -- which at that time was scorned in this country -- as a viable esthetic mode.
Within a decade or so, the group's efforts had succeeded almost too well.
Abstract Expressionism, with its dramatic scale and emotive force, cast an obscuring shadow over the kind of small, meticulous, restrained work Mason was doing, and her professional life from then on became a solitary adventure.


Landeta Stays, but Ingram Gets Away
The Giants won one and lost one yesterday.
They kept Sean Landeta by signing him for four years for $3 million to $3.5 million, making him the highest-paid punter in pro football history.
They lost Mark Ingram when the six-year wide receiver signed with the Miami Dolphins for $4 million over three years.
Landeta had been expected to stay with the Giants.
Ingram had been expected to leave because he wanted to be part of a passing offense, and the Dolphins offered that plus Dan Marino, perhaps the best quarterback in the league.


We Can Have Faster Justice and Due Process; Torture by Jury Duty
To the Editor:
Hooray for "Faster Justice in New York" (Op-Ed, March 1) by Eliot Spitzer.
As one who has suffered through hours of waiting that are the lot of prospective jurors in New York, I wholeheartedly endorse Mr.
Spitzer's recommendation for reform in the state's administration of criminal justice.
VICTORIA NEWHOUSE New York, March 3, 1993


Review/Film Festival; In a Weird City, Games Turn Serious
A miniature city is the haunting centerpiece of "The Music of Chance," Philip Haas's cool, methodical film version of Paul Auster's equally meticulous 1990 novel.
Called "City of the World," it is the bizarre plaything of Willie Stone (Joel Grey), a former optometrist who made his fortune by winning the lottery.
Together with his friend Bill Flower (Charles Durning), Stone lives in an isolated mansion and contemplates the meaning of fate while playing childlike games.
The City of the World is his masterwork.
James Nashe (Mandy Patinkin) and Jack Pozzi (James Spader) are his victims.
With the tenor of a Beckett play as filtered through the mathematical mind of Peter Greenaway, Mr.
Haas's cryptic, elegantly made "Music of Chance" traces the trajectory of Nashe and Pozzi.
Starting out as drifters, they are brought together accidentally and wind up as slaves to Flower and Stone's peculiar vision.
Pozzi is a desperate gambler, and Nashe is in the last stages of an existential experiment (of the sort that has made Mr. Auster's work much more widely appreciated in Europe than it is here, where this New Jersey-born novelist remains something of a cult figure).
Trapped together on the Flower and Stone estate, they find release in the bleak comforts of a shared destiny.


Review/Theater; Another Excursion To a Hip Land of Oz
No matter what else you might say about "The Wiz," the all-black 1974 musical based on L. Frank Baum's classic, "The Wonderful Wizard of Oz," it is an ebullient family crowd-pleaser.
And a new production at the Beacon Theater, directed by George Faison and starring Stephanie Mills and Andre De Shields from the original Broadway cast, demonstrates that it doesn't take much to refresh the show, which ran on Broadway for four years.
All that's needed is an infusion of contemporary slang and choreography (including a little Michael Jackson moonwalking and sexy L. L. Cool J-style pushups) to bring it up to date.
"The Wiz" takes a story so familiar that it doesn't have to be meticulously told to be followed, and reconceives it as a modern vaudeville entertainment with a pop-gospel score.
The show is much jollier in tone than the movie "The Wizard of Oz," which conveyed deep currents of Depression-era anxiety and longing for better times.
Stephanie Mills's Dorothy has more pluck and brass than Judy Garland's waifish prairie dreamer.
And while Ms.
Mills's traveling companions on the Yellow Brick Road bemoan their lack of brains, heart and courage, the show's Scarecrow, Tinman and Lion are not so poignantly bereft of self-confidence as their movie counterparts.


Accounts
*
Kraft General Foods, White Plains, to Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, for its Crystal Light powdered diet drink mix, previously at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York.
Billings were estimated at $13 million to $15 million.
Ogilvy New York also handles other Kraft General Foods powdered beverages like Tang and Country Time.


Fervor for French Rightist Doesn't Show in Polls
As soon as the first bars of the Slaves' Chorus from Verdi's "Nabucco" boomed out, the 3,000 or so people in the indoor stadium jumped to their feet on cue, turning toward a moving spotlight and wildly cheering the heavily built man who came marching in to address them.
By the time the chorus reached its stirring climax, Jean-Marie Le Pen was on the stage, dressed immaculately in a double-breasted suit, punching the air with his fists and savoring the chants of "Le Pen, President." Behind him, three huge screens showed a televised close-up of his triumphant smile.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section on Feb. 22, about cable televison, misstated the percentages of people in New Jersey who have access to cable and who subscribe.
Ninety-nine percent of New Jerseyans have access to cable; 71 percent of those people subscribe.


Top Bank in Canada Adds Trustco
The Royal Bank of Canada, Canada's largest bank, will acquire most of the assets of Royal Trustco Ltd., the nation's second-largest trust company, for $1.65 billion (Canadian), according to an agreement in principle announced today.
If the transaction, which is still subject to approval of stockholders and regulatory agencies, is finally consummated, it would create the fourth-largest bank in North America after Citicorp, the BankAmerica Corporation and the Chemical Banking Corporation.


We Can Have Faster Justice and Due Process
To the Editor:
In "Faster Justice in New York" (Op-Ed, March 1), Eliot Spitzer calls for New York State criminal cases to adopt the Federal method of jury selection, in which the judge questions prospective jurors.
New York jury selection, according to Mr.
Spitzer, takes too long because the "trial lawyers" (read defense lawyers) question the prospective jurors.
Faster is not always, or even usually, better or fairer.
There are problems with New York's jury selection procedure, but changing to the Federal model would simply substitute different problems for them.


McCann and Burnett Shift Executive Jobs
Two giant agencies, the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago and McCann-Erickson Worldwide in New York, announced significant new roles for top executives yesterday.
At Burnett, William T. Lynch, the president, also assumed the title of chief executive, effective immediately, from Richard B. (Rick) Fizdale, who continues as chairman and chief creative officer.
Wally Petersen, a spokesman for Burnett, said it was "completely and totally" the idea of Mr.
Fizdale, 53, to ask the board to name Mr.
Lynch, 50, chief executive.


At the Bar; Twice stung by crooked lawyers, and twice saved by the client protection fund.
Before long, a check for $74,917 will arrive at Sarah Kiss's apartment in Far Rockaway, Queens.
Then, at long last, the 32-year-old Ms.
Kiss, a mortgage broker's representative and part-time makeup artist, will be able to buy some furniture and send her three children to summer camp.
She may also reflect on her horrific experiences with lawyers, which recently led The New York Law Journal to call her "New York's Unluckiest Client."


Burst of Energy
Investors' search for market stragglers and generous dividends has at last led to the energy group.
Some analysts call the purchase of energy stocks a wise move; others call it a sign of an overheated market.
Some even expect higher energy prices -- a notion absent so far from the commodity markets.


CHRONICLE
The actor PAUL SORVINO isn't singing for his supper yet, but he's hoping to.
In fact, Mr.
Sorvino reversed the adage and gave up his supper, sort of, to sing.
He left his starring role in the NBC television series "Law and Order" in November to pursue an operatic career.
But this weekend Mr.
Sorvino is putting singing aside, too: he's getting together a lot of well-known people to play pocket billiards, a game he loves.
Of course, there's more than just fun involved.
This is a benefit for the Sorvino Asthma Foundation to raise money to help establish a children's asthma center.
With a $50 ticket, guests can take part in the games; for $25, they can look on.
Mr.
Sorvino suffered from asthma and, indeed, has written a book on the subject.


Review/Film; Brains, a Gift of Gab And Headed for Trouble
In "Just Another Girl on the IRT," Leslie Harris, a first-time writer and director, has created Chantel, a character who, as played by a terrifically engaging new actress named Ariyan Johnson, is almost as significant of her place and time as Booth Tarkington's Penrod is of his: white middle-class America just before World War I. Both Chantel and Penrod are teen-agers, but there the similarities end.
Like Ms.
Harris, Chantel is black.
She's a pretty, round-faced junior in a Brooklyn high school in the 1990's.
She's bright and intelligent, with a gift of gab, and she has a goal.
She wants to become a doctor.
Unfortunately, she's still more wise-mouthed than wise.
It's the mouth that gets her into trouble with her exhausted, battling parents and her teachers, black as well as white.


Black-Cuban Rift Extends to Florida Law School
With Janet Reno gone to Washington to be Attorney General, black and Hispanic lawyers and officials here are competing to dominate Dade County's legal apparatus while quarreling over the location and control of a new state-financed law school.
Gov.
Lawton Chiles dismayed some blacks but delighted Cuban-Americans in Miami last Friday when he appointed Katherine Fernandez Rundle, 42, a 16-year veteran of the prosecutor's office, to succeed Ms.
Reno as the State Attorney in Dade County, which includes Miami.


Henry Stewart Dies; A Master Tailor, 89
Henry Stewart, a master tailor of fine men's clothing for more than seven decades, died on March 4 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 89.
He died in his sleep, said his daughter, Vicki Bahnasy.


Bombay Bombs Tied to Reputed Drug Dealer
The Bombay police said tonight that a reputed drug trafficker in the city who has fled to Dubai was responsible for the wave of bombings last Friday that killed 232 people, wounded more than 1,400 and severely damaged major buildings.
The police commissioner, Amarjit Singh Samra, made the announcement at a news conference at which he said that two men were arrested today and that they had confessed that the crime figure had paid them about $160 to plant some of the bombs.


Films From New Directors Taking Literary License
The New Directors/New Films series has existed for 22 years, but it has rarely if ever led off with the literary one-two punch of tonight's opening programs, "Orlando" and "The Music of Chance."
Both films are adapted from the kind of serious novel that Hollywood has traditionally shunned as hopelessly highbrow and uncommercial.
"Orlando," the debut of Sally Potter, a 43-year-old English choregrapher turned director, is a cinematic realization of Virginia Woolf's classic 1928 novel.
"The Music of Chance," the first fictional feature by the documentary film maker Philip Haas, is an adaptation of a highly regarded metaphysical suspense novel, published in 1990 by the Brooklyn-based author Paul Auster.


Review/Fashion; In Paris, Outside Influences
There are two distinct camps showing in France: the very, very French, who turn out redingotes faster than you can crack a whip, and the very, very foreign, who revel in their distinctive cultures.
One group celebrates the status quo, the other moves fashion.
Ennio Capasa, the designer for the Italian line Costume National, presented his collection here for the first time yesterday.
It was not a fashion show, but an installation, with models as the medium.


Lender for Low-Income Areas Gets Boost
Chicago's two largest banking companies, the First Chicago Corporation and the Continental Bank Corporation, said yesterday that they had bought $4.5 million of stock in Shorebank Corporation, a much smaller Chicago banking company that specializes in lending in low-income neighborhoods.
The investment in nonvoting stock by the large banks will allow Shorebank's South Shore Bank subsidiary to expand its business in several Chicago neighborhoods.
It comes at a time when bankers are nervously waiting to see how the Clinton Administration will enforce the Community Reinvestment Act.
That 16-year-old act requires banks to do business in their local markets but does not set guidelines for the volume of that business.
Ratings Cited
At the end of 1992, about 10 percent of banks had an "outstanding" rating from regulators for complying with the act, nearly 80 percent were "satisfactory," and more than 10 percent were either "needs improvement" or were in "substantial noncompliance," according to Kenneth H. Thomas, a Miami-based bank consultant.


Clinton Health Team Member Is Forced Aside Over Conflict
The wall of secrecy surrounding the membership of Hillary Rodham Clinton's health policy team was breached today as White House officials finally identified one of its top members, only to disclose that he had been demoted for conflicts of interest.
The adviser, Thomas O. Pyle, was the head of one of 15 committees working for the Task Force on National Health Care Reform.
He is also chairman of the Jackson Hole Group, a conclave of health-care executives and policy analysts sometimes described as a brain trust for the Administration.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Southeast; Seton Hall Confirms It's Bigger and Better Than Tennessee State
As expected, Seton Hall cruised into the second round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament this evening.
The second-seeded Pirates, with more height, depth and talent, routed Tennessee State, 81-59, to advance to Saturday's game against seventh-seeded Western Kentucky in the Southeast Regional.
Terry Dehere led a balanced Seton Hall (28-6) attack with 19 points, and Arturas Karnishovas added 13.
The victory was Seton Hall's 12th in a row.


Art in Review
Fabian Marcaccio
John Post Lee Gallery  588 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through March 27
If the work of Robert Ryman, Roy Lichtenstein, Carroll Dunham, Richard Artschwager, Meyer Vaisman, David Reed and a few others were put in a blender, the results might resemble the smart, self-conscious, ultimately inert abstract paintings of Fabian Marcaccio.
Mr.
Marcaccio, who was born in Argentina 29 years ago and moved to New York City in 1986, is busily taking self-reference to the brink of self-parody -- if not animated frenzy -- and up to a point, it's entertaining.


For Children
Signs of Spring Walk  Marine Park  Avenue U, at Burnett Street  Brooklyn  (718) 287-3400  Recommended for all ages  Tomorrow
One of the first birds to show up in the New York City area as winter ends is the red-winged blackbird.
These thrushes, which are as black as crows but have scarlet-orange epaulets on their wings, were sighted by some sharp-eyed Urban Park Rangers in Brooklyn as early as March 3.
The bird's song, which sounds more like a screech, is heard in marshlands and tall grasses, their favorite hangouts.


The Real Voting Fraud
"Cruel," "sad" and "pathetic." So the Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, described Republican obstructionism that prompted his withdrawal of key provisions aimed at increasing voter registration among the poor and unemployed.
Unless he had caved in to G.O.P. filibuster threats, he said, the entire "motor voter" bill might have been lost.
But there's still hope that the Republicans can be embarrassed into doing the right thing about broadening the franchise.
The bill now goes to a conference committee.
If House Democrats stick to the sound standards they have already passed, the bill would bounce back to the Senate, where the G.O.P.'s selfish objections would come under a harsh spotlight.
The timid Republican moderates who have been lined up behind the minority leader, Bob Dole, would be forced to face their constituents and their consciences.


Review/Music; Schiff Plays Schubert On Its Own Terms
Like the music it purveys, Andras Schiff's six-concert survey of the Schubert piano sonatas promises profound importance without a lot of surface glamour.
The event emerges from the wreckage of the 92d Street Y's Schubertiade, a plan to present all of Schubert's music in chronological order over 10 seasons.
That original format has been subverted by policy turmoils within the Y and survives only in altered form.
Yet if Mr.
Schiff's first concert, played before a packed house on a snow-blown Wednesday night, is an indication, this 18-sonata cycle surrounded by symposiums, master classes and film offerings, has found in defeat an unexpected triumph of its own.
Halfway through the evening, one felt the wisdom of, indeed a necessity for, placing these pieces side by side and separating them from the music of others.
The sonatas operate according to laws of motion all their own, and listeners accustomed to urgency, dynamism, momentum and fixed destination needed time to adjust their inner clocks.


Big Day for a Mattingly Fan
Don Mattingly climbed over a fence near the third-base dugout at Ed Smith Stadium, hugged 11-year-old James Bachenheimer, posed for pictures with the boy and his family and autographed his glove, his baseball cards and his baseballs.
The boy was speechless.
His mother cried.
James, who was born with a birth defect and has undergone five heart operations, said he had been waiting all his life to meet Mattingly, and the Yankee captain obliged him before today's game with the White Sox.
His mother, Patti, helped it happen by writing the Yankees last September to ask if James could meet his favorite player because she wanted to ease his mind about the surgery and give him something to look forward to.


Why Shut the Old In Nursing Homes?
To the Editor:
I am horrified by your assumption in "Shielding the Elderly From Bankruptcy" (editorial, March 1) that "for most people who will eventually enter a nursing home -- and about half the elderly will -- the cost is worth it." Have you ever been in one of these places?
It is like being in hell, with ancient whitened corpses tied to wheelchairs, gazing into space.
There is something unholy about cramming old people together into a single institution, shielding the rest of us from the sight of them.
We treat them like prisoners: out of sight and mind.
But we all need each other, old and young.
How much better to keep old ones in their own apartments with visiting nurses and volunteers (and, one hopes, family and friends) whisking in and out, and a living will and deputy power of attorney on the desk.
This would be real life and cost a fraction of a stay in a nursing home.


Education Chief Backs Minority Scholarships
Education Secretary Richard W. Riley has assured college and university administrators that he considers race-based scholarships a "valuable tool," asserting his personal commitment to a form of financial aid that had been challenged by the Bush Administration.
Mr.
Riley's statement of support was an attempt to help end the confusion about race-based scholarships that had resulted from a policy adopted by the Bush Administration in 1990 that such scholarships were illegal.


Art in Review
Marlene McCarty  Metro Pictures  150 Greene Street  SoHo  Through March 27
Marlene McCarty's new paintings are beautiful when they're mad.
Conceptually, they continue the tradition of language-as-image art that includes such diverse artists as Edward Ruscha, Barbara Kruger and Christopher Wool.
Stylistically, they're all man: oscillating between the flame-edged graphics of heavy-metal album covers and tattoos, and the fat geometric lettering used on racing cars.
But physically they're somehow female, being made with a heat-transfer process that gives the words the tissue thinness and grayness of carbon paper seen from the wrong side.


Abortion Foes in Boot Camp Mull Doctor's Killing
After a year in which the right to choose abortion was upheld by the Supreme Court and a pro-choice President was elected, Operation Rescue has been hunkered down in this Space Coast town since January, running a boot camp that seeks to turn the 22 paying recruits into the shock troops of the anti-abortion movement.
The trainees, 12 women and 10 men, include the 16-year-old daughter of an anti-abortion leader from Ohio; a retired Caterpillar worker and his wife from Chicago; a part-time hardware-store worker from Ellsworth, Me., and a 67-year-old retired medical researcher from Gaithersburg, Md., who used to believe in the right to choose abortion.


Town and Its Hospital, And the Ties That Bind
THE people of this farming village, unlike those in almost every neighborhood and town in New York State, do not mind having a mental hospital in their backyard.
In fact, the people of Wingdale and the surrounding town of Dover have gone to court to stop the state from swiftly closing Harlem Valley Psychiatric Center, the campus of squat brick buildings that sometimes startles New Yorkers on their leisurely way up Route 22 to weekend homes in the Berkshires.


Ah, Spring: It Rhymed, Once, With Sing; See How Others Live
Spring is the season that can't quite make up its mind.
The struggle to throw off the dead hand of winter seems to last much longer than the script calls for, and the month of May flirts indecently with hot and clammy summer.
No wonder the season calls forth complex responses.
It's a highly conflicted three months.
Here 10 New York Times writers give suggestions on where to spend the first weekend of spring 1993, free of charge, in the New York metropolitan region.


Clinton Adds Visit From Russian Official on Aid
In an effort to support President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and his democratic reform movement, President Clinton is to meet with Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev of Russia in Washington next week, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today.
The meeting comes as the Administration is struggling, in the absence of major new financing, to put together a package of small-scale incentives to promote Russia's economic and political reform movement before the Clinton-Yeltsin meeting in Vancouver, British Columbia, on April 3 and 4.


No Headline
"We are in a steep recession, possibly the worst in Germany's postwar history. The Bundesbank cannot ignore that any longer." -- GERT SCHMIDT, a German economist.  [ D12:4. ]


Japan's New York Realty Investing Plunges
New investment by the Japanese in New York City real estate dropped to $10 million last year from $859 million in 1991 and a peak of $2.8 billion in 1988, according to a report released yesterday by Kenneth Leventhal &amp; Company, the accounting agency.
The report found that the only Japanese investment in New York real estate in 1992 was a $10 million commitment to renovate a midtown office building already owned by a Japanese company.
The primary reasons for the decline are Japan's economic crash and, in this country, the continuing repercussions from the overbuilding and steep drop in real estate prices from the mid- to late 80's.


Ah, Spring: It Rhymed, Once, With Sing; O Jeanette, O Nelson
Spring is the season that can't quite make up its mind.
The struggle to throw off the dead hand of winter seems to last much longer than the script calls for, and the month of May flirts indecently with hot and clammy summer.
No wonder the season calls forth complex responses.
It's a highly conflicted three months.
Here 10 New York Times writers give suggestions on where to spend the first weekend of spring 1993, free of charge, in the New York metropolitan region.


Doctors' Investments in Home Care Grow, Raising Fears of Ethical Swamp
Along with a national boom in home medical treatments has come a surge in doctors' investments in companies that provide equipment and medication for such care, raising concerns among medical leaders and government officials about a vast potential for conflicts of interest.
The surge in doctors' investments in home health services coincides with growing Federal and state efforts to ban similar medical investments like clinical laboratories, which critics say drive up the cost of care.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Optioned Jerry DiPoto and Bill Wertz, pitchers, and Jose Hernandez, infielder, to Charlotte of the Southern League and Shawn Bryant, pitcher, to Canton-Akron of the Eastern League.
Sent Ken Ramos and Tracy Sanders, outfielders, to Charlotte and Paul Byrd and Paul Shuley, pitchers, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Optioned Mark Hutton and Bobby Munoz, pitchers, to Columbus of the International League.


Restaurants; A princely address (and interior) for the low-key and reliable cuisine of northern India
Indian food is to the local culinary world what a navy blazer is to the fashion scene: it's always there in a low-key way, never out of style and except for a few seasonal nips and tucks, it varies little over the years.
In New York City one is exposed primarily to rich Mogul cooking of the north, characterized by yogurt-marinated meats, sauces rich in butter and cream, and tandoor-roasted seafood and meats.
Akbar, the regal-looking northern Indian restaurant with a princely address on Park Avenue, is typical of this genre.


David Caplan, 83, Who Led Planning At Bridge Authority
David Caplan, a New York civil engineer who spent 50 years in public service, including 20 as director of planning for the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, died on Wednesday at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 83 and lived in Riverdale, the Bronx.
The cause of death was heart failure, his family said.


St. Raymond Takes Title
Kareem Reid, a 5-foot-8-inch junior guard, scored a game- and career-high 36 points to lead St.
Raymond of the Bronx to an 87-65 victory over Monsignor McClancy of Queens last night at Fordham University in the Catholic High Schools Athletic Association championship game.


Ah, Spring: It Rhymed, Once, With Sing; View From a Bridge
Spring is the season that can't quite make up its mind.
The struggle to throw off the dead hand of winter seems to last much longer than the script calls for, and the month of May flirts indecently with hot and clammy summer.
No wonder the season calls forth complex responses.
It's a highly conflicted three months.
Here 10 New York Times writers give suggestions on where to spend the first weekend of spring 1993, free of charge, in the New York metropolitan region.


ABC Will Start 'Nightline' 5 Minutes Later
In an effort to encourage its affiliates to carry "Nightline" live, ABC announced yesterday that beginning next month it would start the news-interview program five minutes later, at 11:35 P.M., giving the local stations more advertising time to sell.
Further, the network said, it would give stations that carry "Nightline" live an additional 30-second spot to sell each night during the show, plus an additional local spot during each of its news magazine shows, "Prime Time Live" and "20/20." Those spots would not be available to stations that show "Nightline" on tape at midnight or later.


RELIEF IS BLOCKED
Serbian nationalist forces reneged today on an agreement to allow a United Nations relief convoy to reach 60,000 Muslims besieged in a town in eastern Bosnia, and launched an intense artillery barrage against Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital.
The continuing siege of the eastern town of Srebrenica and the bombardment of Sarajevo, the heaviest in months, appeared to be part of a Serbian strategy to increase their tactical advantage before new pressures are placed on them to accept an international peace plan being negotiated at the United Nations.


Adolfo Decides To Quit Designing
Another fashion icon is leaving the scene.
Adolfo will no longer design custom or ready-to-wear clothing for women and will close his salon at 36 East 57th Street in New York to concentrate on his licensing business.
"It will make my life a little easier," he said yesterday in a telephone interview.
"After 25 years of going to the stores, it is very taxing. By the time you finish a collection, you have to plan the trips and still run a business in New York."


Review/Theater; The Sisters Rosensweig Take Up Residence on Broadway
"The Sisters Rosensweig," originally presented by Lincoln Center Theater at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, has reopened at the Ethel Barrymore Theater, 243 West 47th Street, with minor script revisions and two new members of the cast, Christine Estabrook (as Pfeni) and John Cunningham (as Nicholas Pym, a pompous Englishman).
Following are excerpts from Mel Gussow's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 23, 1992.
"The Sisters Rosensweig" is Wendy Wasserstein's captivating look at three uncommon women and their quest for love, self-definition and fulfillment.
United by their sisterhood, they are as different as only sisters (or brothers) can be, as each tries to live up to an image imposed by her family.
At the same time, each performs her own act of rebellion -- or is it penitence?


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Midwest; California Freshman Stings L.S.U.
California and Louisiana State were tied, 64-64, with less than 20 seconds remaining tonight.
Cal was in a spread offense and freshman point guard Jason Kidd had the ball at the left side of the top of the key.
Kidd dribbled to his right and then drove down the lane and put up an underhand scoop shot that fell through the net with just over one second remaining to lift the Golden Bears to a thrilling 66-64 victory in the opening round of the Midwest Regional.


Review/Film; Again, the Black Dress And the Assassin in It
Of all the French films that have recently been remade for American audiences, "La Femme Nikita" is the one that has changed least.
There's a good reason for that: In spirit, "La Femme Nikita" was half American in the first place.
Luc Besson, the original film maker, achieved a stunning synthesis of French contemplativeness and American violence in his slick, manipulative story of a feral punk who is saved from extinction and then trained as an assassin.
His film's secret weapon was the punk herself, a leggy heroine who exuded both glamour and viciousness and performed some of her most savage deeds wearing pearls and a skimpy black dress.
In Mr.
Besson's calculating tour de force, this woman could behave shockingly while looking like a fashion model.
And when Nikita began to soften, discovering her romantic side for the first time and rebelling against the violent, dehumanizing life that had been imposed upon her, the film took on the pomposity of a conversation piece without sacrificing its commercial verve.


Hungarian Steps Up Attack on Rightist Opponent
Prime Minister Jozsef Antall has mounted his strongest offensive yet against his party's nationalist right wing, which is led by Istvan Csurka.
In an interview this week in the daily newspaper Pesti Hirlap, which is loyal to the Government, Mr.
Antall accused Mr.
Csurka of declaring war on the Government and on him personally, beginning with an anti-democratic manifesto he wrote in August.


Irene C. Fromer Dies; Teacher and Artist, 70
Irene Claire Fromer, a retired teacher and artist, died on Tuesday at Doctors Hospital on Staten Island.
She was 70 and lived on Staten Island and in St.
Croix, V.I.
Her death was a result of a myocardial flu virus, said her husband of nearly 50 years, Dr.
Stephen Fromer.


Bosnian Soldiers Report Massacre by Serbs in a Schoolhouse
The first Bosnian Government soldiers to arrive here from an eastern enclave overrun by Serbian nationalist fighters gave accounts today of the killings of dozens of Muslim civilians by the advancing Serbs.
Two of the Bosnian soldiers said they witnessed killings in Cerska and the neighboring village of Velici, which were overrun between Feb. 27 and March 1, when poorly-armed, predominantly Muslim locals lost the area to attacking Serbs.


Eluding Trade Embargo, a Vessel Delivers Gasoline to Yugoslavia
A ship carrying a huge supply of gasoline has evaded the Western ban on trade with Yugoslavia and delivered its cargo to the Adriatic port of Bar, Clinton Administration officials said today.
The delivery of what is believed to be 50,000 metric tons of gasoline, or about 400,000 barrels, undercuts the Western effort to use economic sanctions to stop the Serbs fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Kemper to Move Units In $637.3 Million Deal
The Kemper Corporation said today that it would transfer its reinsurance and risk-management subsidiaries to the Kemper National Insurance Companies in return for about 17.4 million shares of Kemper Corporation stock held by the Lumbermen's Mutual Casualty Company, Kemper National's largest operating unit.
The $637.3 million deal will reduce the Lumbermen's stake in the Kemper Corporation to about 4 percent from nearly 38 percent, the largest single holding in the company.
It is the latest in a series of steps the Kemper Corporation has taken to shore up its balance sheet after enduring huge losses on real estate loans, primarily in California and the Chicago area.
The Kemper Corporation reported last month that it had lost $203.4 million in 1992.
Focus on Core Businesses
"This, in effect, completes our exit from the property and casualty business," said David B. Mathis, who became the Kemper Corporation's chairman and chief executive just over a year ago.
"We are focusing on our core businesses of financial services and life insurance."


CHRONICLE
The people who run the Brooklyn Academy of Music are pretty pleased with themselves, and why not?
There aren't many organizations in New York City that have attracted so much royalty in the last decade.
This spring (if there ever is a spring), KING CARL XVI GUSTAF and QUEEN SILVIA of Sweden will not only be at the academy, but will be paying it their second visit.
"To add royal patrons really adds to the excitement and glamour of an event," said KAREN BROOKS HOPKINS, the academy's executive vice president.
The event, on May 11, will be a gala benefit celebrating two productions by the Royal Dramatic Theater of Sweden -- Ibsen's "Peer Gynt" and "Madame de Sade" by Yukio Mishima -- to be directed by Ingmar Bergman and presented in Swedish, with simultaneous translation into English via headset.


Polish Parliament Rejects Bill to Privatize Industries
In a setback to the Polish Government's economic reform program, the Parliament in Warsaw defeated a bill today that would have converted 600 state companies into private enterprises at a single stroke.
The vote against the mass privatization bill, 203 to 181 with nine abstentions, seemed to catch Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka by surprise and revealed a split in the coalition of nine parliamentary groups she leads.
The vote also raised questions about the future of her eight-month-old Government, which enjoys only a slim majority in Parliament.


We Can Have Faster Justice and Due Process; Presumed Guilty
To the Editor:
Eliot Spitzer, a former prosecutor, wants judges, not lawyers, to select jurors in criminal cases (Op-Ed, March 1).
That would be at the expense of justice and fairness.
Criminal prosecutions are conducted with the imprimatur of the state on behalf of all its people, including the prospective jurors.
The prosecution's main witnesses are police officers, medical examiners and other officials, who are presumed to be telling the truth.
Despite the presumption of innocence incorporated into the State and Federal Constitutions, criminal defendants, who most often are from the lower socioeconomic classes and poorly educated, are presumed to be guilty of at least some crime.


COMPANY BRIEFS
HERMAN'S WORLD OF SPORTING GOODS, Carteret, N.J., said that a Federal Bankruptcy Court had given interim approval for a bank group led by Chemical Banking Corp. to lend $40 million in working capital.
PITTSBURGH FOOD AND BEVERAGE INC., said it had acquired the employee-owned City Pride Bakery, the last commercial bakery in Pittsburgh.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.


Viewing for Helen Hayes
A funeral Mass for Helen Hayes, with John Cardinal O'Connor presiding, is to be celebrated tomorrow at 10:30 A.M. at St.
Ann's Roman Catholic Church, 19 Jefferson Street, Nyack, N.Y.
The body is to be on view today from 2 to 4 P.M. and 7 to 9 P.M. at the Hannemann Funeral Home, 88 South Broadway in Nyack.
Burial at Oak Hill Cemetery in Nyack will be private.


Munich Journal; Free Europe's Entreaty: Don't Tune Us Out Now
News that the Clinton Administration was considering a shutdown of the United States Government-financed Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty stations here in 1995 has set off an avalanche of protest from all over Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
Listeners say they want to know why President Clinton would want to pull the plug on American support for the forces of democracy and free enterprise now, with the struggle in its most intense phase?


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the explosion at the World Trade Center misstated the birthplace of one arrested suspect in some copies.
Mohammed A. Salameh was born in the West Bank.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend
"THE DESTINY OF ME," Circle Repertory Company at the Lucille Lortel Theater, 121 Christopher Street, Greenwich Village.
Larry Kramer's companion piece to his "Normal Heart." With Jonathan Hadary, Tom McBride, Anthony Rapp and Carole Shelley.
Directed by Marshall W. Mason.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30 to $37.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
European trade officials are bracing for U.S. sanctions and are angry and confused that President Clinton's free-trade rhetoric does not match his confrontational style.  [ Page A1. ]  Negotiators from the United States, Canada and Mexico expressed satisfaction with their opening round of talks on the free-trade pact.  [ D2. ]
Germany's central bank lowered a key interest rate in an attempt to rekindle economic growth.
The step was a tacit acknowledgment that the recession may be deeper than thought.  [ A1. ]


Review/Art; Two Exemplars of American Crafts
The dividing line between art and craft is sometimes thick and sometimes thin; at the moment, at the American Craft Museum, it is very fine indeed.
The two exhibitions on view, one of the basket maker John McQueen, the other of the quilt maker Nancy Crow, are among the best that the Craft Museum has recently mustered.
Mr.
McQueen and Ms.
Crow, who are renowned in the craft world, are each firmly in control of their medium and pushing actively at its inherent possibilities.
Their work brims with potential, even if it is not always entirely fulfilled.
Mr.
McQueen's exhibition of 36 pieces traces a 15-year development in which the notion of basketry is applied more and more loosely and ingeniously.
His oddly shaped works hover, often with great humor, in the gap between craft, sculpture and Conceptual Art.
The least interesting pieces spell out words and poems with their forms or with the threads that hold them together, a habit that is a bit pretentious, especially when the results are illegible or nearly so; some of the best ironically recapitulate the compact roundness and raised mouths of Southwest Indian ceramic pots.


Muslim Cleric Gives His Side in TV Interviews


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
3.58
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.96
4.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.01
3.07
4.21
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.56
5.68
7.27
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.78
6.86
7.96
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.73
7.78
8.92
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.96
5.98
6.77
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Don't Underestimate Trauma for Children in Trade Center Blast
To the Editor:
"Blast Trauma Lingers, but Mostly for Parents" (front page March 2), a follow-up on the kindergarten students trapped by the World Trade Center explosion, may seriously mislead readers about the effects of psychological trauma on young children.
To depict the children as essentially unharmed and their parents as "hysterical" flies in the face of much that we know about responses to trauma.
Lenore Terr, in a field study of children in the 1976 Chowchilla, Calif., school bus kidnapping, discovered significant long-term consequences in all the children involved, as well as in one who was let off the bus immediately before the kidnapping.


Ah, Spring: It Rhymed, Once, With Sing; Harbor Contemplation
Spring is the season that can't quite make up its mind.
The struggle to throw off the dead hand of winter seems to last much longer than the script calls for, and the month of May flirts indecently with hot and clammy summer.
No wonder the season calls forth complex responses.
It's a highly conflicted three months.
Here 10 New York Times writers give suggestions on where to spend the first weekend of spring 1993, free of charge, in the New York metropolitan region.


INSIDE
First Alzheimer's Drug Is Backed for Marketing
Advisers to the Food and Drug Administration have voted for approval of a drug that helps some patients with Alzheimer's disease.
Page A18.
When Doctors Invest in Care
Thousands of doctors are investing in companies that provide home medical treatment, raising concerns about conflicts of interest.
Page A14.
Poland Blocks Privatization
In a setback to Poland's economic program, the Parliament defeated a bill that would have put 600 state companies in private hands.
Page A3.
Allen Says Report Clears Him
Woody Allen said investigators had cleared him of Mia Farrow's assertion that he sexually molested their 7-year-old daughter.
Page B1.


Review/Fashion; Lagerfeld's Home Run for Chanel
Karl Lagerfeld hit a home run today in his third time at bat here and won the ball game for Chanel.
His fall and winter ready-to-wear show was wild, wicked and enormously entertaining.
It is likely to cause frissons of anxiety throughout the fashion world because, guess what?
The champion of long skirts has changed his stance.
Legs are back.
Oh, there are a few long, thin dresses with flounces at the hem, just to keep the franchise.
But you know what you will really need to be in fashion next season?
A long white shirt -- you will wear it over your black tights and boots, under your black velvet jacket cut short to let the shirttail show, or under your tailored jacket scattered with brilliants that look like snowflakes.
At night, when you want to dress funky, you toss the same white shirt over a black dress, or you tuck it into the waistband of a big velvet skirt with a train.
The new formality, you know.
Lagerfeld is a master of the funny interlude.
Are all the models in Paris wearing suffragette high-laced shoes or clunky boots on the runway?
Lagerfeld gives them furry mukluks or sneakers with the Chanel logo.


C. W. Eliot 2d, 93, An Early Advocate Of Urban Planning
Charles William Eliot 2d, a retired city planner, conservationist, educator and government official, died on Tuesday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 93.
Mr.
Eliot was an early practitioner of modern professional planning to cope with and manage change.
During World War II, when some spoke of the eventual end of wartime restrictions and a return to normality, he said: "We're not going back to anything. We are going forward." He advocated better housing, more recreation and parks for "pleasing natural scenery as an antidote to the nervous tension of city life."


Art in Review
Cora Cohen  Jason McCoy Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through tomorrow
The seven abstract paintings in Cora Cohen's show are materially spectacular, typically mixing acrylic, oil, raw pigment, pastel, polyurethane, copper, enamel and graphite in a single work.
Her technique is no less complex.
The painting titled "Extended Allegory" is built up from a ground of splashed stain, to which are added strokes of thick paint, driplike skeins, stippling, smooth areas of mottled metallic sheen, and here and there granular crushed pigment.
The colors range from expanses of ultramarine to a membranous orange-beige, punctuated with spots of saturated yellow or red.


To sell its new luxury cars, Chrysler replaces Iacocca with a wink and a nudge.
THANKS to some hot-selling models, a little profitability and a sheaf of news clips about its second coming, the Chrysler Corporation is feeling pretty good about itself.
But how to convey that swagger?
In the past, Detroit's No. 3 auto maker relied on its popular front man, Lee A. Iacocca, to chastise anyone who doubted that Chrysler was the embodiment of the American entrepreneurial spirit.
But with Mr.
Iacocca in retirement (as of last night, anyway), Chrysler is trying out a number of strategies to focus its many brands better.


Double-Up and Out For No. 1 Courier
Jim Courier, the world's No. 1 player and renowned workaholic, put in a double shift today on the weather-whipped construction site that doubles as the site of the Lipton Championships.
He wound up sorry he made the extra effort.
His morning opponent treated him with consummate respect, but his evening opponent -- older, wiser and familiar because of their shared practice sessions in the California desert where they have neighboring condos -- cruelly ambushed him.


On My Mind; Cutting Aid to Israel
Israeli economists in Jerusalem are beginning to talk about a brand new problem of aid from the United States -- how and when to bring up the idea of getting not more but less.
That is not yet the policy of the Rabin Government, and may never be.
And there will be a lot of back and forth about it, denials maybe, expressions of shock and similar bureaucratic blahblah.


Sounds Around Town
It's Monday Night All Week
The Monday Night Orchestra, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, near Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-1785.
This 15-piece orchestra was formed 10 years ago by the pianist, composer and arranger Gil Evans to play on Monday nights at Sweet Basil.
When Mr.
Evans died, in 1988, the leadership of the band passed to his son, the trumpeter Miles Evans, and the band has continued every Monday night since then, with the pianist and accordionist Gil Goldstein assisting Mr.
Evans in directing the band.
This week, to celebrate the anniversary, the band is playing a full week's engagement for the first time, featuring works from Gil Evans albums like "Birth of the Cool," "Quiet Nights," "Sketches of Spain" and "New Bottle, Old Wine," studio arrangements that have rarely been performed live.
The band will include Monday night regulars like the trumpeter Lew Sloff, the saxophonists Alex Foster and Roger Rosenberg, and the trombonist Dave Bargeron.
There are sets tonight and tomorrow night at 9, 11 and 12:30, and two on Sunday, at 9 and 11 P.M.
There is a music charge of $15 and a $6 minimum.
The 50's Meet the 90's
New York Voices, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue near 17th Street, (212) 533-7900.
The five singers who make up this group have taken their cues from Lambert, Hendricks and Ross, the ground-breaking jazz singers of the late 1950's.
They add a 1990's twist to the jazz feeling and style of that group on Oliver Nelson's "Stolen Moments," John Coltrane's "Giant Steps" and Duke Ellington's "Cottontail," as well as the songs of Earth, Wind and Fire, Bill Withers and Stevie Wonder and a brilliant a capella version of Thelonious Monk's " 'Round Midnight." There are shows tonight and tomorrow night at 8, 10 and midnight, and on Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M.
There is a $20 cover charge and a $10 minimum.
A Voice in Maturity
Chris Connor, Tavern on the Green, Central Park West at 67th Street, (212) 873-3200.
An autumnal glow has warmed the harsher edges of Chris Connor's early singing, in which her mannerisms contributed to her popularity but often limited some of the broader potential of her voice.
Now, as she winds up her first engagement at Tavern on the Green this weekend, she is singing with a confidence that often eluded her during the 1960's and 70's.
With accompaniment by the pianist Bob Kaye, the bassist Scott Lee and the drummer Vinny Johnson, she can be heard tonight and tomorrow night at 8:30, 10:30 and 12:30, and on Sunday at 9 and 11 P.M.
There's no minimum, and the music charge is $15 tonight and tomorrow, $10 on Sunday.


Treasury Issues in Sharp Price Jump
Treasury prices jumped sharply yesterday, raising the question of whether the rally that stalled a week ago could commence again and bring yields on long-term bonds down to new lows.
Coming on the heels of what appeared to be disappointing inflation reports last Friday and Wednesday, the price rises yesterday seemed to show that investors and traders are still comfortable at these lofty levels for price and low levels of yields.


Larz E. Bourne, 77; Drew Deputy Dawg
Larz E. Bourne, a cartoonist, died on Sunday at a hospital in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 77 and lived in Sarasota.
Mr.
Bourne created Deputy Dawg and other cartoon characters for television and comic books.


Grandmother's Plea Is Kept From Texas Cult Leader


Corrections
The listing of most-active Nasdaq stocks and the Nasdaq stock table in Business Day yesterday misstated Wednesday's closing price for the stock of Gates/FA Distributing Inc.
It rose 12.5 cents, to $12.375.


Lebanon Plans $10 Billion Reconstruction
The Government presented a $10 billion plan today to rebuild Lebanon after 15 years of civil war, but critics say it will plunge the country deeper in debt.
Prime Minister Rafiq al-Hariri, the banking and building tycoon behind the plan, said "the dream may be difficult to realize," adding, "We are counting on the will of the Lebanese people who are determined to realize it."


Corrections
An article in the Media Business pages on Monday about a new men's fashion magazine planned by Esquire magazine misstated the history of Gentlemen's Quarterly.
It was Esquire Inc., not the Hearst Corporation, that turned Apparel Arts into Gentlemen's Quarterly in 1957 and sold it to Conde Nast in 1979.


Stocks Jump 38.90 Points; Rates Cited
A German interest rate cut and the ensuing bond market rally in the United States drove stocks sharply higher yesterday, with heavy industries showing the most muscle.
The Dow Jones industrial average shot to within about a point of a record before closing at 3,465.64, up 38.90 points, or 1.1 percent.
The broader market averages also ran up, in moderate trading, as the best-known issues stood out.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  SERBS RENEGE ON AID CONVOY
Serbian nationalist forces reneged on an agreement to allow a United Nations relief convoy to reach 60,000 Muslims besieged in a town in eastern Bosnia, and launched an intense artillery barrage against Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital.
A1
Washington said a ship had evaded a trade ban on Yugoslavia.  A10
Bosnian soldiers told of a massacre of civilian Muslims by Serbs.  A10
The U.N. began efforts on enforcing the flight ban in Bosnia.
A11  GERMAN INTEREST RATE IS CUT
Germany lowered one of its key interest rates in what was seen as an attempt to rekindle European economic growth.
A1  CONFUSION OVER TRADE SIGNALS
America's trading partners are angry and confused over conflicting signals from President Clinton on whether he is leaning toward free trade or protectionism.
A1  U.S.
COMPANIES IN SOUTH AFRICA
Although the African National Congress is still months away from lifting its injunction against doing business with the Government in South Africa, American companies are quietly drifting back in.
A1  POLAND BLOCKS PRIVATIZATION
In a setback to the Polish Government's economic reform program, the Parliament defeated a bill that would have converted 600 state companies into private enterprises at a single stroke, voting 203 to 181.
A3  FRENCH RIGHTISTS LOSING SUPPORT
For the first time since Jean-Marie Le Pen raised his anti-immigrant banner in France in 1974, support for his party may be flagging.
Polls say National Front candidates will receive only 11 to 12 percent in Parliamentary elections.
A3  CLOSE CALL FOR ARAB DELEGATE
The Israeli Army said Palestinians in the occupied Gaza Strip tried to shoot the chief Palestinian delegate to the Middle East peace talks, but he said gunfire near him had come from Israeli troops.
A6  BOMBAY BOMBS LINKED TO DRUGS
The police in Bombay said a reputed drug trafficker who had fled to Dubai was responsible for the wave of bombings last Friday that killed 232 people, wounded more than 1,400 and damaged major buildings.
A7  DEBATING THE A-BOMB IN SEOUL
In light of North Korea's defiance, a hard-line minority of South Korea's legislators are starting to argue that their country made a huge mistake when it decided a decade ago not to build an atomic bomb.
A8  Italian judges paused to say whom they were not investigating.
A2  Hungary's Prime Minister stepped up attacks on a rightist foe.
A9  President Clinton is to meet with Russia's Foreign Minister.
A5  Munich Journal: A Plea for Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty.
A4  National A8-18  HOUSE PASSES CLINTON BUDGET
Democrats mustered overwhelming majorities in the House to pass key elements of President Clinton's budget -- his plan to cut the deficit and another to create jobs.
A1  CRACK IN HEALTH PANEL SECRECY
The White House finally identified one of the top members on Hillary Rodham Clinton's health policy team, only to disclose that he had been demoted for conflicts of interest.
A1  ETHICS OF DOCTORS' INVESTMENTS
Thousands of doctors are investing in home-care companies to which they refer patients, even as such investments are attacked by government officials as driving up health-care costs.
A14  HEAD START RUNS INTO CRITICISM
Head Start, the pre-school program that is being championed by President Clinton, is suddenly being sujected to quibbles, criticisms and outright assaults.
A1  SHOCK TROOPS OF ABORTION FIGHT
At a boot camp for Operation Rescue recruits, the future shock troops of the anti-abortion movement agonized over the killing of an abortion doctor and what it means for their movement.
A12  FUROR OVER G.O.P. 'JOKES'
A brouhaha erupted in Virginia politics after prominent state and national Republicans, including Oliver L. North and Charles Black, made comments about minority groups at a banquet here last Friday.A12  THE POWER OF UNDERSTATEMENT
Washington at Work: Thomas F. McLarty 3d, the White House chief of staff, has earned wide support from his staff by wielding his tools of charm, understatement and occasional flashes of temper.
A19  ALZHEIMER'S DRUG APPROVED
An advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration voted to recommend approval of a drug that would be the first on the market to treat Alzheimer's disease.
A18  Defense Secretary Aspin received a pacemaker.
A19  A slow start for the defense of four Los Angeles police officers.
A18  The Education Secretary backed race-based scholarships.
A15  Law Page B16  In New Jersey, a milestone in courts' treatment of the mentally retarded.
In Florida, an ethnic battle over Janet Reno's successor.
Metro Digest B1  DROP IN REPORTED CRIME
For the second consecutive year, reported crime in New York City declined last year in all major categories, according to the Police Department.
And the total number of reported crimes fell to their lowest level in seven years.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-30  Remember spring?
C1  New Directors/New Films.
C24  For Children C30  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  "The Wiz" revived.
C3  "The Sisters Rosensweig." C13  Film: "Orlando." C1  Dance: "France Danse." C3  Restaurants C18  Art: Sculpture in iron.
C1  Word and Image: Death in adolescence.
C23  Fashion Page B6  Sports B7-14  Basketball: Knicks clobber Cavaliers.
B7  St.
John's beats Texas Tech.
B7  Santa Clara upsets Arizona.
B7  Column: Lipsyte on the Glen Ridge case.
B7  Obituaries A21-22  Benjamin H. Read; led research on foreign affairs.
A21  Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials  The real voting fraud.
Old alliances, new Asia.
A test of backbone for Democrats.
Topics: Helen Hayes, everywhere.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Cutting aid to Israel.
Anthony Lewis: Small is powerful.
Sergei N. Khrushchev: Stop wasting aid to Russia


HOUSE DEMOCRATS UNITE TO APPROVE CLINTON'S BUDGET
The House of Representatives, in a late-night session, gave President Clinton two major victories as overwhelming Democratic majorities passed first his plan to cut the deficit and then his jobs bill, designed to foster short-term economic stimulus.
Early today, at 12:38 A.M., a 235-to-190 vote sent the $16 billion jobs measure to the Senate.
That bill had been challenged by some conservative Democrats who doubted its ability to spur the economy, but in the end only 22 Democrats deserted their party.


Review/Dance; The French Spirit, Past and Present
Under the apt title "France Danse," the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts has just opened a two-week festival that offers a varied overview of the extraordinary French dance boom of the last 15 years.
The Paris Opera Ballet and the experimental troupe of Michel Kelemenis led off in different theaters at the Kennedy Center on Wednesday night.
It was a typically far-ranging start for a season that features two ballet companies and four modern-dance groups, and there was already a surprise: the rare historical revivals that the ever-brilliant dancers from the Paris Opera chose for their first program in the Opera House.


Books of The Times; Of Death in Adolescence And Innocence Lost
The Virgin Suicides By Jeffrey Eugenides 249 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $18
Jeffrey Eugenides's piercing first novel begins with a startling and horrible event: a 13-year-old girl hurls herself out of a window and impales herself on the iron fence that runs around her family's house.


Benjamin H. Read Is Dead at 67; A Leading Foreign Affairs Scholar
Benjamin Huger Read, founding director of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars and first president of the German Marshall Fund, died yesterday at George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
He was 67.
He died from complications from liver disease, his family said.


The Art Market
Moving 'Fortress'
The National Gallery of Art in Washington doesn't want to talk, but that's not stopping the rest of the art world.
The news is the gallery's pending purchase of Bellotto's "Fortress of Konigstein," for a reported $9.5 million.
The deal hangs on whether the painting will be granted an export license and allowed to leave London.
It is considered British property because it has been in a private English collection for the last 150 years.
Painted between 1756 and 1758, Bellotto's landscape is one in a series of five commissioned by the Elector of Saxony, Friedrich Augustus II, for the royal collection in Dresden.
The painting is large (52 1/2 by 92 3/4 inches) and is being sold to the National Gallery by Bruno Meissner, a Zurich dealer who bought the work with Konrad Bernheimer, a Munich dealer.
It was the centerpiece of Mr.
Meissner's booth in October at the International Antique Dealers Show in Manhattan, where it carried a price tag of $14 million.


Calling Moral Court To Order
THE March Madness is upon us, when the boys who will be boys are beloved beyond all reason.
What better time to say that the verdict in the Glen Ridge case must not be regarded as a closure but as a call to action.


Showalter Has His Say By Not Saying Much
Day after day, question after question, Buck Showalter displays how adept he is at avoiding controversy.
Although his relationship with George Steinbrenner is merely beginning and the potential remains for it to turn explosive, it is unlikely the Yankee manager will perturb the owner by uttering something foolish.
He is boring for a reason.
Whether he is addressing the job battles at second base or for the final two slots in the rotation, whether gauging Gerald Williams's chances of making the Yankees or discussing why he would not play Wade Boggs against the Red Sox, Showalter spits out words that are diplomatic and will not return to haunt him.


Ex-Assemblyman Sued in Harassment Case
An employee of former New York State Assemblyman Mark Alan Seigel has filed suit against him and against the State Assembly, contending that Mr.
Seigel sexually harassed her and then dismissed her from her job.
The woman, Charmian Neary, 33, worked as the legislative director for Mr.
Seigel from January to July 1990.
She has repeatedly charged that Mr.
Seigel frequently made lewd comments, propositioned her and then fostered the impression that the two were having an affair.
When she complained to Assembly officials at the time, she charged in a complaint filed on Wednesday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, she was rebuffed.


Review/Art; A 12-Work Gift Sampler From Leon Polk Smith
The best approach to the show of Leon Polk Smith's work at the Brooklyn Museum is straight through the permanent collection of contemporary art that precedes it in the museum's newly renovated west wing.
This long, high, crowded space has the distracted atmosphere of an open-air bazaar.
Pluralism reigns.
From Karel Appel to Adrian Piper, the good, the bad and the ugly sit side by side, and the viewer is importuned, seduced or preached to every step of the way.
By contrast, the atmosphere in the larger of the two galleries set aside for Mr.
Smith's work is calm, airy, even a trifle chilly.
The dozen paintings, a promised gift from the 87-year-old artist to the museum, are all of a piece: smooth of surface, spare but often vivid of color, and eccentrically geometric.
It is clear at a glance that they require time and attention from the viewer, in the form of both close-up scrutiny and a slow, contemplative 360-degree turn from the center of the room.


Indian Tribe's Lawsuit Freezes Property Owners' Land Titles
Daniel and Charlotte Nyzio have lived in their Shelton Road home here for 29 years.
The couple, now retired, had planned to sell their house this spring and move to a warmer climate.
But that was before the Nyzios and a half-dozen neighbors were included in a lawsuit filed by the Golden Hill Paugussett Indians that has frozen the titles on hundreds of properties in Bridgeport and Trumbull, making it impossible for owners to sell or refinance their homes and businesses.


Art in Review
Emil Heilborn  Robert Mann Gallery  42 East 67th Street  Manhattan  Through April 10
Trained as an automotive engineer by General Motors, Emil Heilborn switched fields in the early 1930's and for the next two decades was one of Sweden's most successful commercial photographers.
Now 93 and living in Stockholm, he has not shown in this country since 1934.
Mr.
Heilborn specialized in industrial subjects, and his pictures, nearly all of which were done on commission, express a ringing faith in technology that seems both admirable and dated.


Confusion In Jockeying For The Post
On the eve of yet another bankruptcy court hearing on The New York Post, one possible group of wealthy bidders broke up and another formed yesterday, leaving even the participants confused about who was allied with whom and what might happen next.
At the same time, The Post's renegade editor, Pete Hamill, was ordered to leave the newspaper.
Acting on a request from Abraham Hirschfeld, the paper's would-be publisher, the bankruptcy court that now handles The Post's liabilities and assets issued a temporary restraining order barring Mr.
Hamill from the Post building and directing him not to act as the newspaper's editor.


Tyson Has Prison Meeting With Shabazz
MIKE TYSON prayed in Arabic and discussed his education behind bars with the widow of civil rights leader Malcolm X.
BETTY SHABAZZ visited the former heavyweight champion Wednesday at the Indiana Youth Center, a medium-security prison about 15 miles west of Indianapolis in Plainfield, Ind., where he is serving a six-year sentence for rape.


Why Shut the Old In Nursing Homes?
To the Editor:
I must take exception to your conclusion in "Shielding the Elderly From Bankruptcy" (editorial, March 1).
The concept of nursing home insurance is long overdue, and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is to be commended for proposing such a program for New York State.


Joseph Kestin Is Dead; Brown Professor, 79
Joseph Kestin, a professor of engineering at Brown University for 41 years, died on Tuesday at Miriam Hospital in Providence, R.I.
Professor Kestin, who lived in Providence, was 79.
The cause of death was acute leukemia, said his daughter, Dr. Anita Kestin.


Ah, Spring: It Rhymed, Once, With Sing; Death as Well as Life
Spring is the season that can't quite make up its mind.
The struggle to throw off the dead hand of winter seems to last much longer than the script calls for, and the month of May flirts indecently with hot and clammy summer.
No wonder the season calls forth complex responses.
It's a highly conflicted three months.
Here 10 New York Times writers give suggestions on where to spend the first weekend of spring 1993, free of charge, in the New York metropolitan region.


Snow + Rain + Freezing Temperatures = Ice


Topics of The Times; Helen Hayes, Everywhere
Several years ago a man waiting on line at a book signing (the signer was a former movie star) regaled his fellow standees with tales of celebrities sighted and autographs garnered.
He had Brando and Redford and Newman and Davis.
Plus, he added, "loads" of Helen Hayes.
Helen Hayes, he explained, is "everywhere."
In the 92 years of her life, Helen Hayes was indeed everywhere.
When she made her debut in show business -- in a school production of "A Midsummer Night's Dream" -- she wasn't much more than a baby.
By 8 she was on Broadway.
She stayed for 62 years.


Ah, Spring: It Rhymed, Once, With Sing; Soaking Up Energy
Spring is the season that can't quite make up its mind.
The struggle to throw off the dead hand of winter seems to last much longer than the script calls for, and the month of May flirts indecently with hot and clammy summer.
No wonder the season calls forth complex responses.
It's a highly conflicted three months.
Here 10 New York Times writers give suggestions on where to spend the first weekend of spring 1993, free of charge, in the New York metropolitan region.


Wachtler and Silverman Clash on Control of Trust
A dispute over trust funds between Sol Wachtler, the former Chief Judge of New York State, and Joy Silverman, his former lover, bogged down today when two judges declined to hear the case because of their past associations with Mr.
Wachtler.
The matter was finally assigned to Judge Edward A. Baker of Nassau County Court, who late this afternoon scheduled a hearing for April 8.


U.S. Companies Quietly Returning to South Africa
The advertisement spread across two pages of a Johannesburg newspaper pictures a bottle of pharmaceutical capsules and the announcement: "Now Legally Available."
The product on sale is not a drug, but the Windows computer program from the Microsoft Corporation, the American producer of software that withdrew from South Africa in 1986 when an anti-apartheid boycott was gathering force.
For years there was a gray market in Microsoft products, but now the company is back, with a small office and an ad campaign that transforms the long taboo into a marketing come-on.


Jaspers Lodged at Airport, Not Planning to Fly Away
Perhaps there is some message in the accommodations given to Manhattan College, an 11th-seeded team in the East Regional of the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament at the Carrier Dome.
The Jaspers are holed up in a Quality Inn near the Syracuse airport, while their first-round opponent, No. 6 Virginia, is stretched out in the Homewood Suites.
Suites suggest long stays with maximum comfort.
Airport lodgings suggest quick and early departures from town.


Ex-Ranger Who Likes to Stay In Touch
From his new home in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Kris King pays close attention to the Rangers, the team that traded him to the Jets in December.
He reads about their continuing trades and injuries and coaching changes and overtime defeats, such as Wednesday night's 4-3 loss to the Edmonton Oilers at Madison Square Garden.


Ah, Spring: It Rhymed, Once, With Sing
LITERARY and historical texts suggest that the city of New York once experienced an annual interval of mild weather, known as "spring," that lasted up to three months.
Modern scholars believe it was a transitional period between winter and summer whose beginning was marked by cool, windy weather bearing the seductive hint of warm, ripe days to come.
Days were apparently mild and balmy, evenings cool and fragrant with the aroma of a thousand blossoming trees and flowers.
The spring experienced by our remote ancestors bears nothing in common, needless to say, with the cruel tease that New Yorkers know today, a 10-day jolt of slashing rain that follows six weeks of meat-locker temperatures and howling Arctic winds, and raises the curtain on four months of blistering heat and 90 percent humidity.
Spring in New York is a hoax.
The city staggers into it like a man with a "kick me" sign tacked to his rear end.
Chicago is spared this debacle, because it has no hope.
It is a city that has grown accustomed to deep snowdrifts in Wrigley Field on opening day.
New York still hopes.
And every April, New York sees its hopes crushed.


RESULTS PLUS
N.I.T.
Three Big East Teams Come Up Winners  Junior guards Howard Eisley and Gerrod Abram combined for 42 points as Boston College withstood a stiff challenge from Niagara to win, 87-83, last night in the first round of a National Invitation Tournament game in Niagara Falls, N.Y.
Boston College (17-12) will play Rice (18-9) in the second round.
Niagara finished the season at 23-7.
Abram finished with 22 points and Eisley with 20.
Niagara got 17 points from center Brian Clifford and 15 from forward Ron Robinson. (AP) Providence 73, James Madison 61: Franklin Western scored 14 of his 20 points in the second half and Providence withstood two late surges by James Madison for the victory in Providence, R.I.
Dickey Simkins added 12 points and Michael Smith 10 for the Friars (18-11), who face West Virginia (17-11) Saturday night in a second-round game.
Kent Culuko scored 18 for James Madison (21-9), while William Davis added 15 for the Dukes.
The Friars held Bryan Edwards, who came into the game averaging 14.1 points, to 5 points.
It was the fourth straight year that James Madison has lost in the first round of the N.I.T.
The Dukes, who led the nation in field-goal percentage at 52.3 percent, shot only 39.6 percent from the field. (AP)


Review/Film; Fond Recollections Of a Part of Gay History
"I can think of no place better to have suspense and a real eerie feeling of decadence than a lesbian bar, because lesbians have always been outlaws," asserts Mary Wings, an author of lesbian mystery novels, in the opening moments of the documentary film "Last Call at Maud's."
Ms.
Wings is one of many women interviewed in the film who look back with a mystical nostalgia on the glory days of Maud's, a popular lesbian hangout in the Haight-Ashbury district of San Francisco.
More than just a watering hole, Maud's, which flourished between 1966 and 1989, is remembered as a sort of sorority house for a generation of lesbians, most of whom are now over 50.


Latest in the Italian Scandal: President Is NOT a Target
In a land so steeped in public corruption that no one of any prominence seems safe from whispers of misdoing, the magistrates investigating Italy's broadest scandal felt obliged to pause today to say whom they were not investigating.
The figure who inspired this brief reversal of a daily torrent of names -- officials and politicians accused of taking kickbacks and businessmen charged with handing them over -- was no less than President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, whose largely ceremonial post nonetheless provides the country with a final moral arbiter.


A Test of Backbone for Democrats
Trent Lott of Mississippi and fellow Senate Republicans are on the verge of attracting enough Democratic votes to scuttle a key component of President Clinton's deficit-reduction plan.
The unfortunate coalition opposes raising taxes on wealthier Social Security recipients, which President Clinton proposed as a way to trim a program that accounts for nearly one-fifth of Federal outlays.
Sadly, Senate Democratic leaders are gearing up to compromise rather than fight.
There's more at stake here than just the $30 billion the tax hike is expected to raise over five years.
If the Democratic leaders flinch on the first challenge to their program by a powerful interest group, the rest of the economic package could come apart at warp speed.


Review/Art; When Iron Became Clay For Sculptors
IT is hard to recall an exhibition more beautifully installed on the spiral ramp of the Guggenheim Museum than "Picasso and the Age of Iron," which opens today.
The works, spaciously and elegantly arrayed, seem to reflect perfectly the structural and material panache, the formal daring and the emotional intensity of Frank Lloyd Wright's architecture.
The show includes, in addition to a group of drawings and paintings by Picasso, roughly 100 sculptures by not only Picasso, but also Julio Gonzalez, Alexander Calder, Alberto Giacometti and David Smith.
Altogether, they describe one of the great passages in the art of this century, forged largely in iron.


Webb Waived by Celtics, Then Arrested
MARCUS WEBB was jailed yesterday on a charge of aggravated rape, a few hours after the rookie was waived by the Boston Celtics following several off-court incidents.
Webb, 22, pleaded innocent and was held at a Cambridge, Mass., jail after failing to post $50,000 bail at his arraignment in Waltham District Court, the Middlesex County district attorney's office said.


'English Only' Law Fails Rights Test
Since 1980,Dade County has had an "English only" law even though more than half the county's population is of Hispanic descent.
The law, which requires that English be the only language in non-emergency material published by the county, has survived any number of challenges and attempts to repeal it.
But this month it ran afoul of the Federal Government.
Not surprisingly, Washington won.


The Spoken Word
SYMPOSIUM ON NAZI CULTURE, New York Public Library, Fifth Avenue at 42d Street.
"Purity and Degeneration in National Socialist Art and Culture," a daylong symposium on the Nazi esthetic and political principles, moderated by Prof.
Anson Rabinbach of Cooper Union.
Other speakers include Sander Gilman of Cornell University, Andreas Huyssen of Columbia University, George Mosse of the University of Wisconsin, Claudia Koonz of Duke University and David Bathrick of Cornell.
Tomorrow from 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Free.
Sponsored by Goethe House in connection with "Assault on the Arts: Culture and Politics in Nazi Germany," an exhibition at the library.
Information: (212) 930-0679.
GALLERY TALKS, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"1993 Biennial Exhibition," by Leslie Heiner, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 and 3:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3676.


Man and Son Hurt In Pit-Bull Attack
A man and his 2-year-old son were attacked and seriously hurt yesterday by a stray pit bull that they encountered in the hallway of their apartment building in Brooklyn, the police said.
The 24-year-old father, Anthony Calvacca, and his son, Anthony Jr., had just returned from walking their own dog, a collie, in Williamsburg when the pit bull suddenly leaped at the family pet.


Corrections
The real estate column in Business Day on Wednesday about office development in Winston-Salem, N.C., misidentified the university there that has a new combined law and business center.
It is Wake Forest.


Balkan Update
Sarajevo, Bosnia
Serbian forces fired thousands of shells into the city yesterday, striking places like apartment blcoks, city streets and refugee centers.
Hospital officials said they knew of at least 20 people who had been killed and scores who had been wounded.
Cerska, Bosnia
After escaping from Cerska, an eastern Bosnian enclave overrun by Serbian fighters, Bosnian soldiers corroborated ham radio reports of the killings of dozens of Muslim civilians by the Serbs.
United Nations
The Security Council began preparations to authorize immediate enforcement of its ban on military flights over Bosnia, seeking a resolution ordering NATO war planes to shoot down violators.


Crime Down in New York for 2d Year in Row
Reported crime in New York City declined last year in all major categories, the Police Department said yesterday.
After seemingly inexorable increases in crime year after year going back to the early days of the Eisenhower Administration, the 1992 figures marked the second consecutive year of decline.


Gordon A. Juel, 39, Theatrical Designer
Gordon A. Juel, a theatrical scenery designer and prop man, died on Monday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 39 and lived in White Plains.
He died after a short illness, said his companion, Ralph Marash.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CRIME RATE HITS 7-YEAR LOW Reported crime in New York City declined last year in all major categories, the Police Department said.
After seemingly inexorable increases in crime year over year going all the way back to the early days of the Eisenhower Administration, the 1992 figures marked the second consecutive year of decline.
The number of murders dropped below 2,000 for the first time in three years and the total number of reported crimes fell to their lowest level in seven years.
A1.
NEW SECURITY PLAN FOR HOUSING AGENCY The New York City Housing Authority will spend $139 million over the next three years on an array of measures intended to improve security in the authority's 324 housing complexes, including increasing housing police officers on the beat, more social services for tenants and such safety measures as new locks and intercom systems.
The plan was announced at the Red Hook Houses, the sprawling Brooklyn public housing complex where an elementary school principal was shot and killed last December.
B3.


Woody Allen Says Report Clears Him
A team of child-abuse investigators at Yale-New Haven Hospital here cleared Woody Allen of Mia Farrow's assertion that he sexually molested their 7-year-old daughter, Mr.
Allen and his lawyer said today.
The findings, presented to Mr.
Allen and Ms.
Farrow at the hospital after a seven-month inquiry, were not made public.
Ms.
Farrow's lawyer, Eleanor B. Alter, did not specifically challenge the report, although she characterized it as inaccurate.


Abroad at Home; Small Is Powerful
Gary Orren, professor of public policy at Harvard's Kennedy School, usually teaches and writes about elective politics.
This year, on sabbatical, he is leading a team of 11 young men and women in the service group City Year.
He has found the experience so gripping that with the Kennedy School's permission he is going to spend a second year at it.
"This is the first time I've ever felt I touched civic education," Professor Orren said when I visited City Year.


Sounds Around Town
Enjoying Sweet Success
Jimmy Scott, the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street, Manhattan, (212) 921-1940, extension 11.
Nominated for a Grammy Award this year for jazz vocal performance, Jimmy Scott, at the age of 67, is finally basking in some long-overdue glory.
More than 40 years into a career that has seen stints with Lionel Hampton and too many nights in stale-aired dives, Mr.
Scott is still celebrating the success of his 1992 major-label debut album, "All the Way"(Sire); and early this year, Rhino/Atlantic released other tracks on "Lost and Found," a compilation of rare recordings from the early 1970's.
Onstage, Mr.
Scott's high, piercing voice, loosely shrugged shoulders and twisted, wrenched notes reinvent ballads like "Someone to Watch Over Me" and "The Masquerade Is Over." For all his new found stature, there's enough of the late-night saloon singer in him to cast the clearest sentiments and most hopeful romances in melancholy shadow.
Performances tonight and tomorrow night at 8 and 10.
Tickets are $15, with a two-drink minimum at tables.


Donald Brewster, 56, A Photographer, Dies
Donald B. Brewster, a photographer, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan at 56.
The cause was complications of lung cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Brewster's work was published in newspapers and magazines and shown at the Louvre, the Smithsonian Institution, Nikon House and the Overseas Press Club, among others.


Old Alliances, New Asia
North Korea's defiance of the world over nuclear inspections should remind Americans that peace in Asia can't be taken for granted.
But while the reckless antics of Pyongyang's time-warp dictatorship are familiar to Washington, newer challenges have crept up on policy makers almost unnoticed.
America's cold war era security treaties are inadequate to meet the challenges ahead.
China has doubled its military spending since 1988, using the money to build its first seagoing navy since the Ming Dynasty half a millennium ago.
This week it threatened to attack if Taiwan moves toward independence.
Japan has stretched the limits of its constitutional ban on overseas military deployment.
And smaller powers like Indonesia and Malaysia have embarked on arms-buying sprees.


CHRONICLE
EDDIE MURPHY, the actor and comedian, married his longtime girlfriend and the mother of his two children at a lavish wedding last night at the Plaza Hotel, The Associated Press reported.
The bride, NICOLE MITCHELL, is a model.


Humana Inc. (N)
Humana Inc. said yesterday that profits from health maintenance organizations and other managed care operations rose sharply in the three months that ended on Feb. 28.
It was the final quarter that included results from Humana's aborted effort to keep hospitals filled with patients from its own H.M.O.'s.
Galen Health Care Inc., the troubled hospital chain that Humana spun off to shareholders on March 1, showed another earnings decline.
Galen set up shop a few blocks from Humana's headquarters in Louisville, Ky.


Devils Surge, Snap and Step Up
The Devils scored three goals on their first five shots tonight, sealing the fate of the Edmonton Oilers, ending a four-game losing streak and moving into third place in the Patrick Division race.
The victory came at the expense of Oilers goalie Bill Ranford, who only one night before had made a sensational club-record 56 saves in beating the Rangers.


Ship Evades West's Blockade
A ship carrying a huge supply of gasoline has evaded the Western ban on trade with Yugoslavia, American officials said.
Page A10.


Cain's Triple-Double Doubly Sweet for Redmen
The St.
John's Redmen called upon two once-ignored but now vital sources of energy -- point guard David Cain and the deep end of their bench -- to turn a potentially dangerous finish into an 85-67 victory over Texas Tech today in the first round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
With Cain earning the first triple-double of his career -- 12 points, 11 assists and a career-high 11 rebounds -- a 24-4 stretch in the final minutes sent the Redmen cruising toward a second-round meeting in the East Regional with Arkansas on Saturday afternoon.
The Razorbacks defeated Holy Cross, 94-64, as Arkansas forward Darrell Hawkins set a tournament record with 8 steals in the second game of the afternoon doubleheader at Lawrence Joel Coliseum.


Sounds Around Town
Romance at Rainbow
"A Grand Night for Singing!: The Rodgers and Hammerstein Revue," Rainbow and Stars, 65th floor, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, (212) 632-5000.
Five of Broadway's finest younger voices -- Victoria Clark, Jason Graae, Lynne Wintersteller, Martin Vidnovic and Karen Ziemba -- are featured in the sixth of the Rainbow and Stars revues honoring great American songwriters.
Under the direction of Walter Bobbie, who plays Nicely Nicely Johnson in "Guys and Dolls," the mood shifts seamlessly from sweepingly romantic (Mr. Vidnovic's "This Nearly Was Mine") to playfully inventive ("Shall We Dance?" as a comic skit).
Warhorses like "Some Enchanted Evening" and "You'll Never Walk Alone" are omitted in favor of lesser-known but worthy numbers from shows like "Cinderella." The gorgeous piano and cello accompaniments are a model for contemporary cabaret performance.
Shows are at 8:30 and 10:30 P.M. today and tomorrow.
There is a $35 cover charge, with no minimum.


Market Place; Warren Buffett warns that stock prospects are dimmer in the 90's.
WITH the Dow Jones industrial average near record highs, investors' excitement about stocks is nearly palpable, impressing even the most jaded Wall Streeters.
The 1990's, it seems, are shaping up to be another great decade for stocks.
But not according to everyone.
A little Midwestern rain is falling on the stock parade in the form of a letter to shareholders sent out this week by Warren E. Buffett, the chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, whose investing prowess earned him the title of "the sage from Omaha."


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the bribery scandal in Italy rendered the Italian nickname of the inquiry incorrectly.
It is Mani Pulite, or Clean Hands.


Ah, Spring: It Rhymed, Once, With Sing; Just Trekking
Spring is the season that can't quite make up its mind.
The struggle to throw off the dead hand of winter seems to last much longer than the script calls for, and the month of May flirts indecently with hot and clammy summer.
No wonder the season calls forth complex responses.
It's a highly conflicted three months.
Here 10 New York Times writers give suggestions on where to spend the first weekend of spring 1993, free of charge, in the New York metropolitan region.


And in N.B.A. East, Knicks Clobber Cavaliers
It was difficult for the Cleveland Cavaliers to argue with the statement made here tonight by the Knicks.
They tried, but that only made it worse.
Harassed, bullied and shoved into a 22-point hole by the middle of the second quarter, the Cavaliers lost a series of animated debates with the officials over the Knicks' physical play, Coach Lenny Wilkens to a third-quarter ejection and ultimately a 115-95 supposed showdown to the Knicks at the Richfield Coliseum.


Reviews/Film; Not Easy Growing Up With a Gambling Father
Andrew Jacobs (Tzvi Ratner-Stauber), the central character in "Family Prayers," a small, sentimental coming-of-age drama set in Los Angeles in 1969, is a dour adolescent with the rigid posture of a tin soldier.
His earnestness and lack of athletic skills make the 13-year-old boy something of an outsider at the Hebrew school he attends.
Although he is obviously smart, his psychological problems have made it difficult for him to memorize the Haftarah he must chant at his imminent bar mitzvah.
The source of the boy's anxiety is a family that is coming apart because of his father's compulsive gambling.
Martin Jacobs (Joe Mantegna) is a textile worker who spends most of his off hours trying to kick up some easy money in high-stakes poker games and by betting on sports events.
When he wins, color television sets and pianos materialize like magic in the Jacobs bungalow.
When he loses, thugs pound on the front door demanding money that Martin doesn't have.


Big Payout by General Dynamics
The General Dynamics Corporation said today that its board had approved a special one-time cash payment to stockholders of $20 a share and that William A. Anders, who has pared the company and driven up its stock price, would step down as its chief executive.
The payout, effective April 22, continues the company's practice of returning to investors some of the proceeds from its multibillion-dollar divestments.


G.O.P. Speakers at Dinner In Virginia Irk Minorities
A brouhaha erupted in Virginia politics today over comments about minorities made by some prominent Republicans, including Oliver L. North and Charles Black, at a banquet here last Friday.
The uproar, over remarks making fun of "soul brothers" and others referring to "fags" and "gay apparel," has embarrassed many Virginia Republicans and left others seething.


Esiason Enters to Take No. 7 Handoff for Jets
Boomer Esiason returned home to Long Island today and, with his wife, father and old high school coach looking on, was immediately presented with Jets jersey No. 7.
Goodbye, Ken O'Brien.


TVWeekend; Anjelica Huston Stars In 2-Part Family Saga
Television movies are usually tidy affairs, methodically moving in a direct line from point A to point B so that even the dimmest viewer risks no possibility of confusion.
"Family Pictures" will have none of that.
The four-hour "ABC Novel for Television" that will be broadcast on Sunday and Monday at 9 P.M. is a messy, sprawling, contradictory story that follows a single family from the 1950's through the 1970's, from shallow innocence to wary resignation.
Sometimes off the mark, "Family Pictures" in the end proves surprisingly powerful, thanks to splendid performances from Anjelica Huston and the rest of the cast.
Jennifer Miller's adaptation of Sue Miller's novel wastes no time in revealing the basic outline and details of the story.
The year is 1983.
Nina (Kyra Sedgwick), a photographer who is the narrator, explains that her parents are divorced and that she herself is separated from her husband.
Her mother, Lainey (Ms. Huston), is working as a scenery designer in New York City.
Her father, David (Sam Neill), a psychiatrist, is about to marry a woman who was once their neighbor in suburban Seattle.
Nina's story then returns to 1950, before she was born, to the day her father snapped a picture of his son Randall, and realized the unusually placid child was autistic.


Ah, Spring: It Rhymed, Once, With Sing; A New Jersey Idyll
Spring is the season that can't quite make up its mind.
The struggle to throw off the dead hand of winter seems to last much longer than the script calls for, and the month of May flirts indecently with hot and clammy summer.
No wonder the season calls forth complex responses.
It's a highly conflicted three months.
Here 10 New York Times writers give suggestions on where to spend the first weekend of spring 1993, free of charge, in the New York metropolitan region.


2 Doctors and 9 Lawyers Held In Fraudulent Injury Claims
It began as an undercover inquiry three years ago by an insurance company that suspected it was losing millions of dollars in fake personal-injury claims orchestrated by a group of lawyers and doctors in Brooklyn.
The private undercover work led yesterday to the arrests of nine lawyers and two doctors who were indicted on state charges that they falsified medical reports, invented injuries and destroyed records to obtain personal-injury settlements or to win lawsuits for their clients.


F.D.A. Panel Urges Approval of Alzheimer's Drug
An advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration voted unanimously today to recommend approval of a drug that would be the first on the market to treat Alzheimer's disease.
The drug, tacrine, made by the Warner-Lambert Company of Morris Plains, N.J., appears to benefit only a minority of patients and is by no means a cure.
But the committee members said that since Alzheimer's disease, a neurological disorder, was so devastating and since there was no other treatment, patients should have a chance to take the drug.


The Horse With a Harvard Touch
When Stanley Shapoff was a classmate of John F. Kennedy at Harvard in the late 1930's, he was studying English with no precise idea what he intended to do with it.
But he really wanted to major in horses.
And that's why, half a century and many horses later, he is the trainer of one of the leading candidates for the Florida Derby this Saturday and the Kentucky Derby six weeks later.
But Skip Shapoff will not be saddling his star colt Saturday when the focus of the racing world is trained on Gulfstream Park.
He will be back on Long Island watching on television from his room in St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, where he underwent multiple-bypass heart surgery two weeks ago.
He is 74 years old and has been tracking his horse from the hospital, and his son said the other day: "We may have to win the Florida Derby to pay the telephone bills."


Ah, Spring: It Rhymed, Once, With Sing; O Jeanette, O Nelson
Spring is the season that can't quite make up its mind.
The struggle to throw off the dead hand of winter seems to last much longer than the script calls for, and the month of May flirts indecently with hot and clammy summer.
No wonder the season calls forth complex responses.
It's a highly conflicted three months.
Here 10 New York Times writers give suggestions on where to spend the first weekend of spring 1993, free of charge, in the New York metropolitan region.


Housing Authority Plans $139 Million for Security
The New York City Housing Authority plans to spend $139 million over the next three years on an array of measures intended to improve security in the authority's 324 housing complexes.
Authority officials said the money would be spent on increasing housing police officers on the beat, more social services for tenants and such safety measures as new locks and intercom systems.
Most of the money will come from existing funds in the authority's budget.
Agency officials could not immediately say how much the plan would increase the budget or what programs would be cut or altered to provide the extra security.


Topics of The Times; A Boy Named Beerhall
Remember "A Boy Named Sue," the Johnny Cash song about a child who grew up punching people who laughed at his name?
Not likely in Germany, where parents are forbidden by law to choose names that blur gender or otherwise "endanger the well-being of the child." Names that didn't make the cut in 1992 were recently cited in an annual survey.
Among the rejected were Bierstubl ("beerhall"), Storenfried ("disturber of the peace") and Whoopy (for the actress Whoopi Goldberg), because it is a stage name and too closely akin to the phrase "making whoopee."


U.S. Shouldn't Push Russia Into Chaos
To the Editor:
After acknowledging that President Boris N. Yeltsin's "authoritarian instincts are undeniable" in "The Perfect Gift for Mr. Yeltsin" (editorial, March 10), you endorse him in his conflict with the Russian Congress of People's Deputies.
You thus tell Mr.
Yeltsin -- and the world -- that you will support him if he carries out his strongly implied threat to use special troops against the legislature.
You justify this on the ground that Mr.
Yeltsin faces a Parliament that opposes and thwarts his economic policy.
So will President Francois Mitterrand if new elections bring the opposition to power in the French National Assembly, as expected.


Washington at Work; Clinton Staff Chief Lives Up to Name
The day after President Clinton delivered a somber and poorly reviewed Oval Office speech calling for individual sacrifice to help the economy, his oldest friend called members of the young White House senior staff into his office.
And he scolded them.
Yet the friend, Thomas F. McLarty 3d, the courtly chief of staff, never raised his voice.


Sense on Social Security
To the Editor:
Proposals to tax Social Security benefits are as fraudulent as using Social Security taxes for general revenue purposes.
Fairness and equity do not require any tax on the Social Security component of wealthy people's income.
The Social Security benefit is a relatively small share of a wealthy person's income but a large share for a poor or "middle class" person.
If wealthy people don't "contribute" enough, tax the non-Social Security components of their income more progressively.
JOHN MORAN Bronx, March 2, 1993


United Air Gets Tough On Unions
Playing hardball with labor unions in an attempt to lower costs, the chairman of United Airlines said yesterday that the carrier would not take delivery of at least $2 billion worth of planes from the Boeing Company that had been scheduled for delivery in 1994 and 1995.
United may also abandon unprofitable short-haul routes, said the executive, Stephen M. Wolf, leasing the planes used on those to low-cost airlines.
Mr.
Wolf said that after August, the airline would not accept delivery of Boeing planes until May 1995, when it would begin to get the 777, a twin-engine jet that it has planned to use on international routes.
Pressure Tactic Seen
The move to pull back in the short-haul markets and possibly to use carriers like Southwest Airlines to feed its major routes would presumably put considerable pressure on United's unions to agree to changes in work rules and make other concessions.


Raiders Call Audible. Hostetler Fixes Flat.
If the Los Angeles Raiders wind up signing free-agent quarterback JEFF HOSTETLER, it won't be because of his running ability or his strong arm.
It'll be because he knows how to change a tire.
MIKE WHITE, the Raiders' quarterbacks coach, and STEVE ORTMAYER, the director of football operations, met Hostetler at the Los Angeles airport Wednesday, and they were on their way to the Raiders' camp in El Segundo, Calif., when their car had a flat tire on the freeway.


Injury Could Keep Pena Out for Season
Pittsburgh Pirates reliever ALEJANDRO PENA will undergo surgery on his right elbow today in Birmingham, Ala., and is likely to miss the entire season.
Pena, who was signed to a one-year, $1.35 million contract as a free agent on Dec. 10, has not pitched in an exhibition game this spring.


Late Kings Goals Spoil Islanders' Rally
The Islanders overcame a two-goal deficit to tie the Los Angeles Kings with 8 minutes 7 seconds remaining, but they had no more shots in them.
The Kings broke the 4-4 tie with a rising slapshot goal by Aleksei Zhitnik with 6:43 left, and security goals were then tapped in by Wayne Gretzky and Luc Robitaille (empty net) for a 7-4 victory.
The Kings won even though the Islanders outshot them, 46-21.
Los Angeles goalie Kelly Hrudey turned aside 42 shots while New York goalie Glenn Healy had just 14 saves.


Review/Film Festival; Witty, Pretty, Bold, A Real She-Man
TAKING Virginia Woolf's bountiful and witty 1928 novel, "Orlando," which is as much about words, writing and the dogged pursuit of fine literature as about a number of other things, Sally Potter has made a grand new movie that is as much a richly informed appreciation of the novel as it is a free adaptation.
This ravishing and witty spectacle invades the mind through eyes that are dazzled without ever being anesthetized.
Throughout Ms.
Potter's "Orlando," as in Woolf's, there are a piercing kind of common sense and a joy that, because they are so rare these days in any medium, create their own kind of cinematic suspense and delightedly surprised laughter.
"Orlando" could well become a classic of a very special kind, not mainstream perhaps, but a model for independent film makers who follow their own irrational muses, sometimes to unmourned obscurity, occasionally to glory.


TV SPORTS: College Basketball; A Day at Ground Zero Atop a Wall of Video
March Madness (when will the P.C. Police mandate this a slap at the mentally ill?) may mean rabid fans watching as 64 teams are winnowed down to the Final Two.
But the view from inside CBS is different.
Here are some postcards from CBS command control where up to four games play at once in a surrealistic hoop-de-loop, live from the building where Dan Rather
and
Rock Rote go to work each day:
11:51 A.M.
Announcer Jim Nantz stops by a rehearsal hall-turned-media room to suggest that Evansville "has a real chance over Florida State" and that Ball State may give Kansas a hard time. (Neither will pan out, but he admits that spotting upsets is tougher than divining tournament seedings in advance.)


BP Group Begins Relocation of Executives
In a move to relocate its top managers to London, the BP Group shifted a number of its key executives yesterday.
The most important changes concern BP America, the former Standard Oil Company of Ohio, which British Petroleum acquired in 1987 when it purchased the 45 percent of the company's shares it did not already own.


INSIDE
Hirschfeld Gains in Post Bid
Abraham Hirschfeld moved forward in his effort to buy The New York Post, then made a wary peace with the newspaper's on-again-off-again editor, Pete Hamill.
Page 23. 2 Trade Clashes Averted
Two trade confrontations were defused when the United States postponed sanctions against Europe and said Japan had met a target for imports of computer chips.
Page 37.
Perot Keeps Vow Anyway
With a televised address and surveys, Ross Perot is staging a low-tech variation of the "electronic town meeting" he promised if elected.
Page 6.


Change, and Hope, for the Court
Not to be pre-empted by his 84-year-old fellow Supreme Court Justice Harry Blackmun, who has only hinted about retiring soon, Justice Byron White, 75, declared yesterday that he had definitely decided to retire this summer.
His departure, giving President Clinton his first chance to name a justice, could mark the beginning of an energetic new era for the Court.
The vacancy creates a potential for change arising sooner than Mr.
Clinton could have hoped.
To the degree that Justice White represented disdain for important rights and liberties, it signals less danger for those freedoms.
It's also an immense challenge for a President who starts his search for a nominee today but has yet to appoint his own Justice Department staff.


Flagrant Foul Costs Cavs' Ferry $4,000
Cleveland Cavaliers reserve forward DANNY FERRY has been fined $4,000 for a flagrant foul he committed in a game against Philadelphia earlier this week, the National Basketball Association announced yesterday.


Washington Memo; Lobbyists Scurry for a Place On the Health-Reform Train
Politicians love to rail against the entrenched interests who are fighting health-care reform, but nowadays it is hard to find an interest group that does not present itself as a dedicated health-care reformer.
As the lobbyists put it, the train is leaving the station.
The Clinton White House is 45 days from producing a comprehensive health-care plan, and the argument is no longer over whether to change the system but how.
Nearly all affected interest groups have suggestions, warnings, pleas and competing visions of what the reforms should be.


Clinton and 'Justice Cuomo': The Real Thing, or Just Talk?
In the 1992 Presidential campaign, Bill Clinton named only one person when asked whom he might appoint to the Supreme Court: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
On June 16, in a question-and-answer session on MTV, Mr.
Clinton responded to a question by saying, "I think Governor Cuomo would make a good Supreme Court Justice."


Romania's Come Far Since Ceaucescu Days
To the Editor:
"Gag Rule in Romania" (editorial, March 9) is dismaying for its many misstatements of fact.
All debates in the Romanian Parliament are public and are conducted in front of both the press and television cameras.


Rabin Calls for Tighter Controls On Palestinian Workers in Israel
Cutting short a trip to the United States because of surging violence here, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin returned home today saying he wants fewer Palestinians from the occupied territories working in Israel.
"To the extent that their numbers are reduced, the level of danger will be reduced," the Prime Minister said at an airport news conference.
"Coexistence under the present circumstances creates difficulties." Fewer Palestinians in Israel
Mr.
Rabin said controls would be tightened on the 120,000 or more Arab workers who leave Gaza and the West Bank each day for jobs in Israel.
Identity cards will be scrutinized more closely, he said, and magnetic detectors similar to those at airports will be set up at checkpoints.


Brokerage Firm's Past: Getting the Full Story
CALL your state securities regulators or the National Association of Securities Dealers to inquire about the reputation of Market Securities Inc., a Florida brokerage firm, and you'll get a computer printout that's as assuring as they come: "No disciplinary records," the official records say.
The savvy investor who knows enough to check out the regulatory record of a brokerage firm may not be quite savvy enough.
In the case of Market Securities -- and no doubt many other firms, lawyers say -- a second set of records exists that the informed investor should know about.
Getting the whole story may take a little detective work, but it's worth the trouble to be comfortable with the reputation of the people handling your money.


JWP Sees Another Big Loss and Will Sell Unit
Bowing to competitive pressures as well as its own serious financial problems, JWP Inc. said yesterday that it planned to sell its information services business.
The company estimated that its fourth-quarter losses would be at least $265 million.
Combined with losses in each of its first three quarters, JWP, a Queens water utility that transformed itself largely through acquisitions into the nation's largest computer reseller and electrical contractor, will lose close to $500 million for all of 1992.


Connecticut Is Eliminated
Lindsey Hunter scored 9 of Jackson State's 10 points in overtime and finished with 39 points as the Tigers won their first Division I post-season game, defeating Connecticut, 90-88, last night in overtime in a National Invitation Tournament game in Storrs, Conn.
The Tigers (25-8) let Connecticut (15-12) hit three 3-pointers in the final 50 seconds to force the overtime.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY BOMBING PROFILE: MISSING SUSPECT
Mahmud Abouhalima, a missing suspect in the World Trade Center bombing, was known at work as a taxi driver with an attitude.
On one March day two years ago, he racked up six separate summonses for failing to post his identity in his cab, driving with suspended licenses and tinkering with the taxi meter.
But among Brooklyn's circle of militant Arab immigrants, who consider it a duty to struggle against what they consider infidel Middle Eastern governments, he was known as one of the committed.
Page 1.
VAN PIECES ARE KEYS TO BLAST PUZZLE
In a makeshift workroom beneath the World Trade Center, yards from where a bomb carried by a Ryder van exploded last month, blowing the van to bits, investigators move over an identical van, trying to match parts.
They are identifying scraps of the original Ford Econoline 350 van that could lead them to new suspects, strengthen ties to those already under arrest and shed light on how the bombing was carried out.
Page 24.
WOODY ALLEN AND MIA FARROW IN COURT
As the custody battle between Mia Farrow and Woody Allen went to trial, the two appeared in open court for the first time since their dispute began.
With Ms.
Farrow watching, Mr.
Allen testified about the disintegration of the couple's relationship, his affair with her daughter and his own views of children.
Page 25.
POLICE RESCUE CRACK SUSPECT'S CHILDREN
Two small children who were left without supervision in a garbage-strewn and roach-infested apartment in Kensington, Brooklyn, were found by the police after their father was arrested for selling crack to an undercover detective, the authorities said.
Page 24.
REGION TRADER'S TRICKS FOR CLEANER AIR
Now that that the right to pollute can be bought, sold or traded, it can also be retired.
A Connecticut utility plans to donate about $3 million worth of pollution allowances to chapters of the American Lung Association.
And that organization will, in turn, give the allowances to volunteers and donors in the form of "Atmosphere Savings Bonds," each worth one ton of pollution that will never be emitted.
Page 26.
DISPUTE OVER CAUSE OF A WOMAN'S DEATH
Three years ago, when the battered body of 20-year-old Susan Negersmith was found in Wildwood, N.J., the medical examiner concluded she died of acute alcohol poisoning and exposure.
But private investigators, attracted to the case because of news accounts, say her death was a classic rape-homicide, and they are working to have the death certificate altered.
Page 26.
CUOMO HAS TENTATIVE PACT WITH UNION
The Cuomo administration announced that it had reached a tentative contract agreement with the second-largest union of state employees, bringing an end to over two years of bitter negotiations, lawsuits and uncertainty.
Page 26.
NASSAU'S SLUDGE ALLOWED TO HEAD SOUTH
Nassau County won the right to ship millions of tons of sewage sludge to West Virginia, rather than follow state and Federal demands for treatment at proposed L.I. plants.
Page 26.
As Justice Byron R. White steps down, Mario Cuomo's name may come up.
Page 9.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 25


Review/Dance; A Real 'Giselle,' but One of Sugar Plantations and Bayous
In Dance Theater of Harlem's remarkable and original production of "Giselle," the action has been transferred to early 19th-century Louisiana.
The innocent heroine is no longer wooed at a harvest festival in the vineyards by a woeful Germanic aristocrat.
Instead, Giselle invites her friends from the sugar plantations to share her happiness with another suitor in disguise, the heir to a Creole fortune and a descendant of freed slaves who live in their own stratified society.


Age 70 1/2: Decision Time for Tax-Deferred Withdrawals
People who reached age 70 1/2 during 1992 and who have been socking away money in tax-deferred retirement accounts like I.R.A., Keogh and 401(k) plans must begin taking money out by April 1 or face a hefty 50 percent tax penalty.
"There are some very, very significant decisions to be made," said Joel S. Isaacson, who is in charge of personal financial planning for Clarfeld &amp; Company, a New York accounting firm.
These are the decisions:


It Wasn't Beautiful, But Nets Will Take It
There are spots in a season that every team hopes to avoid but each one inevitably hits.
They are Dead Zones, where normal basketball time and space cease to exist.
A good team steps in and -- wham -- everything goes haywire.
For about three and a half quarters tonight against the Milwaukee Bucks, a team that would contend for the National Collegiate Athletic Association championship, the Nets looked down and discovered that their feet were stuck in one of these nasty zones.


Review/Television; 'Day One' Plus Two: Look, No Sex
"Day One," the newest ABC news magazine, made a pulpish debut two weeks ago with a report on a womanizing bartender who was recently convicted in Oregon of attempted murder because he failed to tell one or more of the women he was sleeping with or trying to sleep with that he had tested positive for HIV.
Other elements in this tale, related by Forrest Sawyer, included references to drug use, a charge of rape, details of oral sex, pictures of a dying woman and interviews with grieving parents.
Last week the sex-crime theme was pursued with a report on coerced sex of female prisoners in the former Georgia Women's Correctional Institution.
More than 160 women have accused prison staff members of offenses, including rape, and 15 men have been charged.
The reporter, Sheila MacVickers, went beyond the court records to draw attention to the incompetence or indifference of the warden and state officials (yes, men), who did not come off at all well under her questioning.
Although the account of a possible coverup of a murder seemed strained, the reporting was more productive than in day one of "Day One.".


An Easy Victory for Richter's Showcase
The sighs of relief at Madison Square Garden last night came from the Ranger coach as well as the players.
The unthinkable never happened as the Rangers skated away with an 8-1 trouncing of the lowly San Jose Sharks.
Coach Ron Smith was relieved because "coaches are always more anxious and nervous when the team is supposed to win."


Key Dodges Rain And Wind
The rain stopped and started all afternoon, but it didn't dampen Jimmy Key's performance today.
Two weeks and two days from the Yankees' season opener, he is ready and rejuvenated.
While a split squad was losing to the Chicago White Sox, 6-1, on the other side of Florida, Key was pitching the rest of the club to a 6-0 victory over the Los Angeles Dodgers here.
In between torrents of wind and rain, he worked five scoreless innings, struck out five, induced three double plays and finished by striking out the side in the fifth.


Using Your Computer To Run Your Finances
A PERSONAL computer and a powerful but inexpensive financial program offer a fast and easy way to stay on top of personal finances.
Bill-paying, which might take two hours a month by hand, can be streamlined into 15 minutes with the data automatically carried into budgeting and cash-flow statements.
And that's only the beginning.
"Quicken and Managing Your Money are both excellent," said Robert A. Clarfeld, the president of Clarfeld &amp; Company, a New York accounting firm that specializes in financial planning.
"I love those programs." He frequently recommends them to clients and finds that their use develops financial discipline.
With both widely available for around $35, he said, "I can't imagine anyone who wouldn't get an immediate value."


Results Plus
PRO BASKETBALL Blazers Halt Rockets Winning Streak The longest winning streak in the National Basketball Association this season ended at 15 games last night when the Portland Trail Blazers, behind Jerome Kersey's 22 points, beat the Houston Rockets, 106-98, in overtime.
Hakeem Olajuwon had 34 points and 17 rebounds for the Rockets before fouling out with 15 seconds left in regulation.
Olajuwon fouled Kersey, a 61 percent free-throw shooter, but he made both attempts to tie the score at 94-94.
Houston's Vernon Maxwell missed a 3-pointer with five seconds to go and Portland's Cliff Robinson failed to connect on an off-balance 18-footer at the regulation buzzer.
The Blazers, who never trailed in overtime, built a 102-98 lead on Mario Elie's 3-point play with 45 seconds to go in the extra period.
Terry Porter, only 2 for 13 from the field, sank 3 of 4 free throws in the final 11 seconds for the Blazers.
Carl Herrera scored 17 points and Maxwell 16 for the Rockets, playing their second road game in as many nights.
Rod Strickland had 16 and Porter 15 for Portland. (AP) TENNIS Edberg Upset in 7-Hour Ordeal Eyebrows and umbrellas remained raised yesterday in Key Biscayne, Fla., at the waterlogged, windwhipped Lipton Championships, where the rubberized Laycold surface of the stadium court came to a boil again in the morning, where cloudbursts arrived and departed with tidal regularity all afternoon and then exploded again at night.
Because of a parade of rain delays, the day's first match, a quarterfinal between third-seeded Stefan Edberg and fifth-seeded Petr Korda, turned into a seven-hour ordeal that ended on an upset note, with Edberg the loser, 7-6 (7-3), 7-6 (7-5).
"It's not a real contest when you come on and off the court five times," Edberg said.
Gabriela Sabatini might have agreed after absorbing her worst loss to Steffi Graf in 34 meetings, 6-0, 6-2, a defeat that ended Sabatini's eight-match Florida winning streak against Graf.
With snap in her serve and crackle in her signature forehand, Graf, a two-time champion, advanced to her fourth Lipton final today, where she will face defending champion Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, who eliminated Japan's Kimiko Date, 6-2, 6-1.
Another men's quarterfinal saw Pete Sampras advance, 6-3, 7-6 (9-7), with some assistance from Richard Krajicek's double fault at matchpoint.
Also reaching the semifinals was Marcos Ondruska, who eliminated Mark Woodforde, 6-4, 6-2, the conqueror of top-seeded Jim Courier on Thursday.
HOCKEY Hartford Can Say Goodbye to Playoffs In Landover, Md., Dimitri Khristich scored two of his three goals during Washington's four-goal first period and the Capitals eliminated Hartford from playoff contention by beating the Whalers, 5-2, last night.
The Whalers had not missed the playoffs since 1985, but the loss assured them of no better than a fifth-place finish in the Adams Division.
Hartford is 29 points behind fourth-place Buffalo with 14 games to play.
Washington, meanwhile, tightened its grasp on second place in the Patrick Division by winning for only the third time in 10 games.
The Capitals lead the Rangers by 2 points and the New Jersey Devils by 3.
Khristich completed his second career hat trick by scoring into the empty net with 1 minute 15 seconds left.
His first three-goal game occurred Feb. 11 against St.
Louis. (AP) HORSE RACING Alydeed Is Scratched, but Binalong Wins Alydeed, the favored Canadian colt, was scratched from the Gulfstream Park Sprint yesterday because the weight was too high and the track too wet.
In his absence, Binalong, carrying 110 pounds, outran Loach to win the seven-furlong event by two lengths with a time of 1:221/5 .
Roger Attfield, who trains Alydeed for the Kinghaven Farm, reported that his star was healthy, but added: "I was a little concerned about the weight of 123 pounds just 13 days after running such a huge race off the layoff. I knew the track was bad this morning, and I definitely didn't want him to run on it."
Attfield referred to the fact that Alydeed didn't race from last September until March 6, when he won a sizzling sprint over Fly So Free.
He conceded that he had been prompted by the loss this week of another of his star horses, St.
Jovite, the European champion, who was suddenly retired after he injured a tendon while working out.
The trainer said that Alydeed would start in the Breeders' Cup Commonwealth at Keeneland on April 13 and then in New York in May in the Carter and the Metropolitan Mile.
SKIING Schneider Picks Up 3d Slalom Victory Vreni Schneider of Switzerland rallied with a strong second run in Vemdalen, Sweden, to win her third slalom of the World Cup season yesterday.
Patricia Chauvet of France finished second and Annelise Coberger of New Zealand was third, retaining the lead in the World Cup slalom standing after seven of the season's eight races.
The best American was Julie Parisien, of Auburn, Maine, who shared sixth place with Karin Koellerer of Austria. (AP)


U.S. Will Increase Airdrops To Besieged Bosnian Town
The United States will nearly double the amount of supplies it airdrops to the besieged eastern Bosnian town of Srebrenica, the State Department announced today.
The American action was taken at the request of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata, whose agency has sought to bring food and relief supplies to the predominantly Muslim town that has been besieged by Serbian nationalist forces.


Breast Implants Found to Irritate Immune System
In a turnabout, the Dow Corning Corporation reported today that new studies on laboratory rats showed that the silicone gel used in breast implants was not inert, and in fact had been found to be a strong irritant of the immune system, at least in animals.
More than one million American women have received silicone-gel implants over the last 30 years.
Dow Corning estimates three-quarters of them received its products.
More than 3,500 women have sued the company, many claiming to have developed autoimmune disease.


Rider Plays a Game That Isn't a Contest
Rick Pitino sat down.
Minutes passed, mistakes were made and Pitino remained in his sideline seat at Vanderbilt's Memorial Gym, his legs crossed and his mouth closed.
Normally, he paces.
He screams.
He stomps and waves and all but throws things courtward to command the attention of his Kentucky Wildcats.
But how could he yell at his players tonight?
Whether they made shots or missed them, dropped passes or executed perfect picks-and-rolls, the outcome of their first-round N.C.A.A. tournament game against Rider College was not going to change.


Woody Allen Tells of Affair as Custody Battle Begins
With Mia Farrow watching from a few feet away, Woody Allen testified yesterday about the disintegration of the couple's relationship, his affair with her daughter and his own views on children.
The former couple's custody battle went to trial with Mr.
Allen saying Ms.
Farrow cut his head out of family pictures after she learned of the affair, made threatening phone calls to him in the middle of the night and once left a note on a windowsill saying, "I jumped out the window because of what you've done to my children."


Mobutu Oppression In Zaire Must End
To the Editor:
Nowhere does "Zaire: Two Leaders, Many Problems, Few Hopes" (news article, March 9) speak of the pro-democracy desires of the people of Zaire.
The battle is much bigger than you seem to understand.
It is not just between two personalities, Mobutu Sese Seko and Prime Minister Etienne Tshisekede.
The struggle in that Central African country is between freedom and oppression.
Mr.
Mobutu is a Machiavellian murderer who wants to stamp out the flickering flames of democratization in Zaire.
It is time to stop calling him the President.
His mandate ran out Dec. 4, 1991, two months after my husband and I, as a missionary with the Presbyterian Church (with numerous other Americans and Westerners), were evacuated from Kinshasa because of unstable conditions and near anarchy due to Mr.
Mobutu's 26-year totalitarian reign.


Trade Confrontations Averted on Two Fronts; Washington Says Japan Meets Goal On Chip Imports
A trade confrontation that had been looming for years was unexpectedly defused today when American officials announced that the Japanese had met a target for imports of computer chips.
Imports accounted for 20.2 percent of the Japanese semiconductor market during the fourth quarter of last year, exceeding the 20 percent target set in a 1991 trade agreement, said Donald H. Phillips, the assistant United States trade representative for industry.


'90 Report on Woman's Death Is Doubted
Susan Negersmith was found dead in an alley in Wildwood, N.J., three years ago.
About this there is no dispute.
On May 26, 1990, the 20-year-old from Carmel, N.Y., was on a beach trip with friends, looking for a party in this popular southern New Jersey resort town.
On May 27, she was found dead and alone, her jeans wrapped around one ankle, her pink T-shirt pushed up and bloodied with a hand print on the chest.
Her fingernails, painted pink to match her outfit, had blood underneath them.
The back of her skull was deeply bruised; the list of separate injuries fills a page and a half of autopsy report.


Archbishop Is Resigning After Accusations of Sex
Robert F. Sanchez, the Archbishop of Santa Fe, N.M., announced yesterday that he had submitted his resignation to Pope John Paul II.
The announcement came two days before the CBS News program "60 Minutes" is to broadcast a report naming several women who say they had sexual relations with him in the 1970's and early 80's.
"It is my personal desire to thoroughly evaluate my life and ministry before God," Archbishop Sanchez wrote in a letter to Roman Catholics in his archdiocese.
"I have also written to the Holy Father humbly asking him for permission to resign."


Society Has a Right to Seize Ill-Gotten Gains
To the Editor:
"The Court Slows Property Seizures" (editorial, Feb. 27) criticizes the efforts of law enforcement that you describe thus: "The Justice Department wanted to seize the home of a woman in Rumson, N.J., because it was bought with drug money, without giving her a chance to prove that she was an innocent party."
However, the weight of legal tradition, fairness and logic argue that the gift recipient should not be allowed to keep the profits of the donor's crime.
For centuries, the law has recognized that someone who innocently receives a gift of stolen or embezzled property has a lesser right to that property than the original rightful owner.
The reason is that the recipient -- no matter how innocent -- is given the property at no cost; to forfeit the property is only to surrender a windfall.


Corrections
An article on Monday about an after-school program for children at the Archbishop Walsh Homes in Newark described its operation and finances incompletely.
The program is administered by the Rutgers University Cooperative Extension Program, with some grant money from the United States Agriculture Department.
For two years, the Newark Housing Authority has provided money from its operating budget to match that grant.


A Railroad Man With the Heart of a Gambler
It's 7:15 on a recent morning and the Metro-North train to Manhattan has just departed Chappaqua.
A commuter, dozing between pages of his Harry Truman biography, is awakened by the booming voice of a lanky man sprawled across the adjacent seat talking to a companion.
"I'm sorry if we've disturbed you," the man says to the sleepy neighbor.
"Would you like us to move?"
A scene from one of those Metro-North commercials where real-life conductors plug the tranquillity of their trains?
Not quite.
But the apologetic man does work for the railroad.
In fact, he runs it.


COMPANY BRIEFS
HARRIS CORP., Melbourne, Fla., said it had won a $47 million contract to help modernize the F.B.I.'s computer system for keeping track of crime information.
VIDEO JUKEBOX NETWORK INC., Miami, will sell a controlling interest to Island Trading Co.
Inc.
Island will pay $7 million and receive 7 million shares of convertible common stock and warrants to purchase an additional 7.9 million shares of convertible common stock and 2 million shares of common stock.
SIGNAL TECHNOLOGY CORP., Sunnyvale, Calif., acquired Omega Inc., a manufacturer of products for the military industry and commercial contractors.
Terms were not disclosed.


Corrections
A review in Weekend yesterday about a show of photographs by Emil Heilborn misstated the address of the Robert Mann Gallery.
It is at 42 East 76th Street in Manhattan.


After the Storm, Lessons on Insurance
Millions of Americans are probably paying too much for homeowners' insurance or buying too little protection, and in some cases, doing both, recent disasters and industry surveys demonstrate.
The buffeting of the East by last weekend's mammoth storm should provide all the prompting needed to reach into the file draw and review exactly what you are paying for.
That a home can be totally destroyed, recent storms have made clear, is not as far-fetched as many insurance agents and banks have assumed. (Hurricane Andrew destroyed more than 60,000 dwellings.) And the majority of homes in the United States are insured for far less than the amount needed to rebuild them from scratch.
In addition, millions of American homes are just plain naked when it comes to insurance protection against floods and earthquakes.


Clarkson and Brown Gain ECAC Final
Brown, overlooked as the fourth-seeded team in the tournament, upset Harvard tonight, 3-1, and moved within one victory of what would be a first for the Bears, the championship of the Eastern College Athletic Conference.
Brown will play Clarkson for that title here Saturday night in the Olympic Arena.
The Golden Knights defeated Rensselaer, 5-3, in the first semifinal game tonight before a crowd of 6,292.


Review/Film; The Turtles Transported To Old Japan
Seldom has a movie production company been more aptly named than Golden Harvest, whose "TeenAge Mutant Ninja Turtles III" began raking in lucre at neighborhood theaters yesterday.
That's not entirely bad news.
This Ninja Turtles tale is less violent and more scenic than its predecessors, since it gets the title characters out of the sewer and transports them back to feudal Japan.
There, they go native while exclaiming "Whoa!" and "Check it out!" and so on, thus staying in touch with their roots.
This film, written and directed by Stuart Gillard, has a conventional action plot involving a feudal lord, his rebellious son, the son's beautiful sweetheart and a wicked English trader.
It will hold no surprises for adult viewers but should sustain the interest of children.
The story is so unremarkable, by time-traveling adventure standards, that one must struggle to remember that the heroes actually have hard shells and green, spotty heads.
The nonchalant humor, supplied by the jokey Turtles and by Elias Koteas as their unofficial camp counselor, is always something of a relief.


Uncovered Short Sales Rise on 2 Exchanges
The short positions in stocks on the New York and American stock exchanges rose in the monthlong period that ended in mid-March, the exchanges said yesterday.
It was the second consecutive increase.
Short interest on the Big Board rose by 3.5 percent, to 993.6 million shares on March 15 from the middle of February, the exchange said.
On the American exchange, short interest climbed by 1.5 percent, to 73.3 million shares, from an adjusted 72.2 million shares in the previous period, its highest level in the last 12 months.
But short interest on the American exchange remains well below the record 83.5 million shares set in November 1990.


Critic's Notebook; Searching for Music's Outer Limits
Every year the New England Conservatory in Boston devotes a week of performances and discussion to a major living composer.
Past guests have been John Cage, Michael Tippett and Witold Lutoslawski.
Last week, the honor went to Gyorgy Ligeti.
Mr.
Ligeti may not be a household name, but his music has reached a far wider audience than most contemporary composers dare dream of.
For the indefinite future he is fated, and fortunate, to be introduced as "the composer of '2001' ": his amorphous, free-floating, shimmering soundscapes formed the musical backdrop for Stanley Kubrick's cinematic visualization of alien intelligence.
The film did not betray the music: Mr.
Ligeti's ecstatic, frightening murmurs, his works titled "Atmospheres," "Requiem" and "Lontano," still represent an outer extreme of the 20th-century quest for musical otherness.


Senate Democrats Deflect First G.O.P. Budget Shots
With President Clinton's five-year budget plan safely through the House, Democrats turned today to defend the proposal against Republican attacks in the Senate, easily rejecting an attempt to freeze spending on many domestic programs at their current levels.
Congressional aides predicted tougher battles before a final vote on the budget resolution is held late next week.
The most difficult may be a Republican attempt to strike the budget's most contentious tax proposal, an increase on the Social Security benefits of better-off retirees.


Business Digest
International  A long-looming trade confrontation was unexpectedly defused when U.S. officials announced that the Japanese had met a target for imports of computer chips.
Imports accounted for 20.2 percent of the Japanese semiconductor market in the fourth quarter of 1992, exceeding the 20 percent target set in a 1991 agreement.  [ Page 37. ]


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
3.03
3.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.92
4.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.01
4.22
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.63
5.56
7.35
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.81
6.78
8.04
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.73
9.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.95
5.96
6.79
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


No Headline
"It has been an interesting and exciting experience to serve on the Court. But after 31 years, Marion and I think that someone else should be permitted to have a like experience." -- JUSTICE BYRON R. WHITE.  [ 9:2. ]


From Paranoia To Peril
There's a constant flow of American military personnel coming and going to give advice and check the situation in this small Balkan state, totally isolated and hostile until a little over three years ago.
Albanian television shows many films of American military force, especially planes zooming off carriers in the Mediterranean-based Sixth Fleet.


Never Sleeps, and Never Runs Out of Questions
IN the telephone research room at the Brooklyn Public Library, it is easy to envision the city as a science fiction organism, a heaving colony pulsating with unimaginable curiosity.
Outside things are cold and inert but in this know-it-all chamber, command central in an endless game of Trivial Pursuit, the phone (718 780-7700) rings insistently, at an average of once every two minutes, 2,000 calls a week, bringing questions, mundane, arcane and insane.


Discus Champion Is Suspended for Life
KAMY KESHMIRI, a three-time N.C.A.A. winner in the discus for the University of Nevada, was suspended for life, USA Track &amp; Field said yesterday in Indianapolis.
Keshmiri tested positive for methandienone, a steroid, after undergoing an International Amateur Athletic Federation out-of-competition test May 15, 1992.


Everglades Plan Should Satisfy Everyone
To the Editor:
Late last month, Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt named the Everglades a national environmental "test case." We agree.
"Sugar Industry Must Clean Up Its Mess Now" (letter, Feb. 27) by Tom Martin of the National Audubon Society, dated Feb. 11, was written before United States Sugar Corporation's Feb. 21 environmental peace proposal in the dispute.
The peace plan defines the private and public responsibilities in Everglades restoration, with farming (vegetables, sod, cattle, citrus and sugar) required to clean up.
Small and large farmers have embraced the program, which accepts a state-sponsored cleanup plan but offers an alternative to its crushing costs.


Secrets of New York Republicans
The Republicans who run the New York State Senate complain constantly about fiscal mismanagement.
Yet these same Republicans tenaciously deny taxpayers basic information about their own legislative budget.
A state court ruling a few weeks ago held that the state's Freedom of Information Law required the Senate to disclose the exact amount of public money legislators spend on postage for their self-promoting mass mailings.
That's what both houses of Congress, and lately the State Assembly, now do routinely.
At issue, of course, are principles larger than any technical reading of the information law: open government and fair elections.


Perot to Hold His Own Vote, But This Time on Television
Reasserting himself as a force in national politics, Ross Perot tomorrow night will stage a low-tech variation of the "electronic town meeting" he promised to hold if elected President.
The "town meeting" -- actually a 30-minute television address by Mr.
Perot accompanied by several polls -- will be an unusually elaborate effort to marshal public opinion on a national issue, in this case government reform.
But public opinion experts say Mr.
Perot's effort points out the limits of participatory democracy practiced on his terms.


At 2 World Trade Center, It's Back to Work


Classical Music in Review
Festival Chamber Music Society
Merkin Concert Hall
For reasons that are often sound, some listeners have qualms about ad hoc chamber groups, those that come together for a few concerts and then disperse, perhaps meeting again in different permutations.
But the Festival Chamber Music Society demonstrated on Tuesday evening that the approach is not always destined to fail.
The society was started six years ago by Ruth Glasser Sommers, a cellist, and draws on soloists and players from other chamber groups and orchestras.
It has a series at Merkin Concert Hall, and its Tuesday program of Bach, Dohnanyi and Schubert works drew a nearly full house, mostly of listeners in their 20's and 30's.


Corrections
An article on March 8 about the investigation of the bombing of the World Trade Center omitted a word in quoting Rabbi Avi Weiss, the national president of the Coalition for Jewish Concerns, at a demonstration outside the Al-Salaam mosque in Jersey City.
He said, "I am not here to condemn this place and this mosque."


Chrysler Gets Serious About Luxury Cars
Auto makers stake their reputations on luxury cars, their flagships.
In 1989, when the Chrysler Corporation introduced a new Imperial, the boxy, stretched version of the outdated K-car seemed to embody the company's condition, which appeared critical at the time.
In contrast, Chrysler's introduction here this week of its New Yorker and LHS sedans is being greeted as a return to the promised land.
The Imperial, decorated with vinyl on its vinyl and plastic froufrou, prompted sneers and giggles from cogniscenti, who deemed it unworthy of comparison with Lexus, Mercedes, Cadillac or Lincoln.
Similarly, the New Yorker and LHS are essentially longer versions of Chrysler's new midsize sedans: the Dodge Intrepid, Chrysler Concorde and Eagle Vision.


Two Toddlers Are Discovered Alone at Home And in Squalor
Two small children who were left without supervision in a garbage-strewn and roach-infested apartment were found by the police after their father was arrested for selling crack to an undercover detective, the authorities said yesterday.
The father, Robert Ruckert, 40, of 703 Coney Island Avenue in Kensington, Brooklyn, was arrested near the apartment at 5:20 P.M.
Thursday for selling two vials of crack, said Sgt.
Steven Richardson, a supervisor with the Brooklyn South Tactical Narcotics Team.


Like a Sort of Idea
To the Editor:
Re "We Are, Like, Poets" (Op-Ed, March 7): If "like" is more than a verbal tic, I fear that its main function may not be poetic or usefully rhetorical, but just a vague qualifier of whatever thought, or half-thought, it accompanies.
The term suggests its user has only an approximate notion in mind.
A good deal or conversation, of course, does.
But sprinkling discourse with tokens of imprecision keeps both speaker and listener from coming to grips with the thoughts behind the words.


Virgin Air, British Air End Talks
The feud between Virgin Atlantic Airways and British Airways intensified today with the collapse of efforts to settle allegations by Virgin that British Air used "dirty tricks" to lure away passengers.
Virgin threatened to take the case to court in the United States.
Virgin, founded by Richard Branson, said the talks had foundered on British Air's insistence that Mr.
Branson accept limitations on discussing the case publicly.
He has taken advantage of the chance to embarrass his competitor, which has been fighting for greater access to the United States market through a deal with the USAir Group, and has said he wants the British Government to investigate its business practices.


PANEL RECOMMENDS NEW DRUG TO TREAT MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
A Federal advisory committee today recommended approval of a new drug to treat multiple sclerosis.
The drug is the first shown to be effective against the neurological disease, although hundreds have been tried over the decades.
In a 7-to-2 vote, the committee found that the drug, Betaseron, made by the Chiron Corporation and Berlex Labs, a subsidiary of Schering A.G. of Germany, was safe and effective in treating the disease.
The drug is not a cure, but a new study presented to the committee indicated that it can slow the otherwise relentless course of the disease.


U.S. Judge Lets Nassau Sludge Be Shipped Out, Not Shaped
Nassau County today won the right to ship millions of tons of sludge to West Virginia for composting, rather than follow state and Federal demands that it be treated at proposed plants on Long Island.
The decision, issued this afternoon by Judge Jacob Mishler of Federal District Court in Uniondale, came as a relief to many Nassau County residents who had waged a three-year battle to stop two sewage-treatment plants from being built in their neighborhoods.
In turn, it was a setback for state and Federal environmental agencies that wished to avoid the long-term uncertainty of disposing of the sludge out of state.


Balkan Update
Srebrenica, Bosnia
A convoy of food and medicine that had been blocked by Serbian nationalists passed into Srebrenica yesterday, bringing relief to the thousands of hungry refugees there.
Belgrade, Yugoslavia
Radovan Karadzic, leader of the Bosnian Serbs, proposed that Serbian areas in provinces controlled by Muslims and Croats be exchanged for areas in Serbian provinces that are not held by Serbs, Reuters reported.
Washington
In response to a plea from the High Commissioner for Refugees, the Administration has agreed nearly to double relief airdrops.


In Teeth of Wind, Love's Power Prevails
Using his tremendous length to key advantage, Davis Love 3d whistled shots through strong winds and heavy mist today to take the second-round lead of the Nestle Invitational.
Love shot a three-under-par 69 for a 36-hole total of four-under-par 140, which put him a stroke ahead of Ben Crenshaw, Bernhard Langer and Michael Allen.
Love posted his score, the highest ever to lead the 15-year-old tournament after two rounds, amid winds blowing up to 25 miles an hour, a steady drizzle and a temperature dropping into the low 50's.
Fairway Woods Count
The 28-year-old Love, who won the opening event of the year at the Infiniti Tournament of Champions, used his ability to hit drives in the 280-to 320-yard range to shorten some of the lengthy approaches that are the most difficult challenges at the Bay Hill Club.


Q and A
Social Security
Q.
If you return to work after receiving Social Security retirement benefits, will your benefits change when you stop working again?
A.
ROSENBLUTH, Manhattan A. Social Security retirement benefits are based on your lifetime average earnings.
"If you claim retirement benefits and continue or return to work, the amounts you earn will be credited to your personal lifetime earnings record," said Joseph L. Matthews, author of "Social Security, Medicare and Pensions" (Thorndike Press, $22.95).


As Shows in Paris End, No Clear Trends Emerge
The ready-to-wear shows for fall and winter just fizzled out.
There was too much fashion -- or too little, depending on your point of view.
After a couple of weeks of searching desperately for a new line or a new shape, those who attended the shows just felt tired.
Yves Saint Laurent, the last of the big houses to show, provided little guidance.
In years past, his collection provided a powerful punctuation mark to the season's shows, pulling together all the loose ends and pointing to which styles would die on the cutting-room floor, which would make it to the racks of stores and which would show up on the backs of women all over the world.


Clinton Expected to Pick Moderate for High Court
President Clinton is likely to choose a moderate politician or judge rather than a legal scholar to replace Justice Byron R. White and will give priority to ethnic and sexual diversity in making his selection, lawyers close to the White House predicted today.
The retirement of Justice White gives Mr.
Clinton an early opportunity to begin reshaping a Supreme Court that has been dominated for the last 26 years by conservative Republican appointments, and aides say he and Hillary Rodham Clinton are certain to take their time in making a selection.


How They Do It; Cutting Energy Costs: A Fondness for Heat-Loss Calculation Helps.
In 1983, John Reformato, an electronic engineer from East Meadow, L.I., began charting a home-energy conservation plan on his computer.
His primary goal -- to reduce heating costs by making a house more energy-efficient -- has become a pet project.
Over the last 10 years, a series of incremental improvements have cut his heating costs by about 40 percent.
To keep expenses low he has done much of the work himself and has made the most costly changes, liek buying a new furnace, only after existing equiptment needed replacement.
Here is a look at his first decade of the conservation project.


Review/Drama; Harsh Tale of Bigotry From Vichy France
The history of the 20th century seems at times to be an unending story of half the world's population fleeing persecution by the other half.
"The Free Zone," a play by Jean-Claude Grumberg at Ubu Repertory, takes place in unoccupied France during World War II.
But at a time when whole towns and villages are being displaced by the "ethnic cleansing" campaigns in the Balkans, it is as current as today's headlines.
"The Free Zone" is more staged chronicle than drama, an account of one Jewish family's flight from Nazi-occupied Paris to the relative safety of Vichy.
Changing their name and claiming to be refugees from Alsace, they are taken in by a French farmer and lodged in a one-room cabin.


No Backward Glances As Knicks Take Charge
As the victories pile up and the number of regular-season games begin to dwindle, the Knicks have gathered a powerful head of steam that they are hoping can carry them right into the playoffs.
Nothing has been able to derail them of late.
No sore knees, no ankle sprains, no broken noses.
No opponents in their last eight games.


Sports of The Times; Robinson Starts Over On the Nets
SOME athletes you meet, you never forget.
They remain in that one time and place, always young and always confident.
You cannot imagine them ever failing.
Rumeal Robinson is one of those unforgettable athletes, yet he was slipping backward until a remarkable surge with the New Jersey Nets made him the current player of the week in the National Basketball Association.


Raymond Jacobs, 69, Co-Founder Of Earth Shoe Company in 1970's
Raymond Jacobs, who, with his wife, brought a Danish sandal to America, called it the Earth Shoe and created an indelible symbol of the 1970's, died on Wednesday.
He was 69.
Mr.
Jacobs's heart failed at a nursing home in Torrington, Conn., after a long illness, his family said.


Classical Music in Review
Four Nations Ensemble  Merkin Concert Hall
The crazy quilt of Haydn presented on Wednesday evening by the Four Nations Ensemble was just zany enough to have a ring of historical verisimilitude.
The first half consisted of a piano trio, the piano-accompanied soprano cantata "Arianna a Naxos" and the fifth movement, "I Thirst," from the string-quartet version of "The Seven Last Words." After intermission came the "Military" Symphony, arranged by Johann Peter Salomon for string quartet, flute and piano, with the movements separated by Haydn settings of Scottish songs.
The symphony reduction was amusing in its attempt to compensate for the loss of bass drum and cymbal with paltry keyboard dissonances.


Hirschfeld Strengthens Grip on Post
Abraham Hirschfeld solidified his hold on The New York Post yesterday, then made a wary peace with Pete Hamill, the renegade editor who had come to symbolize a staff revolt against Mr.
Hirschfeld.
The developments appeared to stabilize the newspaper, which has been something like a war zone for weeks and which yesterday made a front-page appeal that Mr.
Hirschfeld be unseated.
They came in a daylong hearing in Federal Bankruptcy Court in which Judge Francis G. Conrad at least temporarily barred other bidders who might compete with Mr.
Hirschfeld.


Coast Guard Follows Tanker Law
To the Editor:
"The Trouble With Tankers" (Op-Ed, Feb. 27) by Richard Blow cites an anecdotal nonaccident in Alaskan waters a few months ago and a study by an environmental group to support an erroneous and impatient conclusion: "30 months after passage of legislation to prevent oil spills, we're still in the same leaky boat."
The major target of his scorn is the Coast Guard, which he accuses of "bureaucratic bungling and foot-dragging." With no apparent qualifications in naval architecture or ship operations, the author assails the Coast Guard's highly technical rule-making determinations for minimum hull spacing on new double-hull tankers and on systems for vessel traffic control.
Congress wisely delegated these highly complex decisions to the Coast Guard, which has ample expertise and unquestioned integrity.


CHRONICLE
The home musicale isn't disappearing, it's just high on the list of endangered nice things.
But what better way to commemorate a great pianist and composer than to have a series of musicales in the New York apartment in which he lived.
The man in question, Sergei Rachmaninoff, would probably approve, as he would the idea that a pianist, GERTRUDE BARLOW, and her husband, LOU BARLOW, an artist, took over his Upper West Side apartment after his widow, Natalia, died in 1952.


Trade Confrontations Averted on Two Fronts; U.S. Postponing Europe Sanctions In Surprise Move
Fending off a trade battle at least temporarily, the United States today postponed plans to impose trade sanctions on the European Community on Monday over rules that let public utilities favor European companies when making purchasing decisions.
In an unexpected about-face, Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, announced that he would delay the sanctions for at least eight days so that he could meet with European Community trade officials in Brussels on March 29 to see if the two sides could settle the dispute.


Lung Association Getting A Donation of Cleaner Air
Now that that the right to pollute can be bought, sold or traded like baseball cards, a Connecticut utility has found another approach: donating it to charity.
The company, Northeast Utilities, which serves most of Connecticut and large parts of Massachusetts and New Hampshire, announced that it would donate 10,000 tons of emissions allowances, worth about $3 million, to American Lung Association chapters in those states.
The donations amount to about 7 percent of the company's total allowances.


In Busy Day, Blue Chips Outpace Rest of Market
The lumbering industrial giants continued to march ahead of the rest of the market yesterday, as the Dow stocks advanced slightly but most others lagged.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index lost 1.70 points, to 450.18, and Big Board decliners outnumbered advancing issues, but the Dow Jones industrial average gained 5.94 points, to 3,471.58.
As on Thursday, the Dow ventured to within about a point of a record before pulling back.


Albany, Too, Must Help Save Historical Society
To the Editor:
The advisory committee of the trustees of the New-York Historical Society has taken a major step to exercise responsible stewardship with a plan to rescue the core collection and keep it in New York City.
Because any plan for saving the society has to provide it with a sufficient endowment the committee recommends making the most of the institution's assets through sale of air rights and refining the collection with a deaccession plan sensitive to the concerns of the museum community.
Each part of the plan could be criticized and derailed by bureaucratic obstacles, but the alternative is to have nothing but a shuttered limestone monument to neglect.


Georgia Tech Teeters, Totters And Topples
Georgia Tech might be the ultimate see-saw team.
One day the Yellow Jackets lose to the College of Charleston, another day they plaster Duke, another day they flop to North Carolina State, another day they sweep the Atlantic Coast Conference tournament.
Today was a Charleston day.
Southern University, a second-place team from a conference most Georgia Tech players cannot identify, routed the Yellow Jackets, 93-78, in a first-round National Collegiate Athletic Association West Regional contest.


Beliefs
Two Sundays ago, a book review in The New York Times referred ominously to a recent "hysterical anti-science reaction, especially in Britain."
The phrase did not escape Bryan Appleyard, who happened to be in New York that day to debate the thesis of his latest book, "Understanding the Present: Science and the Soul of Modern Man" (Doubleday).


2 More Men Are Released From Cult's Compound
Two men were released this evening from the Branch Davidian compound near here, the first people to leave the sect's fortified headquarters in nearly a week.
The release came several hours after the Federal Bureau of Investigation issued one of its most optimistic reports yet about the progress of negotiations to end the 20-day standoff between the sect and Federal agents.
But it was not clear whether the release of the two men, which the sect's leader, David Koresh, had originally promised several days ago, signaled the beginning of any larger exodus.


Jaspers Finally Get Their Shot, and They Miss
Manhattan had hoped to make its first visit to the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament in 35 years a lasting and memorable experience.
Well, at least it will have the memories.
Virginia (20-9) played the perfect ushers, welcoming the Jaspers (23-7) to the show, then showing them the door.
The Cavaliers' talented sophomore guard, Cory Alexander, proved the consummate showman, leading his team to a 78-66 victory in the first round of the East Regional at the Carrier Dome here this afternoon.


St. John's Can Expect 40 Minutes of Pressure
Nolan Richardson sees a game the rest of us can only imagine.
The coach of the surprising Arkansas Razorbacks, the second-round opponent for St.
John's in the national collegiate tournament, envisions a time when basketball is consistently played at a pace rarely reached now.


TRANSACTIONS
Auto racing  TEAMKAR INTERNATIONAL -- Signed Yannick Dalmas, driver, to a three-year Indy car contract.
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Optioned Jim Edmonds and Kevin Flora, outfielders, to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Sent Reggie Williams, outfielder, outright to Vancouver and Jorge Fabregas and Chris Turner, catchers, and Ray Martinez, infielder, to their minor league camp for reassignment.
National League  FLORIDA MARLINS -- Optioned Stan Spencer, pitcher, to High Desert of the California League.
Sent Jose Gonzalez, outfielder, and Terry McGriff and Mitch Lyden, catchers, to their minor league camp for assignment.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Released Pedro Chavez, infielder.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  NBA -- Fined Danny Ferry, Cleveland Cavaliers forward, $4,000 for a flagrant foul committed in a game against the Philadelphia 76ers on March 16.
United States Basketball League  JACKSONVILLE HOOTERS -- Announced they are moving their operations to Daytona Beach, Fla.
Football  National Football League  ATLANTA FALCONS -- Signed James Geathers, defensive tackle, to a three-year contract.
Arena Football League  CLEVELAND THUNDERBOLTS -- Signed Kent Wells, lineman.
Hockey  National Hockey League  MINNESOTA NORTH STARS -- Announced that Brian Propp, left wing, has left Lugano of the Swiss League and will rejoin the team.
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Recalled Ben Hankinson, right wing, from Utica of the American Hockey League.
TAMPA BAY LIGHTNING -- Recalled Tim Berglund, forward, and Keith Osborne, right wing, from Atlanta of the International Hockey League.
Reassigned Matt Hervey, defenseman, and Jason Ruff, left wing, to Atlanta.
College  DUQUESNE -- Announced the resignation of Renee DeVarney, women's basketball coach, effective April 30.
HOFSTRA -- Announced the resignation of Ron Rohn, women's basketball coach.
WESTERN MISSOURI STATE -- Named Ron Ponciano defensive line coach.


31 Years of Jurisprudence: A Byron White Sampler
Following are excerpts from some of the majority opinions and dissents that Justice Byron R. White wrote in his 31 years on the Supreme Court: Abortion
Justice White dissented from the 1973 decision, Roe v.
Wade, in which the Court first found a constitutional right to abortion.


Teen-Age Rebels in Ulster With an Agenda of Their Own
"You, Me and Marley," written by Graham Reid and directed by Richard Spence, dramatizes the extent to which goals have been lost and loyalties have blurred over the years during the undeclared, unending civil war in Northern Ireland.
No longer is it just the Irish Republican Army against the British Army, or the Roman Catholics against the Protestants.
Now it's also the I.R.A. establishment against gangs of aimless Catholic teen-agers who are seen to be giving the sacred I.R.A. cause a bad name.
The teen-agers' idea of fun is to steal cars, go joyriding around Belfast for a while, then abandon the cars, set them afire or sell them for spare parts.


France Finds a Hero in Balkan Town
Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon, the French Army officer who led a United Nations convoy into the besieged Bosnian Muslim town of Srebrenica today, has been hailed as a hero by his compatriots for refusing to abandon its 60,000 inhabitants until much-needed food had reached them.
Several times a day over the last week, General Morillon's anguished reports of the imminent starvation facing Srebrenica have been broadcast on television and radio here, invariably followed by commentaries praising his courage in remaining there until Bosnian Serbs allowed a food convoy to enter.


In Crisis, W. Kentucky Will Look Down to Bell
On one side will be Western Kentucky, led by the smallest player in the Southeast Regional, a 5-foot-8-inch guard who helped run Memphis State right out of the N.C.A.A. tournament Thursday night.
And on the other side will be Seton Hall, with such players as Terry Dehere and Luther Wright, the 7-2 center who is also the tallest player here.
But if the distance between Wright and Mark Bell can be measured by heart and hunger, Bell figures he will have the edge when the two teams meet in the second round on Saturday.


Kenneth Boulding, an Economist, Philosopher and Poet, Dies at 83
Kenneth Boulding, a much-honored but unorthodox economist, philosopher and poet, died yesterday.
He was 83.
His assistant, Vivian Wilson, said Professor Boulding, who had taught at the University of Colorado in Boulder since 1977, died at his home after a long bout with cancer.


For Investors, Three Firsts, Widely Varied
Investors who want higher returns than money market funds with only slightly more risk might consider the Montgomery Short Duration Government Fund.
Duration is a better measure than maturity of how bond prices react to changes in interest rates because duration also accounts for call options, coupons and other bond features.
The fund's maximum duration tracks three-year Treasury notes, now at 2.59 years, so a 1 percent rise or fall in interest rates means the fund's share price falls or rises 2.59 percent.
Its 30-day yield in February was 6.82 percent.
Scudder has the first no-load fund to invest in Latin America.
A 2 percent redemption fee is levied on shares sold within one year, a good idea because only long-term investors should consider this volatile region.
Expenses are capped at 2 percent through October.


Alphonse Salamone, 73, Manager Of Plaza and the Waldorf-Astoria
Alphonse W. Salamone, who started as a hotel desk clerk in Knoxville, Tenn., and rose to manage the Plaza and Waldorf-Astoria in New York and to lead national hotel chains, died on Tuesday at his home in Huntington, L.I.
He was 73.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Expert Testifies Officers' Beating Of Motorist Complied With Policy
The debate over whether four police officers used excessive force in the beating of Rodney G. King swung back to the advantage of the accused officers today as a defense witness testified that every baton blow and kick had been justified, and even required, under Police Department policies.
The testimony by the defense's chief expert on the use of force, Sgt.
Charles L. Duke Jr. of the Los Angeles Police Department, directly contradicted testimony by the prosecution's expert on the issue, Sgt.
Mark Conta of the same department.
And it reinforced impressions that the outcome of the trial could ultimately turn on the testimony of experts called by both sides.


WHITE ANNOUNCES HE'LL STEP DOWN FROM HIGH COURT
Justice Byron R. White, the only sitting Supreme Court Justice appointed by a Democratic President, announced today that he would retire in early summer after 31 years on the court.
The departure of the 75-year-old Justice, a reliable conservative on many issues ranging from abortion to the rights of criminal defendants, gives President Clinton an early opportunity to try to put his own stamp on the Supreme Court and begin to reverse the effects of the long string of Republican appointments.


U.S. Backs Oregon's Health Plan for Covering All Poor People
The Clinton Administration today approved Oregon's proposal to guarantee health services for poor people by rationing care.
But it said the state must revise its ranking of services to eliminate the possibility of bias against disabled people.
Under the plan, all poor people in Oregon will be eligible for Medicaid, the Federal-state program that now serves 240,000 Oregonians, including about two-thirds of the poor people.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  EXULTATION IN SREBRENICA
Refugees who have been surviving on moss and vegetation dug from beneath the snow rejoiced when an aid convoy rolled into Srebrenica, but the confrontation there between Serbian nationalist forces and United Nations forces is not over.  1  AIRDROPS NEARLY TO DOUBLE
Washington will nearly double the amount of supplies it airdrops to the besieged eastern Bosnian town of Srebrenica, but remained uncommitted on a request to use military craft to evacuate the injured from the enclave.  4
Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon is toasted as a hero at home.  4  SRI LANKA ON BRINK OF PEACE?
Buoyed by military success against Tamil guerrillas and a spurt of economic growth, the Sri Lankan Government is about to broach a political settlement that will partly meet the political demands of the Tamils, who have been locked in vicious fighting with the Government over the past 10 years.  1  IRAQ IS ACCUSED OF WAR CRIMES
The Pentagon accused Iraq of serious war crimes during the Persian Gulf war, saying it abused all of the prisoners of war it captured, tortured and killed Kuwaitis and damaged the environment.  3  RABIN TIGHTENING GRIP ON ARABS
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, who left Washington ahead of schedule, said he wants fewer Palestinians working in Israel and promised controls would be tightened on the 120,000 or more Arab workers who leave the occupied territories each day for jobs in Israel.  5  POLICE KILL ESCOBAR AIDE
Information from two members of the Medellin cocaine cartel in police custody were reported to have led the authorities to the military chief of Pablo Escobar Gaviria, the cartel leader.
The police said they shot and killed the No. 2 leader, Mario Castano Molina.  3  GEORGIA NEAR BOILING POINT
Georgia accused Russia of "undisguised military aggression" in the breakaway Abkhazia region, threatening to expand ethnic fighting into an open war between Russia and Georgia after a Russian plane was shot down over Abkhazia.  3  Mukalla Journal: Waiting to die, untouched and untouchable.  2  National 6-9  JUSTICE WHITE TO RESIGN
Justice White, the only sitting Supreme Court Justice to have been appointed by a Democratic President, announced that he would retire at the end of the current term.  1  FINDING A DIFFERENT JUSTICE
President Clinton is likely to choose a politician or a judge to replace Justice White and will stress ethnic and sexual diversity in making his selection, lawyers close to the White House predicted.  9
Clinton earlier suggested one possible nominee: Governor Cuomo.  9  DISRUPTION OF A.T.M.'s
Banks are scrambling to find alternative service for one million customers affected by the disruption of a huge automated teller machine network by the blizzard.  1  NEXT ROUND OF BUDGET FIGHT
With the Clinton budget plan safely through the House, Democrats focused on defending the proposal against attacks in the Senate.  8  LOBBYISTS JOUST FOR A VOICE
Washington Memo: As the White House nears its deadline for a comprehensive health-care plan, lobbyists from all affected interest groups are no longer arguing over whether to change the system but how.  1  OREGON HEALTH PLAN APPROVED
The Administration approved Oregon's proposal to guarantee health services for poor people by rationing care, but it told the state to revise its ranking of services.  8  NEW MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS DRUG
An advisory Federal panel urged approval for a drug to treat multiple sclerosis.  1  REVERSAL ON BREAST IMPLANTS
Dow Corning reported that new studies on rats showed that the silicone gel used in breast implants was not inert and was a strong irritant of the immune system.  8  PEROT KEEPS PROMISE ANYWAY
Ross Perot is staging a low-tech variation of the "electronic town meeting" he promised to hold if elected President.  6  STUDENTS ACCUSED OF SEX CRIMES
Eight high school students in a Los Angeles suburb were accused by law enforcement officials of raping or molesting girls as young as 10.  6  ACCUSED, AN ARCHBISHOP RESIGNS
Archbishop Robert Sanchez of Santa Fe, N.M., announced his resignation after five women accused him of engaging in sexual relations.  6  Beliefs: Science as the major world religion.  7  Metro Digest 23  A SUSPECT'S COMMITMENT
Mahmud Abouhalima, a missing suspect in the World Trade Center bombing, was known among Brooklyn's circle of militant Arab immigrants as one of the committed.
His acquaintances say he left his home for months at a time to join the rebels fighting the Soviet-backed government in Afghanistan.  1  Business Digest 37  Arts/Entertainment 11-16, 49  Dance: Harlem's "Giselle." 11  Film: "Savage Nights." 11  "Jit." 16  "The Blue Eyes of Yonta." Sports 28-33  Fashion 27  Obituaries 10  Kenneth Boulding, a highly honored economist, philosopher and poet.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  Health care the Oregon way.
Change, and hope, for the Court.
Secrets of New York Republicans.
Letters  Russell Baker: Let the wall be blank.  34th Precinct News.
Flora Lewis: From paranoia to peril.


Away From the City, the Snow Is Still Inviting


3 Dismissals Reported at NBC News
Three top NBC News staff members were said to have been dismissed yesterday after an investigation of a "Dateline NBC" report in which the network used deceptive film of a General Motors truck bursting into flames as a result of a collision.
The Washington Post reported today that the dismissals came as the network prepared to release an internal report on the incident, perhaps next week.


Missing Blast Suspect's Portrait Drawn in Shadows of Militancy
Mahmud Abouhalima, a missing suspect in the World Trade Center bombing, was known at work as a taxi driver with an attitude.
On one March day two years ago, he racked up six separate summonses for failing to post his identity in his cab, driving with suspended licenses and tinkering with the meter.
But among Brooklyn's circle of militant Arab immigrants, who consider it a duty to struggle against what they consider infidel Middle Eastern governments, he was known as one of the committed.
Several times, his acquaintances say, he left his home to go fight for months at a time with the rebels trying to topple the Soviet-installed government in Afghanistan.


Dinkins Campaign to Stress Control of the Schools
Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that his re-election campaign would be a crusade to give the mayor control over the Board of Education, which he said had become "sidetracked and politicized."
By focusing on who would control the schools, Mr.
Dinkins appeared to stake his political fortune on his belief that most New Yorkers support the initiatives begun by the outgoing Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, whose proposals ignited a backlash among conservative board members that led to his ouster.


CHRONICLE
The name Astor in itself is practically a landmark in New York, so it works out rather well that VISCOUNT ASTOR will speak at the April 8 lunch of the New York Landmarks Preservation Foundation at the St.
Regis.


Saberhagen Isn't Happy
Bret Saberhagen said today he was "disappointed" with the latest contract-extension proposal from the Mets.
The right-hander said the club had barely improved its initial offer of a three-year, $14 million package that included an option year.
He said the Mets' adjusted offer, which was made Thursday, didn't reach $15 million.
"They are being seriously slow," said Saberhagen.


IRAQI WAR CRIMES ASSERTED BY U.S.
In a long-awaited report, the Pentagon asserted today that Iraq committed serious war crimes during the Persian Gulf war by abusing all of the prisoners of war it captured, torturing and killing Kuwaitis and damaging the environment by releasing oil into the Persian Gulf and destroying Kuwaiti oil wells.
The report was prepared by the United States Army and was based on intelligence and operational reports, and interviews and debriefings of prisoners of war and hostages by teams of military lawyers.
It covers the period from the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August 1990 through the American-led military action to oust the Iraqis in early 1991 and the repatriation of American prisoners in March 1991.


Service for Helen Hayes
A funeral Mass for Helen Hayes, with John Cardinal O'Connor presiding, is to be celebrated today at 10:30 A.M. at St.
Ann's Roman Catholic Church, 19 Jefferson Street, Nyack, N.Y.
Burial at Oak Hill Cemetery in Nyack will be private.


Editors' Note
The "How They Do It" chart in "Your Money" last Saturday, about a bed-and-breakfast operation run by Kathleen Burk in Port Jefferson, L.I., reported that she had received a permit from village officials after weeks of wrangling.
In reporting on Mrs.
Burk's legal difficulties, The Times should have sought comment from village officials.
They say that Mrs.
Burk has not been granted a permit and that two citations have been issued to her for operating without a permit.
The officials say the village's housing code requires that a bed-and-breakfast have no more than three bedrooms and that the owner live on the premises.
Mrs.
Burk's has four guest bedrooms, and she lives elsewhere.


Review/Film Festival; Love Among the Chaos In Post-Colonial Africa
Flora Gomes's moody film "The Blue Eyes of Yonta" offers a richly shaded vision of a post-colonial African society on the verge of losing hope.
Set in Bissau, the capital of the small West African republic of Guinea-Bissau, it shows a bustling city that wants to be a modern metropolis but that barely functions.
A layer of red dirt covers boulevards dotted with mud puddles in which farm animals mingle with the traffic.
The city's electrical power sputters at irregular intervals, plunging nightclubs into sudden darkness and causing warehouses of fresh fish to rot.
The collapse of the real-estate market has brought a wave of evictions that is causing innocent people to be put out on the street with their possessions.


Review/Fashion; Alaia and Leger Loosen Up a Bit
It shouldn't come as too much of a surprise, in a season when the aristocratic Ines de la Fressange designed punk clothes and the former punk visionary Vivienne Westwood did Dior-style suits, that the man most famous for provocative Paris fashion was inspired by his grandmother's vest.
Of course, the vest turned into a leather bustier, and the designer, Azzedine Alaia, cinched it over sheer shirts to give them his signature shape.
Mr.
Alaia was also influenced by the clothing of Asia, producing loose, liquid clothes that will be in stores for the spring-summer selling season.
His shoes, made by Massaro, Paris's premier boot maker, are stack thongs modeled after those worn in rice paddies.


High School Gang Accused of Raping for 'Points'
Eight high school students in the middle-class suburb of Lakewood were in custody today, accused of raping or molesting girls as young as 10 in a gang competition to accumulate "points" for sexual conquests.
Los Angeles Sheriff's deputies who made the arrests on Thursday said the incidents went back at least five months and that scores of victims might have been involved.
Lieut.
Joseph R. Surgent said that seven victims had been identified so far and that he expected additional arrests, with possible arraignments on Tuesday.
Arrests Were Televised
The arrests, some of them on the campus of Lakewood High School, have divided the student body into angry camps and have shocked a quiet town that has been struggling against encroaching crime and gangs.


Albany and State Professionals' Union Reach Agreement on Contract
The Cuomo administration announced today that it had reached a tentative contract agreement with the second-largest union of state employees, bringing an end to over two years of bitter negotiations, lawsuits and uncertainty.
The four-year agreement with the Public Employees Federation, which represents 56,000 professional workers, would increase wages by 4 percent on April 1 and by slightly more than 4 percent in the next fiscal year and would give small bonuses in December 1993 and September 1994.
The contract does not include any retroactive wage increases.


Mukalla Journal; Yemen's Lepers Still Outcasts as in Ancient Times
The stark, volcanic peaks that plunge headlong into the emerald waters of the Arabian Sea make up some of the most forbidding terrain in the Arabian Peninsula.
It was in the shadow of these cliffs that the camel caravans passed on the ancient frankincense trade and the colonial port of Aden -- "the white man's grave" -- was established by the British as a bridgehead to India.
But the jagged, rocky slopes, with their crumbling stone fortresses, harbor not only bits of history, but the outcasts of Yemeni society.
In squalid encampments, caves and thatched huts live many of the country's 14,000 lepers, banished from their villages by a populace that still views the disease as a curse reserved for thieves and miscreants.


Sri Lanka Is Choking Off Long Ethnic Revolt
After a decade of fighting in one of the world's most violent ethnic wars, the Sri Lankan Army appears to be gaining the upper hand against Tamil insurgents here in the eastern part of the island while it confines the insurgency to the Tamil stronghold in the north.
With its confidence buoyed by military success, as well as a recent spurt of rapid economic growth, the Sri Lanka Government is also on the verge of proposing a political settlement to the Tamils that will go some distance toward meeting their political demands for autonomy in Tamil areas.


Race for Dominance in Chips
Since the introduction of personal computers, the availability of inexpensive hardware has driven innovation.
But in yet another sign that computers have become mere commodities, the makers of the speedy microchips called RISC processors, heralded as computing's new age, are finding that software, not hardware, is now the ruling force.
And that is hurting RISC's chances of changing the existing order.
Having proved that they can speed processing by simplifying computer hardware and shifting more complex operations to software, RISC chips are now at the heart of a growing number of supercomputers, mainframes and work stations, in which performance is key.


Reversal on Breast Implants
Dow Corning, which has long defended the safety of its breast implants, revealed a new study linking them to immune disorders.
Page 8.


CHRONICLE
If summer's weather turns out to be as capricious as that of this winter, which theoretically ends today, the best portable coolers around may again become popular.
Remember fans, those hand-held arcs that were generally pleated but not always?
Some pretty snappy examples of the genre have been commissioned by Tiffany &amp; Company for an exhibition on April 19 and 20.
More than 100 artists, designers and celebrities have donated fans they designed.
KARL LAGERFELD sent an 18th-century fan with a sketch of himself on the back, and ROY LICHTENSTEIN painted bonsai trees on a Japanese fan.


NCR Chief to Retire Early; Newcomer to Replace Him
The chairman of the NCR Corporation, the computer maker that first resisted a merger with A.T.&amp; T., then successfully completed such a deal, said yesterday that he planned to retire early.
The chairman, Gilbert P. Williamson, who will turn 56 next month, said he would retire effective May 1 after more than 30 years with NCR, which is also a leading maker of automated teller machines.


Classical Music in Review
Pamela Frank, violinist Peter Serkin, pianist  Alice Tully Hall
At first look, Pamela Frank and Peter Serkin make an odd couple as a violin and piano duo.
Yet as Sunday afternoon's recital showed, both their differences and samenesses end up being happy ones.
First, there is Mr.
Serkin's dry, fastidious piano tone against Ms.
Frank's more sensuous violin playing.
The two, however, tend to interlock.
The piano operates at full throttle; and even with lid fully raised, it never swamps the smaller instrument.


From Federal Express to Cal Success
You could find Todd Bozeman seven years ago as a key player for Rhode Island.
Or five years ago in Crystal City, Va., just outside the nation's capital, delivering Federal Express packages.
Or four years ago at courtside as an assistant coach at Tulane.
Or over the past three years as an assistant at California.
Saturday at the Rosemont Horizon, when California (20-8) takes on Duke (24-7) in the second round of the Midwest Region of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, you will find Bozeman calling the shots for the Golden Bears.
He has become head coach, mentor, friend, confidant and savior to his players and, by any account, one of the most unsual stories in the tournament.


Whirlpool Plans Charge Of $40 Million
The Whirlpool Corporation said yesterday that troubles in the airline-leasing industry would contribute to a $40 million after-tax charge against its first-quarter earnings, which are to be released next month.
Whirlpool, based in Benton Harbor, Mich., is most familiar as a maker of appliances sold under 10 brand names in more than 120 countries.
But it also has a financial services unit with a $1.7 billion portfolio.
Its largest segment owns and leases jetliners to airlines; in January 1992, it acquired an unspecified number of shares in GPA Group P.L.C., the Irish aircraft-leasing company.


Key Compaq Officer Quits
In a surprise announcement, the Compaq Computer Corporation said today that the senior vice president of its personal computer division had resigned.
H.
Douglas Johns, 44, was the hands-on leader for engineering, marketing and production during the division's remarkable recovery after he was named its chief after a reorganization in October, 1991.


Nickerson Is Heading for Greener Pastures
Linebacker HARDY NICKERSON, the Pittsburgh Steelers' top tackler the last two seasons, has signed a $5.1 million, three-year contract with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
The contract, signed Thursday, was the second-highest for an inside linebacker, placing Nickerson behind only QUENTIN CORYATT, who receives $2.2 million a year from the Indianapolis Colts.
"I was looking at it as an opportunity for me to help a team win and go to a place that wanted me," Nickerson said.
"The money is right, the team is right."


Health Care the Oregon Way
It would be easy to read too little into the Clinton Administration's quick approval of Oregon's plan to reform its Medicaid program.
Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala says her approval reflects President Clinton's desire to foster state experimentation and her own attitude toward resolving technical difficulties.
But there's more to her quick approval than state flexibility and technical competence.
It signals an understanding that health care reform -- controlling costs while covering the uninsured -- is about drawing lines and making choices.
Some Americans will get more, others will wind up with less.
Making choices is what Oregon has done for its poor; it's what Mr.
Clinton will propose for everyone else when he releases his national reform plan this spring.


Observer; Let the Wall Be Blank
Every new President likes to make his own mistakes in dealing with the White House press, and Bill Clinton is obviously no exception.
So he has let two months pass without holding a formal news conference.
Wise politics for any President?
Maybe, but it also edges the press toward dudgeon.
Nasty suspicions simmer: What's with this new guy anyhow?
Is he trying to cut the ties that bind President and press in their turbulent love-hate relationship?


AID TRUCKS ARRIVE IN A BOSNIAN TOWN AFTER SERBS YIELD
Thronged by what was described as thousands of cheering, weeping townspeople and refugees, a convoy of United Nations relief trucks entered a besieged Muslim town in eastern Bosnia today, heading off for the time being the threat that large numbers of Muslims would starve.
The arrival of the relief column in Srebrenica, a town where some people had not eaten in days and others had survived by eating moss and vegetation pulled from beneath the snow in the surrounding forests, was a personal triumph for Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon, the United Nations commander in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
He had made a personal crusade of the town's survival, camping in the local post office for nine days and vowing not to abandon the 60,000 residents to the besieging Serbian nationalist forces.


Galoob to Buy Toy Maker
Lewis Galoob Toys Inc., best known for its Micro Machines line of toy cars, said today that it intended to acquire Diversified Specialists Inc., a privately held toy maker.
Diversified, based in Houston, markets preschool and juvenile electronic products, boys' activity toys and walkie-talkies, among other products.
It had revenues of about $33 million in 1992.
The terms of its acquisition were not disclosed


Teller Machines Are a Casualty Of the Blizzard
After a week of dealing with the nation's largest disruption of automated teller machines, bankers are still struggling to return service to normal for the one million card holders affected.
The collapse of the snow-laden roof of a computer center in Clifton, N.J., last Saturday also brought down 5,000 A.T.M.'s nationwide, causing particularly serious problems in California and Illinois.
The situation has left the banking industry and its customers wondering about their growing reliance on such machines.


Judith Grad, Expert On Municipal Ethics And a Therapist, 68
Judith Grad, a former counsel to the New York City Board of Ethics who in later life became a psychotherapist, died yesterday at her home in Greenwich Village.
She was 68.
The cause of death was heart failure, her family said.


Henry Gellerman, President of Overseas Press Club, 80
Henry Gellerman, a former president of the Overseas Press Club of America, died on Wednesday at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 80.
The club reported his death and said it came after a brief illness.


Georgia Shoots Down a Russian Plane
The Georgian leadership said today that a Russian aircraft piloted by a Russian major had been shot down over Abkhazia and accused Russia of "undisguised military aggression" in the breakaway region.
The conflict between the Tbilisi Government and Abkhazia threatened to expand into an open war between Russia and Georgia.


Woman Slain in Midtown
A woman was shot to death yesterday afternoon as she tried to get out of a car outside the Port Authority Bus Terminal on Eighth Avenue at 41st Street in midtown Manhattan, the police said.
The woman, Lisa Moss, 28 years old, of Webster Avenue in the Bronx, was seen arguing with two men inside the car just before 5 P.M., said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.
"She was trying to get out, and they shot her in the back," said Officer McInnis.
The woman was hit by several bullets, he said.
She fell from the car to the pavement and died immediately, he said.
The two men then abandoned the car, a blue Lincoln sedan, and fled on foot, Officer McInnis said.
A .22-caliber revolver was recovered from the car.


Bridge
While thousands of players were arriving here Thursday for the start of the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals, two Texas experts were capturing the North American Pairs title, an event that began at grass-roots level six months ago.
James Griffin and Ken Schutze of Austin, Tex., held on to a slim lead while facing their closest rivals in the last two rounds.
The final standings were:


Review/Film Festival; Of Charm, Sex, Desperation, Death
Cyril Collard can be seen in his own film "Savage Nights" as a warm, attractive actor with a rueful grin that never quite fades away.
Mr.
Collard's vivid presence in the film makes it especially sad to note that he died of AIDS on March 5, less than a week before "Savage Nights" received four French Cesar awards, including the one for best picture.
Under happier circumstances, the appearance of "Savage Nights" in the New Directors/New Films series (at 9 P.M. today and tomorrow) would be an occasion to hail an impressive new talent.
Mr.
Collard appears in this autobiographical story as Jean, a charmingly flirtatious 30-year-old with an especially complicated sex life.
Ever receptive to both men and women, he becomes involved simultaneously with Laura (Romane Bohringer), a feisty and voluptuous teen-ager, and Samy (Carlos Lopez), a handsome rugby player who is living with a woman when Jean first meets him.
The frustrations brought on by these two affairs are sometimes more than Jean can manage.
When that happens he goes cruising, finding release and comfort in wordless group sex with strangers.


Reviews/Film Festival; A Quirky Ancestor And the Road to Love
The airy African pop sound known as jit-jive washes like sunshine through "Jit," a playful romantic comedy from Zimbabwe that the New Directors/New Films series is showing this evening and tomorrow afternoon at the Museum of Modern Art.
With its sparkling guitar-and-keyboard textures spun into bouncy three-against-two rhythmic patterns, the sound defines the irrepressible spirit of the film's central character, a mischievous youth nicknamed U. K. (Dominic Makuvachuma).
The fearless young man with an impish grin has left his parents' village to seek his fortune in the city, where he lives with his uncle, a Zimbabwean pop singer (Oliver Mtukudzi).
While riding in a crowded taxi one afternoon, he defends a beautiful woman being verbally harassed and is promptly thrown out onto the street and knocked unconscious.
When he comes to, he has a vision of paradise.
Leaning over him, her face filled with concern, is Sofi (Sibongile Nene), the passenger he tried to help.
He falls instantly and totally in love.


Trade Center Jigsaw Puzzlers Find How Bits Made a Van
In a shadowy, makeshift workroom beneath the World Trade Center, yards from where a bomb carried by a Ryder rental van exploded last month, blowing the van to bits, investigators move over an identical yellow van, trying to match parts.
Holding piece after crumpled piece next to corresponding parts of the unscarred van, they are performing a crucial part of the overall investigation, identifying scraps of the original Ford Econoline 350 van that could lead them to new suspects, strengthen ties to those already under arrest and shed light on how the bombing was carried out.


U.N. Evacuates Bosnian Muslims From a Town Besieged by Serbs
Nearly 680 Muslims, more than 100 of them seriously wounded, were evacuated today by United Nations forces from besieged Srebrenica to the relative safety of the Bosnian-held city of Tuzla.
Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon of France, commander of the United Nations forces in Bosnia, supervised the evacuation and accompanied the convoy of 18 trucks and an ambulance on the first leg of the journey through the siege lines to the neighboring Serbian-held town of Bratunac.


The Emperor's Old Clothes
To the Editor:
"The New Tatterdemalions" ( March 7) of London are the ultimate British send-up.


Wilbur Daniels, 70, Garment Union Official, Dies
Wilbur Daniels, a former top officer of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union and a civic leader, died yesterday at home in Manhattan at the age of 70.
The cause was a heart ailment, his family said.


Croat Presses Muslims on U.N.'s Bosnia Plan
With the Security Council expected to vote on Monday to enforce the ban on military flights over Bosnia, the leader of the country's Croats was pressing the Muslim-led Government to accept a United Nations peace plan.
The head of Bosnia's Croatian delegation, Mate Boban, met privately today with President Alija Izetbegovic for three hours to urge him to sign a map that would divide the country into ten largely autonomous provinces with a weak central government.
But afterwards Mr.
Boban told the mediators the two had made little progress.


Jay Joel and Cindy Bogan
Dr. and Mrs.
Howard Bogan of Roslyn, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cindy Bogan, to Joel Joel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Billy Joel of Merrick, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bogan graduated from the University of Michigan.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in social work at New York University.
Her father is a dentist in Flushing, Queens.


In Occupied West Bank Death Is a 2-Sided Story
Four-year-old Huda Siyaj was killed here last Saturday afternoon as she rode in the back seat of her father's car.
A bullet fired by an Israeli soldier pierced the seat and tore into her back and then her stomach.
As with dozens of other fatal episodes in Israel's occupied territories, the only certainty about this shooting is its tragic result.
Events leading to the killing are lost in conflicting accounts by the army and the girl's father.


Using ones Head: The Bad Haircut as Star Turn
They must be really acting if they've got such geeky hair.
That's the hidden message behind the conspicuously awful haircuts of some current leading men.
An actor with bad hair is the equivalent of an actress doing an unglamorous turn (think of Cher looking plain in "Moonstruck") -- a sign he cares so much about his art, he's willing to ugly up.
Here is a sampler of top stars who have been acting with their hair.
Michael Douglas in "Falling Down" -- The nerd du jour look says emphatically that this is
not
Michael Douglas, sex symbol.
No nude posteriors, no ice picks.
The seriously bad hair also says that this is a movie with a message, though the message may be that Mr.
Douglas is paying homage to. . .
Al Pacino in "The Godfather Part III" -- This is the haircut that was so distracting, some people couldn't pay attention to the movie.
Who knows why the aging Michael Corleone got a spiky brush-cut?
Maybe the porcupine look was supposed to keep rival families away.
Kevin Costner in "The Bodyguard" -- This cut perpetuates the myth that secret service agents have to look as conspicuous as possible.
Some people have speculated that this bad hair is an homage to Steve McQueen, for whom the movie was originally written.
More likely it is an homage to . . .
Harrison Ford in "Presumed Innocent" -- There are two possible explanations for this cut.
As a dedicated lawyer, the Ford character wants to look like Julius Caesar.
Or, the hair is a red herring, deflecting attention from the true murderer and any holes in the plot.
Robert De Niro in "Mad Dog and Glory" -- Sometimes he gains 50 pounds to play a role.
Sometimes he gets his hair cut the way it must have looked in third grade.
Living with this 'do inspired him in playing the meek, mild-mannered Mad Dog.
Robin Williams in "Toys" -- No, he isn't entering a Barry Manilow look-alike contest.
The dyed-blond hair suggests a man so in touch with his inner child that his hair has never darkened.
Or, maybe he's just trying to look like Rod Stewart.
Sean Connery in "Medicine Man" -- In this classic hair strategy, the ponytail compensates for a receding hairline.
The character, a scientist who has spent years in the jungle, could be an aging hippy, or a SoHo art dealer who hasn't heard that the 80's are over.
Daniel Day-Lewis in "The Last of the Mohicans" -- The ultimate in Romantic hair.
Never mind that the character is engaged in the French and Indian War.
In another century, Keats and Shelley would have killed for hair like this.
For that matter, so would have Madame Bovary.


Streetscapes: Hamilton Grange; A Move to Move A Historic House
SHOULD it be a pristine memorial to one of the founders of the nation or a delightful surprise crowded onto a New York City street?
Alexander Hamilton's 1802 house was moved from its original site in 1889 to where it is now, on Convent Avenue just north of 141st Street, to make way for real estate development.
Now structural deterioration gives the National Parks Service, which owns the clapboard house, an opportunity to proceed with 40-year-old plans to move it to a more pastoral setting, a plan long opposed by the house's neighbor.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the proposed energy tax misidentified the school at which Alfred Marcus is a professor.
It is the Carlson School of Management at the University of Wisconsin, not Carlton College.


E. Barry Ryan, Horseman, 73
E.
Barry Ryan, horseman, former owner of Normandy Farm in Lexington, Ky., and one of the founders of Classic, a magazine about horses and horse raising, died on Monday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 73 and lived in Manhattan.
A daughter, Margot Ryan Winger, said the cause was pneumonia.


Ah, Spring! and Time to Change Menus
THE minute the mind knows it is spring, the appetite changes.
And it has nothing to do with the weather.
Instead of featuring clunky root vegetables and hearty stews, the menu lightens.
In the market the search is on for tender young asparagus and artichokes to cook lightly and pair with chicken, seafood, delicate cuts of fresh pork and baby lamb.
Feathery herbs replace sturdy spices.
Strawberries begin to color desserts.


Caroline Samsen and Timothy Mueller
Joan Crohn and Lester C. Samsen, both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter Caroline Joan Courtney Samsen to Timothy Mueller, a son of David and Patricia Mueller of North Brunswick, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Samsen, 28, graduated from Connecticut College and is studying for an M.B.A. at Columbia University.
Her father is a retired vice president for Chemical Bank in New York.
Her mother owns Joan Samsen Associates, a fund-raising consulting company.
The prospective bride's stepfather, George Crohn Jr., is the executive vice president of M. Fabrikant &amp; Sons Inc., a wholesale jewelry concern in New York.
Her stepmother, Susan Samsen, is an executive assistant at the Mendik Realty Company in New York.


Leetch Breaks His Ankle in Freak Accident
Reeling from a season of turmoil, and struggling to qualify for the playoffs, the Rangers received another jolt yesterday when they learned that Brian Leetch had broken a bone in his right ankle in a freak accident.
It's likely that Leetch will miss the rest of the regular season and won't be available until deep into the playoffs, assuming of course that the Rangers are still playing.


Miss Humphrey, William Little
Mr. and Mrs.
Henry H. Humphrey Jr. of Short Hills, N.J., have announced May wedding plans for his daughter, Margaret McClay Humphrey, and William Richard Little, the son of Edward S. Little and Dr.
Jill A. Little of Jamesville, N.Y.
Miss Humphrey, 25, is an executive assistant to the chairman of Sotheby's, the auction house in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
She is the daughter of the late Margaret B. Humphrey and the stepdaughter of Ann Humphrey.
Miss Humphrey's father is a partner in Spencer Stuart Associates, an executive search firm in New York.
Her maternal great-grandfather, Harry Landsiedel, was the inventor of the Remington electric shaver.


HOW JACK KEMP LOST THE WAR ON POVERTY
Funny.
I was heartened by the fact that Kemp and Richard Darman would so forcefully do their jobs -- Darman addressing financial burdens, Kemp addressing social problems.
That they would even expend the energy to engage in debate, both intellectual and visceral, renews my lost faith in the previous administration.
JOHN MASTANDREA
Valhalla, N.Y.


A Thai Restaurant That Retains Its Style
IN Connecticut, the Bangkok in Danbury was a pioneer in Thai restaurants when it first opened its doors early in 1987.
At that time the sweet, salty, sour and spicy flavors of the cuisine were familiar only to those fortunate enough to have visited Thailand or Thai restaurants elsewhere in the Unites States.
Since then Thai restaurants have sprouted throughout the state, with two others in Danbury alone.
We have watched as some have modified their cuisine to what they perceived to be Western taste, cutting back on the Thai ingredients used, and in the process devaluing their Thai uniqueness.
At some restaurants neither coriander nor lemon grass were used -- unthinkable in a Thai kitchen!
It was thus with some trepidation that we revisited Bangkok, hopeful that it had retained its culinary integrity but fearful that it too might have tried adaptation.


Clarkson Ends Brown's Holiday on Ice
Clarkson had too much speed and muscle for Brown tonight, winning the Eastern College Athletic Conference's championship game, 3-1, with a flourish.
The automatic bid that comes with the title sends Clarkson into the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, which begins on Friday, and likely ended the season for gallant Brown, the fourth and last-seeded squad in the E.C.A.C.'s 32nd annual final-four event.


SPORTS PEOPLE: FOOTBALLFalcons Sign Geathers
Defensive tackle JUMPY GEATHERS, a 6-foot-7-inch, 290-pounder who played with Washington the last three seasons, signed a three-year contract with Atlanta Friday.
The eight-year pro has 38 1/2 sacks, has forced 15 fumbles and recovered 9.
Geathers played in every game for the Redskins last year.
The Redskins wanted to keep him, but were unwilling to match the Falcons' $2.9 million contract which reportedly includes a $500,000 signing bonus. (AP)


Ties That Bind Poverty's Children
IN the last 10 years, admissions to juvenile detention centers in Connecticut have risen by 65 percent, the State Judicial Department says.
Last year more than 13,000 cases were added to the department's caseload.
Michael F., 14, is one of those statistics.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Fort Washington, Pa.; Expo Center In a Suburb
WHILE Philadelphians await the summer opening of a new downtown convention center, a suburban developer has converted a former industrial building into the Fort Washington Expo Center, a smaller venue for regional trade shows.
The center opened Jan. 20 in 166,000 square feet of an 880,000-square-foot former Honeywell Corporation factory in an industrial park near the Pennsylvania Turnpike and local Route 309, about a 40-minute drive from Philadelphia.
It will compete most directly with the Valley Forge Convention Center, a 140,000-square-foot center of exhibition space with two adjacent hotels that is a 20-minute drive southwest of Fort Washington.


BALKAN UPDATE
Srebrenica, Bosnia  Nearly 680 Muslims, more than 100 of them seriously wounded, were evacuated by United Nations peacekeepers from the besieged town of Srebrenica to the relative safety of the Muslim-held city of Tuzla.
Belgrade, Yugoslavia  A Serbian banker's abrupt departure this month has accentuated economic chaos and thrown some light on the shady deals keeping Serbia afloat despite United Nations sanctions.
United Nations  The leader of Bosnia's Croats is pressing the Muslim-led Government to accept a United Nations plan for ending the civil war.


Mimi Paisley, Kenneth Aneser
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas L. Paisley of Garden City, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Meredith Keogh Paisley to Kenneth Edward Aneser, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John K. Aneser of Huntington, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Paisley, 24, is known as Mimi.
She is an institutional bond saleswoman at G. X. Clarke &amp; Company, a Government securities dealer in Jersey City.
She and her fiance graduated from St.
Michael's College.
Her father is a securities broker at Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
Her mother, Michele Paisley, is a partner in Seventh Street Travel, a travel agency in Garden City.


World Markets; A British Star Called Telecom
FEW companies have remade themselves so completely as British Telecommunications P.L.C., the state-owned phone company that was privatized in 1984.
Since privatization, it has ruthlessly cut costs, shed its slow-moving bureaucratic methods and claimed a place as a dominant force in the worldwide telecommunications industry.
In the process, its stock, which trades on both the London and New York Stock Exchanges, has become a favorite among analysts.
"I follow everything in the industry, and within the universe of telecom stocks, B. T. is clearly at the most attractive end of the spectrum," said Jack Grubman, an analyst at PaineWebber Inc. in New York.


Conversations/James E. Muller; Eat Foie Gras, Live Longer? A Cardiologist Sadly Begs to Differ
Shortly after Dr.
James Muller published a 1985 landmark study showing that heart attacks tend to occur in the morning, he was listening to a local talk radio show.
Another study had been published around that time, suggesting that grapes could reduce the risk of heart disease.
The talk show host put two and two together: The best way to stay healthy was to stay in bed, eating grapes, until noon.
Amid a dizzying flurry of scientific papers about what is good or bad for the heart -- many widely reported in the news media -- cardiologists like Dr.
Muller are worried that patients looking for guidance will be overwhelmed, unable to separate the scientific wheat from the not-so-scientific chaff.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 21, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
60
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
35
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
4
49
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
5
9
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
6
13
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman's death leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
7
3
SILENT PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) Lieut.
Lucas Davenport on the trail of an escaped serial killer.
8
2
ON THE PULSE OF MORNING, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $5.) The poem read at President Clinton's inauguration.
9
3
THE FIRST WIVES CLUB, by Olivia Goldsmith. (Pocket, $5.99.) Three women conspire to get even with the men who divorced them.
10
3
UNTAMED, by Elizabeth Lowell. (Avon, $5.99.) A young woman's romance, in 12th-century Britain, with a man returning from the Crusades.
11 *
7
BYGONES, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A dinner party attended by a woman, her former husband and their two grown children reveals family strains and love.
12
4
THE ELF QUEEN OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The third volume in a series about a fantasy land.
13 *
5
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is still threatened by aliens.
14
25
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a farming family.
15
1
WILDEST HEARTS, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) A businesswoman's proposal of a marriage of convenience to a rich man has stormy romantic consequences.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
4
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) The autobiography of the retired commander of a Navy counterterrorist unit.
2
10
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
3
5
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
4
489
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
5
24
ALIVE, by Piers Paul Read. (Avon, $5.99.) How some of the members of a rugby team survived a plane crash in the Andes in 1972.
6
12
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President discusses factors affecting the environment.
7
1
DOUBLE CROSS, by Sam Giancana and Chuck Giancana. (Warner, $5.99.) Two relatives of the late Sam Giancana recall his life in the Mafia.
8
96
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
9 *
6
HILLARY CLINTON: The Inside Story, by Judith Warner. (Signet, $4.99.) A biography of the First Lady.
10
23
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
126
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
109
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
84
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
9
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
5
3
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1993 edition.
6 *
13
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1993. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
EARLY BEETHOVEN
Beethoven from the age of 22 to 33 is the focus of a four-day symposium at the University of Connecticut in Storrs beginning Thursday, titled "Beethoven in Vienna 1792-1803: The First Style Period." The composer's compositions, personal relationships and his life in general will be scrutinized.
Each evening there will be a concert of his works, beginning Thursday with a chamber music performance in Von der Mehden Hall at 8 P.M.
Lectures and critiques will be held on Friday from 9 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. and from 1:30 to 4:30 P.M. at the same location.
At 8 P.M. a concert by the Classical Quartet will take place at the First Congregational Church on North Eagleville Road.


Port Authority Crisis Is Over, but Problems Persist
Three weeks after the bombing of the World Trade Center, the managers of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey are caught in a paradoxical mood.
Despite the shock and disruption of the attack, agency officials are exhilarated at what they see as a successful all-out effort to restore the buildings and are confident that the bombing will not permanently damage the authority's operations.
But beneath the can-do zeal that the agency has brought to the current crisis is a more sober assessment of long-range problems that have nothing to do with the Feb. 26 attack.


Vegetarians Unite
To the Editor: Rarely have I read something that so completely mirrored my own experience as Suzanne Berne's piece about traveling vegetarians ("How Do You Say, 'Vegetable'?" Feb. 7).
I have been a lacto-ovo vegetarian (dairy is O.K., fish, meat, fowl are not) for 19 years and I have traveled to almost every continent exploring the cuisines of many lands and the challenges of communication.
In a restaurant in Oaxaca, Mexico, a vegetarian friend and I, confusing the Italian word for anchovies with the Spanish word for lettuce, asked our waitress to please bring us a salad with no lechuga.
"We cannot have lechuga," we explained in fragments of Spanish, "we are vegetarians." Looking perplexed, she went to the kitchen and returned with a bowl of blue cheese dressing.
We had ordered the blue cheese salad, which consisted only of lettuce with blue cheese dressing, and told her to hold the lettuce.


Results Plus
SKIING  Austrian Wins Downhill Armin Assinger of Austria won the final downhill yesterday before next year's Winter Olympics in a race at Kvitfjell in Lillehammer, Norway.
Assinger edged Werner Perathoner of Italy by .08 seconds on the 3,007-meter course on Kvitfjell mountain.
Austria's Hannes Trinkl was .13 seconds behind in third place, matching his career best.
William Besse of Switzerland placed fourth.
Kjetil Andre Aamodt of Norway finished tied for fifth, a career-best finish in the downhill.
But Marc Girardelli, who shared fifth with Aamodt and Josef Polig of Italy, retained a commanding lead in the overall points standing over the Norwegian with five races left this season.
Franz Heinzer of Switzerland clinched his second straight downhill points title by placing 10th.
It gave him 527 points to 427 for second-place Atle Skaardal of Norway with one race left next weekend at Are, Sweden. (AP) German Racer Wins Slalom: Katja Seizinger of Germany mastered the tough, icy Supersvaengen course in Klovsjo, Sweden, yesterday to gain the first giant slalom victory of her career.
The victory moved Seizinger within 50 points of the Austrian Anita Wachter, the World Cup overall leader.
Wachter, suffering a slump late in the season, finished 20th and collected only 11 points for a total of 1,166.
The World Cup season ends next week at Are, Sweden.
Wachter and Seizinger will race in all four events at Are. (AP) GOLF Sheehan Catches Coe-Jones Dawn Coe-Jones had such a hot start in the third round of the Ladies Professional Golf Association Standard Register Ping in Phoenix that she rattled everyone but Patty Sheehan.
Sheehan took it as a challenge.
"Dawn started out so quickly that I knew I had to keep pace to even stay in contention. Fortunately, I hit a lot of good shots and made the putts," Sheehan said yesterday after the best round of the season -- a tournament record-tying eight-under-par 65 -- helped her catch the second-round leader.
Sheehan made up two shots on Coe-Jones, who twice birdied three straight holes on the front nine.
Both were four shots ahead of other challengers at 14-under 205. (AP) AUTO RACING Shepherd's Team Triumphs Morgan Shepherd and the Wood Brothers team took a chance and came up winners, stretching a tank of gas over the final 103 miles yesterday to take the weather-delayed Motorcraft Quality Parts 500 in Hampton, Ga.
Shepherd's chances of winning appeared to be gone when he cut a tire and had to practically coast for a full lap before getting into the pit on lap 260 of the 328-lap race.
The final 286 miles (188 laps) were run under the green flag and, at the end, it was a fuel-economy run, with Shepherd going the longest without having to stop.
Ernie Irvan, who stopped three laps later than Shepherd, wound up second, his Chevrolet Lumina trailing Shepherd's Ford Thunderbird across the finish line by 23.5 seconds.
Pole-sitter Rusty Wallace's Pontiac Grand Prix wound up third, with 21-year-old rookie Jeff Gordon's Chevy a lap down in fourth. (AP) SOCCER  Brazil, Brazil, Brazil Gian, a forward, scored in the last minute yesterday to give Brazil a 2-1 victory over Ghana in the final of the FIFA World Youth Championship in Sydney, Australia.
Ghana's Emmanuel Duah opened the scoring in the 12th minute and Yan tied it in the 49th minute for Brazil, which also won the event in 1983 and 1985.
In the third-place game, Julian Joachim scored in the 86th minute to give England a 2-1 victory over Australia.
England's David Unsworth opened the scoring in the 42d minute and Anthony Milicic tied it for Australia in the 52d minute. (AP) Aston Villa Triumphs: Dwight Yorke scored both goals yesterday and led Aston Villa to a 2-0 victory over Sheffield Wednesday and into the lead in England's Premier League.
Villa vaulted from third to first after leader Norwich was beaten, 3-0, by Wimbledon, and second-place Manchester United tied, 1-1, with Manchester City.
With eight games to go, Aston Villa has a 2-point lead over United with Norwich third on goal difference.
In Scotland, defending champion Glasgow Rangers lost for the first time in 45 domestic games, upset, 2-1, by Celtic at Parkhead. (AP) COLLEGE WRESTLING Iowa Leads Penn State Iowa's Troy Steiner beat Cornell's Mark Fergeson for third place and two other Hawkeyes claimed consolation victories yesterday as Iowa virtually clinched its third straight National Collegiate Athletic Association. championship.
Steiner, the top-seeded wrestler at 134 pounds after winning the 142-pound title last year, was upset by Penn State's fourth-seeded Cary Kolat in Friday's semifinals.
But he rebounded in the consolation round with a pin over Oklahoma's Ryan Hager in 52 seconds before outpointing Fergeson, 8-4.
Teammates Ray Brinzer and John Oostendorp also earned third-place finishes as Iowa had 115 3/4 points heading into last night's championships with four finalists -- Chad Zaputil at 118, Lincoln McIlravy at 142, Terry Steiner at 150 and Joel Sharratt at 190.
If the Hawkeyes win, it would be their 13th national title in the past 18 years.
Penn State, with Kolat, 150-pound Troy Sunderland and 158-pound Josh Robbins in the finals, had 87 1/2 points after the consolation round.
They were followed by Nebraska (75 1/2), Arizona State (64 1/2), Iowa State (58 1/4), Ohio State (56), Fresno State (37 3/4), Minnesota (36 1/2), Cornell (35) and Michigan (34 1/2).
Brinzer gave the Hawkeyes their second consolation final victory with a 7-1 decision over Iowa State's Matt Johnson at 177 and Oostendorp followed with a 2-point takedown with five seconds remaining to beat Nebraska's Rulon Gardner 8-7 at heavyweight. (AP)


When Audiences (Cough, Cough) Get Into the Act
The next time someone claps during the final chord of Wagner's "Parsifal," the next time a dramatic silence in Haydn is done in by loud coughs -- be angry, but be thoughtful.
Classical-music audiences are an oppressed society, and perhaps in their bad manners lurks a touch of revolt.
Listen to Elias Canetti in his pitiless sociological study "Crowds and Power." The topic is the symphony concert:


High Schoolers Learn The Rewards of Giving
WEARING blue jeans, unisex flannel shirts or sweat shirts and hiking boots -- the girls long haired and without makeup -- a group of eight students sat recently on the carpeted floor of a tiny room in the wooden cabin that houses the Alternative School here.
They had gathered to talk about their community services experiences.
With them on the floor, as is frequently the custom, was Judy Rosen, a teacher, Anthony Aranella, the school's director, and two Fordham University graduate students.
These high school students and others at the Alternative School, part of Scarsdale High School, are discovering that doing community service is a two-way street.
By giving something of themselves to others, they are learning they get as much if not more for themselves in return.


The Redmen Collapse in Second Half
At the end of a surprising season in which they had consistently defied doubters and occasionally amazed themselves, the St.
John's Redmen, and their hopes of advancing to the round of 16, came apart at the cruelest possible time today.
Having survived the early foul problems of David Cain and Shawnelle Scott, the Redmen lost a 10-point lead in the final 11 minutes 56 seconds and eventually fell, 80-74, to Arkansas in the second round.


Cults Stand Aside as Sects Become Churches
To the Editor:
Perhaps Karl E. Meyer's " 'Cults,' Deconstructed" (Editorial Notebook, March 7), with its facile "declension" of denomination, sect and cult ("My religion is a denomination, yours is a sect, and theirs is a cult"), needs to be supplemented by the definitions from "The Churching of America, 1776-1990" by two sociologists of religion, Roger Finke and Rodney Stark.


The Shock of the Old
WHAT'S new in fashion?
You should be asking, What's old?
For the hottest trend on and off the international runways is thrift-shop chic.
Here is Naomi Campbell backstage at Karl Lagerfeld's show, where her full lips and swaying hips are about to earn her $10,000.
She is wearing a whisper of a chiffon dress, printed with misty flowers, bias-cut so that it slithers across the bosom and flutters to the floor.
She bought it in a London antiques shop for a handful of pounds.


POSTINGS: Tradition and Modernity; Booksellers Group Off to Tarrytown
With one foot in the world of tradition and one in the modern marketplace, the American Booksellers Association has something of a dual personality.
By year's end, it will have a headquarters to match, on a 10-acre property at South Broadway and Sunnyside Lane in Tarrytown, N.Y.
On the site is a two-story, 29,000-square-foot office building that was constructed in the mid-50's as the headquarters of the World Publishing Company.
There is also the 139-year-old Peter Moller home, a 12,000-square-foot Gothic Revival structure built of stone quarried from the site.
And there is a carriage house.


There Are Those Who Say
Some say the most delicious recent metaphor-mangling in Washington came from the lips of Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, who gained fame as televised balcony-mate of Hillary Rodham Clinton during her husband's economic address to Congress.
The Greenspan pledge: "to break the back of the credit crunch."
The
some
that led the preceding paragraph is an example of phantom attribution -- a way of making a statement by pretending to report it as the assertion of others.
Whenever a speech writer uses the "some say" construction, a speech reader knows that he's safe to agree with, or sternly dissociate himself from, whatever "some" are saying.


Culture Shock


Prosecutors' Tense Moment At Glen Ridge Assault Trial
Midway through their star witness's testimony last December in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial, the prosecution fretted that the woman -- who is mildly retarded -- was dooming their case.
Defense attorneys were playing on her perceived friendship with four former football players accused of assaulting her and were leading her into a sympathetic portrayal of the defendants, whom she said she cared about and did not want to hurt.
For prosecutors, the moment was a frantic low point in the 23-week trial.
"It was our greatest fear at that point, that the jury would see it as a recantation," one of the prosecutors, Robert D. Laurino, said in discussing the strategy that led to the conviction of three of the defendants on the state's primary charges of assaulting the young woman with a baseball bat and a broom handle.


Trouble at the Nonpareil of Art Libraries
Doubtless it is from professional deformation that this critic regards a great art reference library as the next best thing to paradise.
Others may prefer the isles of Greece, the hill towns of Tuscany or the magical inlets of Maine.
Though in no way decrying those preferences, I stick to my opinion.
In the libraries in question, I free-float in the past, I draw upon the wisdom (and sometimes the unwisdom) of the ages, and I emerge refreshed and refueled.
Among the many-purposed libraries in that category that are open free to any serious person, the nonpareil is beyond a doubt the Frick Art Reference Library, which is on East 71st Street, back to back with the Frick Collection.
As an adjunct to scholarship at the highest level, the Frick Library is treasured worldwide.
It has long been regarded, moreover, as immune to mundane ills and a first-class passenger to perpetuity.


CRIME
The spectacular image with which Michael Dibdin opens his third Aurelio Zen mystery -- a man floating languidly to his death from the uppermost gallery of St.
Peter's Basilica -- eerily anticipates the spectacular image with which the book ends.
On that, you can depend.
Concerning the rest of CABAL (Perfect Crime/Doubleday, $18.50), trust nothing, because the author of "Ratking" and "Vendetta" excels at the slippery art of ambiguity.
Zen, a functionary of the Italian Ministry of the Interior and a pragmatist to the core, is happy to accommodate the Vatican Curia with the neat suicide verdict requested.
But when the haplessly honest detective lets it slip that the dead man, an aristocrat to whom the papal state had given political asylum, was murdered, he is pressed into investigating the case.
As far as Zen can make out, the murdered prince was involved in some sort of cabal, either "a sinister inner coterie" within the Knights of Malta or "a cartel of Milanese businessmen" looking to beat their taxes.
Or maybe something else entirely.


Virginia A. Galda, Andrew Woelflein
Odessa P. Galda of Tryon, N.C., has announced the engagement of her daughter Virginia Aletha Galda to Andrew Buckley Woelflein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kevin G. Woelflein of Greenwich, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Galda is a project manager in the global systems and operations department of the American Express Bank in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
She is also a daughter of the late Frank D. Galda, who was the manager of a J. C. Penney store in Grosse Pointe, Mich.


New &amp; Noteworthy
CAMBRIDGE, by Caryl Phillips. (Vintage International, $10.) This novel, set in the 19th century, shows how the lives of two very different people -- the daughter of a West Indian plantation owner and one of his slaves -- become entwined in a tragedy.
Last year our reviewer, George Garrett, said that with this book the author "takes a firm step toward joining the company of the literary giants of our time."
THE MISMEASURE OF WOMAN, by Carol Tavris. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $13.) Women are neither worse nor better than men, argues the social psychologist Carol Tavris.
She examines the fallacies inherent in much of the research comparing the sexes, and concludes that while women and men often do different things, their dissimilar behavior does not translate into differences in ability.
"The great virtue of this book is that its author never confuses the very real differences in women's and men's experiences -- pregnancy and childbearing being the most obvious -- with the cultural artifacts surrounding these undeniable facts of life," Susan Jacoby said here last year.
Also out in paperback is THE WAR AGAINST WOMEN (Ballantine, $12), in which Marilyn French documents the institutional and cultural weapons used to perpetuate female inequality in both Western and third world nations.
Last year our reviewer, Isabelle de Courtivron, called it "a sobering reminder that the situation of women may still be so universally abysmal that if any other ethnic, national or religious group were attacked, dominated and maimed at the same rate, it could be said to constitute a state of emergency or war."


Ruth Davis, Peter Coley
Mr. and Mrs.
Donald W. Davis of New Britain, Conn., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Ruth Allyn Davis and Peter Bradley Coley, a son of Dr.
Mary S. Coley of West Hartford, Conn., and Dr.
Geoffrey M. Coley of Hartford.
Miss Davis, 31, graduated from Bowdoin College and is an M.B.A. candidate at Babson College.
Her father is a partner in American Industrial Partners, a management-consulting company in New York, and is a lecturer on business at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Mass.
He is the former chairman and chief executive of Stanley Works, the tool manufacturer in New Britain.


As Bacteria Go, It's a Buick
Every time biologists start to believe they have learned at least a few rules about how nature works, something comes along and shatters that smugness to bits.
Last week, overturning the scientific axiom that all bacteria are microscopic, researchers announced in the British journal Nature the discovery of a strain so colossal it can be seen with the unaided eye.
If it were here on the page, the newly identified organism, Epulopiscium fishelsoni, might be mistaken for a hyphen, making it a million times bigger than the common E. coli microbe.
The discovery of the creature, in the guts of foot-long surgeonfish caught off the coast of Australia, undercuts the assumption that simple single-celled microbes, lacking the internal equipment to move oxygen and nutrients around inside them, had to remain tiny enough to allow vital material to diffuse through them.


The Grahams and The Post
To the Editor:
Your reviewer (Feb. 28) picks up and repeats unchallenged several anecdotes in Carol Felsen thal's book about my mother, Katharine Graham.


A Mission Quite Clear For Kentucky's Mashburn
Jamal Mashburn calls it a "mission." His teammates on the University of Kentucky basketball team are more cautious.
They know it's not in their best interests to announce to the world that they expect to win the National Collegiate Athletic Association title.
It might anger the opposition.
It might inspire more intense competition.
It might get them yelled at by their coach, Rick Pitino, who talks endlessly of "respecting the opposition."
Still, there have been meetings, and Mashburn -- the star and leader on this club -- has made it clear what he expects.
A junior, he will not return to Kentucky next season.
Already, he has announced his intentions to enter the National Basketball Association draft.
He wants to buy a house and a car for his mother, Helen Mashburn, who raised him and still lives in their old Bronx neighborhood.
First, though, he wants to leave college with the national title to his name.


Two Slice-of-Life Plays Are Cut Far Too Thin
There's a big difference between a hard-hitting play and one that is merely relentless, and right now you couldn't find a better example to illustrate the distinction than "Aven' U Boys."
Frank Pugliese's splintered account of three lads in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, and how they grew (at the John Houseman Theater Off Broadway) has every mark and trapping of the hard-hitting drama -- gritty language, acts of brutality, blood in copious supply.
If it were a movie, it would carry an X rating.
The setting alone has come to stand for urban unrest and the racial intolerance that can pit neighbors against one another.
Yet for a work that has clearly set its sights on shaking up the audience, it is strangely numbing.


Widow of the Revolution
THIS I CANNOT FORGET
The Memoirs of Nikolai Bukharin's Widow.
By Anna Larina.
Translated by Gary Kern.
Introduction by Stephen F. Cohen.
Illustrated. 384 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $24.95.


Miss Silbersack, John Aymar 3d
Virginia Rodgers of Stamford, Conn., and J. Wayne Silbersack of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Brooke Claire Silbersack, to John vanBeuren Aymar 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aymar Jr. of Darien.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Silbersack, 24, is an undergraduate student at Fordham University.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of Petersen Advertising in Freehold, N.J.
The prospective bride is the stepdaughter of Barbara Silbersack of Darien.


Trash Pickups To Increase, But Gradually
Many of those green drifts of garbage bags that have been building up beside the graying snow banks along New York City streets will not disappear before the middle of the week, officials at the Department of Sanitation said yesterday.
But residents should disregard the normal collection schedule and immediately put out all their garbage and recyclable trash, because collection will be erratic as workers continue to cart away snow from last weekend's blizzard, said Anne Canty, a department spokeswoman.


POSTINGS: For More Historic Districts; Signs of Distinction
Streets in the city's recently designated historic districts will soon be easier to spot without a Baedecker.
The streets will be named on special signs, with white lettering against a terra cotta background, topped by a narrow black band and the name of the historic district above.
The signs were designed by the Manhattan firm of Vignelli Associates and 4,500 have already been introduced by the New York Landmarks Preservation Foundation in 48 of the city's 58 districts.
"Not only do they provide a sense of place of historical memory to residents and visitors, they also serve a regulatory function," said Barbaralee Diamonstein-Spielvogel, chairwoman of the foundation.


Nubian Art Treasures Move Into the Spotlight
It's 60 years late, but "Nubia: Ancient Kingdoms of Africa," at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, seems perfectly timed.
Described by the museum as the largest and most comprehensive exhibition of Nubian art organized west of Khartoum, the show coincides with today's heightened interest in African art.
First proposed in 1935 but delayed many times since by problems of financing and space, this survey of Nubian art is presented, more or less as it was originally envisioned, in a permanent Nubian art gallery on the main floor of the museum.
The exhibition remains on view indefinitely; the show and its catalogue ($12.95) have been financed by the Nynex Foundation and the National Endowment for the Arts.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE ART OF THE OBVIOUS  By Bruno Bettelheim  and Alvin A. Rosenfeld. Knopf, $23.


ENDPAPER: Public Stages; Clintonian Cinema
You don't have to be a politician, a pollster or a foreign-policy wonk to figure out that Americans don't want to send even a few good men to Bosnia or any war front where they might get bloodied in the crossfire.
You need only see the movies that will be fighting it out for Oscars next week.
While the Academy Award nominations may be a joke as a measure of art, good taste or even common sense, they are an index of commerce, and what is commercial in Hollywood entertainment reflects the country's mood, from the World War II-eve nationalism of "Gone With the Wind" to the James Bond adventurism of the Kennedy era.
No matter how many talking heads debate the merits of American military intervention on Sunday morning television, the voters who go to the multiplex on Saturday night have already made up their minds.
And they are not pining for "The Green Berets." Best Picture contenders like "A Few Good Men," "The Crying Game" and the presumptive winner, "Unforgiven," are antiwar and anti-machismo.
When even Clint Eastwood, who inspired Ronald Reagan to make a national cause out of the taunt "Make my day!," won't pack a gun anymore, who outside of the National Rifle Association will?


Opening a Window at a Theater Gone Stale
When a dying Joseph Papp turned over the artistic directorship of the New York Shakespeare Festival to JoAnne Akalaitis in the summer of 1991, he kept a title for himself: producer.
A little more than two months later, Papp was dead, and the role of producer at the festival, like the title, was buried with him.
Ms.
Akalaitis, it soon became clear, simply did not know enough about what it means to be a producer, and the consequences of that ignorance were severe.
In the mere 20 months she presided as artistic director, the company that Papp built over three decades became an empty shell, a ragtag fairway for theatrical sideshows rather than main events.
The institution that had once been a role model for nonprofit theaters nationwide and a leader in New York City arts advocacy found its own long-term survival thrown into jeopardy.
Last week the festival's board stepped in and dismissed Ms.
Akalaitis, replacing her with George C. Wolfe.
In a typically theatrical gesture, the 38-year-old Mr.
Wolfe made it known that he would not be the festival's artistic director.
He took instead the title of producer.


China Releasing Catholic Priests From Prison
China has released a large number of Catholic priests from prison in recent months and is signaling that it may free other political prisoners before completion of their sentences.
John T. Kamm, an American businessman with experience in pressing Beijing for human rights concessions, said last week that the Chinese had told him of the release of 18 of the 20 Catholics whom the Vatican knew to be imprisoned.
The Catholic Church unofficially confirmed 17 of the 18 releases, he said.


His Critics Don't Get It. But Kenny G.'s Fans Do.
The music of the saxophonist Kenny G. is so sentimental, so slick and so popular that he turns the most avid populists into raving elitists.
After listening to his music, populists throw up their hands and dismiss him as a product of the brain-washing machinations of the entertainment industry.
They curse his name, then forget all about him.
Rarely has anybody sold so many records and been so firmly ignored by critics.
But Kenny G. (actually, Gorelick) can't be ignored.
The weasel-toned soprano saxophonist has sold more than 3 million copies of his new record, "Breathless" (Arista).
The single, "Forever in Love," propelled the album to No. 2 on Billboard's pop chart for six weeks; it has hovered in the Top Five for the last two weeks.
President Clinton has called him one of his favorite jazz saxophonists (he performed at the Inauguration), and he has become, with his post-hippie looks and aura of guy-next-doorness, an identifiable media figure.


The Devils Quickly Revert To Losing
After taking a step forward two days ago -- following four losses on the road -- the Devils took a step back this afternoon in a 5-1 loss to the Quebec Nordiques, the team with the National Hockey League's best record on the road.
The Devils did have some success against the Nordiques with regard to one of Quebec's major strengths: efficiency with the man advantage.
But they played poorly in a lot of other areas, starting with the goaltending.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MAFIA DYNASTY The Rise and Fall  of the Gambino Crime Family.
By John H. Davis.
HarperCollins, $23.


In Wake of Crises, Cuomo Makes Lemonade
After watching his poll ratings slide while struggling with the state's budget crisis, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo seems to have discovered that a different kind of crisis can sometimes work to his advantage.
In the past three weeks, the bombing of the World Trade Center, the crippling weekend blizzard and the struggle to save The New York Post have provided Mr.
Cuomo with opportunities to cast himself in every politician's favorite roles -- general, dealmaker and hometown booster -- all of which play better on television than sparring with the Legislature.


One More Kudo for Bell Atlantic
To the Editor:
Adding something to "A Baby Bell Primed for the Big Fight" (Feb. 21), Bell Atlantic is to be complimented in that it is the only Baby Bell that still supplies out-of-town (non-Bell Atlantic) telephone directories to public libraries in its service area without charge.
This makes these unique sources available to the public free of charge.
MARVIN H. SCILKEN Orange, N.J., Feb. 21  The author is director of the Orange Public Library.


New View Calls Environmental Policy Misguided
A generation after the United States responded to poisoned streams and filthy air with the world's first comprehensive strategy to protect the environment, many scientists, economists and Government officials have reached the dismaying conclusion that much of America's environmental program has gone seriously awry.
These experts say that in the last 15 years environmental policy has too often evolved largely in reaction to popular panics, not in response to sound scientific analyses of which environmental hazards present the greatest risks.


New Catalyst at County Association
IN the first nine days after he became president of the Westchester County Association on March 2, Lawrence E. Dwyer Jr. has visited 15 corporations and a college.
"I'm new, and I'm learning," Mr.
Dwyer said.
"What has impressed me is the range of the resources corporations and colleges are willing to put at the disposal of the Westchester County Association. All the people I've spoken with so far have been extremely supportive."


Looking Back, and Up
"A diva is someone who pretends to know who they are and looks fabulous doing it," Jenifer Lewis says in her wildly funny solo show, "The Diva Is Dismissed." "They are usually rich, famous and disgusting."
For 90 minutes every Sunday night at the Hudson Theater in Los Angeles, Ms.
Lewis (with her director, Charles Randolph-Wright, above) looks back at her life with a mix of dead-on characterizations and superb singing.
"I was a poor diva," she explains as she tells the tale of a young girl growing up in the Midwest who moves to New York, where she receives a modicum of attention as a cabaret singer, then heads for Hollywood, to find she must start all over again.


Talking: Recruiting; Keeping The Board Vitalized
WANTED: energetic person willing to spend untold hours helping to administer and operate organization filled with demanding people.
Satisfaction uncertain.
Position unpaid.


Cutting Back Now to Behold Future Profits
PRUNING continued.
Those who have cabin fever should be glad that they have one important task to complete now before the spring rush.
One category of plants that deserves proper attention are the bramble fruits, especially the red raspberries.
Unless the plantings are managed properly these thorny, vigorous-growing plants can get out of control in a single season.


Sports of The Times; A Total Basketball Homecoming at the Garden
WE cannot say that things always get worse in the city.
We really cannot say we are lucky to break even.
Sometimes things get better.
High school basketball is back in the Garden, and that is good, but back in the old days there was never a thrilling girls championship game like the 62-54 victory by August Martin over Martin Luther King in a championship tripleheader yesterday in the Garden.
There was never a girls championship at all.


Chinese Language and Culture
Buddhist sites in northern China are the focus of a tour to be led by the China Institute in America from May 25 to June 14.
Buddhism took root in China in the first century, when Chinese merchants traveling the Silk Road, an ancient trading route, brought back two Buddhist monks from India.
Led by Dr.
Laura Kaufman, a professor of Asian art history at Cooper Union and at Manhattanville College, the tour will focus on Buddhist art that flourished from the fourth to the ninth centuries.
Among the sites on the itinerary are the ornamented caves of Mount Maiji, the 400-room Xiangtongsi Temple at Mount Wutai and the Yonghegong, a Tibetan Buddhist temple still functioning in Beijing.
The cost for the tour is $5,865 a person, which includes round-trip air fare from New York, accommodations, three meals a day in China, and a $500 tax-deductible contribution to the China Institute.
Information: (800) 225-4262


MARCH 14-20: Tighten Your Seat Belts; G.M. Cost-Cutter Is Leaving And This Time He Means It
For a few days last week, Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua starred as Hamlet on the international business stage.
Ferdinand Piech, chairman of Volkswagen A.G., had convinced Mr.
Lopez to leave his job as purchasing czar for the General Motors Corporation.
But John F. (Jack) Smith, G.M.'s boss, countered with a promise to promote him to the second-ranking job at G.M., with authority over all North American operations.
Mr.
Lopez said yes to Mr.
Smith, angering Mr.
Piech.


Conflicting Charges Are Filed After Police Officers Fight
A New York City police officer has been arrested while off duty and charged with attacking officers who came to his Staten Island apartment to investigate an anonymous call about a loud domestic dispute, the police said yesterday.
The officer, John Martinez, has also filed a criminal complaint of assault and brutality, saying he was beaten by one of the four officers as he tried to explain that he, too, was a police officer and that the argument with his girlfriend had been resolved at least an hour before they arrived, according to his lawyer, Bonita Zelman.


HOW JACK KEMP LOST THE WAR ON POVERTY
Jason DeParle's article on Jack Kemp's tenure at H.U.D. reveals an administration more intent on shooting the messenger than on accepting the message ("How Jack Kemp Lost the War on Poverty," Feb. 28).
Kemp advocates an inclusive brand of conservatism that threatens the status quo moderates and social-engineering bureaucrats alike.
It is no wonder that he failed to institute a far-reaching anti-poverty policy.
Nevertheless, Kemp has set a new direction for modern conservatism by moving it into the realm of state-fostered privatization.
He proposes to do nothing less than to use the Federal Government as an instrument of its own diminution.
This greatly explains his widening appeal.
So long as he draws standing ovations in the ghettos, he should continue to "yell from the rooftops." VINCENT V. DESOMMA
Washington


Andrea Vladimir, Peter Romanoff
Sally Jessy Raphael of Montrose, N.Y., the syndicated talk-show host, and Andrew Vladimir of Miami, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Andrea Vladimir, to Peter Romanoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin Romanoff of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Vladimir, 31, is a physiotherapist in New York.
She graduated from the University of Washington.
Her father is a professor of hospitality at Florida International University in Miami.
The prospective bride is also a stepdaughter of Karl Soderlund of Montrose and Ute Vladimir of Miami.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Forked River  $124,000
2061 Brookdale Park Drive
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old ranch; cathedral ceilings, skylights, two-story entrance foyer; taxes $1,966.
Edison  $107,500
150 Temple Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial, formal dining room, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $1,990.
Metuchen  $158,000
20 McCoy Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; fenced yard, large lot; taxes $3,379.
Ramsey  $218,000
57 Tulip Street  3-bedrom, 1-bath, over-50-year-old ranch; oak kitchen, h/w floors, full basement; taxes $4,292.
Ridgewood  $215,000
331 Walthery Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 34-year-old colonial; full basement, move-in condition, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,932.
Wyckoff  $160,000
425 Goffle Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, over-50-year-old colonial; h/w floors, formal dining room, full basement; taxes $2,529.
OTHER AREAS Albertson, L.I.  $223,500
140 Albertson Parkway  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, gas heat; taxes $3,400.
Mount Kisco, N.Y.  $150,000
73 Park Drive  2-bedrooms, 1 1/2-bath condominium; eat-in kitchen, dining room, deck, full basement; common charges $130.96, taxes $2,135.
Bethany, Conn.  $160,000
249 Bear Hill Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 17-year-old ranch; large family room, deck off kitchen, family room with fireplace, 1.5 acres; taxes $2,614.


Cutting Back Now to Behold Future Profits
PRUNING continued.
Those who have cabin fever should be glad that they have one important task to complete now before the spring rush.
One category of plants that deserves proper attention are the bramble fruits, especially the red raspberries.
Unless the plantings are managed properly these thorny, vigorous-growing plants can get out of control in a single season.


Nathaniel Dunford and Nancy Levine
Bernice Levine of the Bronx and Sidney Levine of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nancy Beth Levine, to Nathaniel Andrew Dunford, a son of Judith Dunford and Nelson Dunford, both of New York.
A spring 1994 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Levine, 25, is a psychologist at Public School 49 in the Bronx.
She graduated from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., and received a master's degree in school psychology from the City College of New York.
Her father is a senior customer service engineer in New York for Xerox.
Her mother is an administrative assistant at the School for Cooperative Technical Education in New York.
Ms.
Levine is the stepdaughter of Dotty Levine.


Data Bank/March 21, 1993


Ellen Washburn, Terence Martin Jr.
Diana J. Washburn of Cumberland Foreside, Me., and Kenneth W. Washburn of Providence, R.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Ellen Virginia Washburn to Terence Damien Martin Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin of New York.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Washburn, 27, graduated from Kenyon College, as did her fiance.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in historic preservation at Columbia University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the Union Wadding Company, which makes filtration products and Christmas decorations in Pawtucket, R.I.
The prospective bride is a stepdaughter of Paula M. Washburn of Providence.


To Keep Water Away From the Basement
BASEMENT leaks occur most often in the spring, when melting snow, thawing ground and frequent rains saturate the soil and raise water tables.
Taking precautions can prevent leaks and sometimes even stop those in progress.
The most important steps are making sure that gutters and downspouts work without leaking or overflowing and that splash blocks or drain hoses direct water from the gutters at least six feet away from the foundation.


Kathleen Capano, Peter N. Farley
Kathleen Mary Capano, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward A. Capano of Westfield, N.J., was married there yesterday to Peter Norbert Farley, a son of Joan Farley of Richmond and the late E. Milton Farley 3d.
The Rev.
Michael Desmond performed the ceremony at the Holy Trinity Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Farley, 26, is an associate at Hunton &amp; Williams, a law firm in Richmond.
She graduated from the University of Florida.
She and her husband both received law degrees from the University of Notre Dame.
Her father is the publisher of the National Review magazine in New York.


Blizzard? So What? A Flea Market's Open
THE blizzard of '93 would have to happen on a weekend, depriving New Yorkers of their outdoor flea markets.
Last Sunday, the three parking lots on Avenue of the Americas near 26th Street that are normally a frenzy of buying and selling looked more like the polar ice cap.
But around the corner, at the New 26th Street Indoor Antiques Fair, 58 dealers, most of whom had set up before the storm, were comfortably settled in.
Still, said Roslyn Raphan, who sells vintage costume jewelry, "I would have liked to stay under the covers."


THE ART WORLD BUST
Lest one think the myth of the starving artist has left us, consider the following: How often does one hear that artists need to be destitute to produce anything of value?
And how infrequently does one hear that our celebrity thespians would be better actors and actresses if reduced to poverty?
CHRISTOPHER WILLARD
New York, N.Y.


At Tilles, It's Come to the Cabaret
HOW to describe the experience of cabaret performing?
To Craig Carnelia it is an innermost thing, "a journey through a life."


'The Soundtrack Of Our Puberty'
To the Editor:
I want to thank Ann Powers for reclaiming new wave from the mists of history  [ "Here Come the Nerds, Again," March 7 ] .
For those of us in the much-maligned 20-something generation, this music was the soundtrack of our puberty.
Its icons are imprinted on our memory, and they're hard to shake.
If asked to name a singer-songwriter known for wry lyrics that illuminate the torture of personal relationships and the madness of the outside world, Elvis Costello comes to mind before Bob Dylan (although the more broad-minded among us can appreciate both).


Cancer Risk Lingers After Smokers Quit
Although giving up cigarettes at any age is beneficial, researchers at the University of Michigan say the risk of dying of lung cancer for former smokers remains consistently greater than that of people who have never smoked.
The researchers also found that the risk of dying from lung cancer was directly related to the age at which a person quits smoking.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Wednesday
Feb. durable goods, percent change
-2.2
0.9
Mid-March auto sales, millions, annual rate
6.5
6.5
Thurs.
Feb. existing-home sales, millions
3.78
3.80
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
351
325
Friday
4th-quarter G.D.P., pct. change, annual rate
4.8
4.8
Tuesday: Federal Reserve Open Market Committee meeting
Wednesday: Two-year Treasury note auction
Thursday: Five-year Treasury note auction
Friday: Minutes of the February F.O.M.C. meeting released


For Peter Mayle, It's a 'Year' That Never Ends
Even on a damp, gray day, with almond blossoms thrown to the ground by the dreaded mistral and the author himself wrapped in wool to fight off a cold, Peter Mayle's honey-colored stone house seemed familiar.
There were the vineyards lovingly cared for by Faustin, the swimming pool that Bernard would soon come to clean, the radiators installed amid much dust and debate by Monsieur Menicucci.
All just as promised in Mr.
Mayle's best-selling book, "A Year in Provence."
Now it is about to become even more familiar.
The first of four two-hour episodes serializing the book will be broadcast tonight at 8 and midnight on the Arts and Entertainment cable network; it will retell the folksy story of the Provencal characters met, the sumptuous meals consumed and the myriad discomforts suffered during the year that Peter and Jenny Mayle spent fixing up their 200-year-old farm outside Menerbes, in the shadow of the Luberon mountains.
Tonight's episode covers the months of January, February and March; subsequent installments will cover three months each and be seen in May, August and October.


Celebrating the Underrated Annual
AS I wrote this column last weekend, four inches of snow had fallen on my city fire escape, hurricane-force winds had knocked over my potted Alberta spruce, and thunder had rumbled over the Hudson River.
Yesterday was the official first day of spring.
Are these extremes the greenhouse effect or just the age-old vagaries of weather?
I don't know, but I've started to note them in my garden journal (March 13: thunder in the blizzard), and I figure that if the incongruities keep piling up, I can sell it as an absurdist play.


Foreign Affairs; The Next Crisis
North Korea's decision to withdraw from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and bar international inspectors from its soil is revealing a historic shift in attitudes here.
For 40 years South Koreans worried about whether the U.S. would be tough enough in combating threats from the North.
Now they're worried that Washington will be too tough.
The truth is that South Koreans were wrong to doubt American resolve in the past, and are right in sensing that the U.S. is likely to be tougher than they in the present crisis.


HOW JACK KEMP LOST THE WAR ON POVERTY
After digesting DeParle's unsettling article, the circumstances leading to policy paralysis in the White House and the ultimate political demise of George Bush have become clearer still.
Gridlock in Washington evidently had its genesis at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue before spreading tumorously toward Capitol Hill and was the result of largely of weak leadership and sandbox standoffs at Cabinet meetings.
Indeed, G.O.P. bickering and infighting has continued long after Election Day, even as President Clinton cleans the cobwebs in the Oval Office.
A.
J.
BENSON JR.
Guilford, Conn.


MARCH 14-20: The Supreme Court; White's Retirement Gives Clinton an Early Chance To Reshape the Judiciary
It was certainly predictable that a Supreme Court vacancy would occur on President Clinton's watch.
The only surprise was that it happened so soon, with Justice Byron R. White's announcement last week that he would retire when the Court's term ends this summer.
The vacancy gives the new President an early opportunity to try to reshape the Court, a chance no Democratic President since Lyndon B. Johnson has had.
The only word from the White House was that the quest for diversity would play a part.


Clinton Gives Yeltsin Support, Saying Summit Is On
President Clinton gave strong support to President Boris N. Yeltsin today after the Russian leader's declaration of special rule and said he would meet Mr.
Yeltsin as scheduled in Vancouver, British Columbia, on April 3 and 4.
But Mr.
Clinton stopped short of backing any further actions Mr.
Yeltsin might take to cling to power.
The President spoke approvingly of the democratic process in Russia and Mr.
Yeltsin's role in it, rather than of Mr.
Yeltsin as an individual.


How Do You Know You're Happy?
RAMEAU'S NIECE
By Cathleen Schine. 280 pp. New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $19.95.


Anne W. Palmer, S. M. Laney Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
F.
Morgan Palmer Jr. of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Winslow Palmer to Stephen Michael Laney Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Laney of Marietta, Ga.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Palmer is an assistant teacher at the Variety House, a boarding home for handicapped children in New York.
She and her fiance both graduated from Elon College.
Her father is a senior account representative at Dun &amp; Bradstreet, the financial information services company in New York.


An Empty Feeling Is Infecting Eastern Europe
In Germany, it is known as the "Wende," or the change.
In the Czech Republic it is the "velvet revolution." But by whatever name, the upheavals that swept away Communism in Eastern Europe share a trait surprising in such a radical transition: the conspicuous absence of any new galvanizing ideas.
This void has brought an uneasy sense that despite all that has changed, something of profound value is somehow still missing.
Beyond the initial economic hardship caused by the switch from a centrally planned to a market economy, there persists a gloomy sense, among many people, that some "third way" might have been found, rather than the wholesale implantation of Western capitalism and equally complete eradication of the past.


The Grahams and The Post
To the Editor:
Not only do I know Kay Graham, but I knew her husband, Phil, and I know her daughter, Lally Weymouth.
When my husband, Vincent Astor, died, I sold Newsweek to Phil Graham because his vision for the magazine was so much like what Vincent's future plans had been.
I got to know Phil after the sale of Newsweek and saw him quite a few times.
He spoke so often of Kay with admiration and affection that to my mind they seemed a very happy couple.
I have seen Kay change, through the years, from a shy person into a very strong, fair-minded and intelligent woman.
Her daughter, Lally, also a friend of mine, was very proud of and devoted to her father and is also very devoted to her mother.
As a friend, I wanted to put on record what I thought and still think of these three remarkable people.
BROOKE ASTOR New York


Profile/John F. H. Purcell; Salomon's Guru On the Third World
THE tone is professorial, and the message, at least at first, is somewhat startling: John F. H. Purcell is explaining why potential investors in Thailand should have been encouraged, not discouraged, by the bloody coup that left scores dead and hundreds missing last May.
"We could honestly say that we thought that was not a serious problem in terms of Thailand's ability to repay," said Mr.
Purcell, a former political science professor who is head of Salomon Brothers' global emerging markets research group.


Game Players


The Violence Director
FIRST you wince.
A director of violence?
As if there isn't enough of that in the streets, on television, in the movies.
And you object.
Why should anyone have to be subjected to people-bashing in the theater?
That's where only words harm.
Then you meet David Leong and you get over it.
He is mellow.
He is polite.
He is analytical.
At 5 feet 6 inches and weighing in at 145, Mr.
Leong looks gentle, positively cherubic when he smiles.
And he explains the place of violence in theater.
Calmly.


One Screenwriter Who Has the Last Word
Richard Price is a novelist whose work was cinematic long before it ever reached the screen.
Beginning with "The Wanderers" in 1979, and most recently with last year's "Clockers," he has written about tough urban situations in vibrant, colorful language the reader can truly hear and see.
Like a lot of other contemporary novelists, he has tried his hand at screenwriting.
But movies, being collaborative efforts, rarely reflect a writer's voice clearly, which is why the close link between "Mad Dog and Glory" and Mr.
Price's fiction is such a welcome surprise.
It is also a paradox.
"Mad Dog and Glory," about a most unusual romantic triangle, has been tinkered with extensively even by the standards of Hollywood, where tinkering is a secondary art form.
This film sat around for months before its release, was substantially re-edited, had its heroine's role significantly altered, and had its downbeat ending re-shot so the story could be resolved happily. (Big surprise.)


The Gospel of the Marketplace . . .
THE CATHOLIC ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM
By Michael Novak. 334 pp. New York: The Free Press. $24.95.


Carolee Gabel, Steven Inskeep
June wedding plans have been announced by Rebecca A. Dann of Wallkill, N.Y., for her daughter, Carolee Roberts Gabel, and Steven Alan Inskeep, a son of Roland and Judith Inskeep of Carmel, Ind.


THE CHELSEA SHOW
Only a mean-spirited individual would pick on a 13-year-old, describe her "gawkiness, frizzy hair and orthodontically transitional smile" and then contrast her to "the Aryan perfection of Sarah and Kristen Gore" (Endpaper/Public Stages: "The Chelsea Show," by Frank Rich, Feb. 28).
I thought the word "Aryan" went out with Joseph Goebbels.


Hats Suitable For a Trip Through The Galaxy
Friends of the New York Public Library went creative with headdress, March 11.


Health Task Force Moving in Right Direction
To the Editor:
"Opening Up on Health Care" (editorial, March 7) states, "The White House's effort to keep secret" the deliberations of the President's Task Force on National Health Care Reform is "unseemly, possibly illegal and wrong." The editorial and earlier articles suggest a kind of subtle task force conspiracy to cloud the minds of the American people on health care issues, such as choice of physician and financing health reform.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
MOE THE DOG IN TROPICAL PARADISE.
By Diane Stanley.
Illustrated by Elise Primavera.
Putnam. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) Not everyone gets to go south in late winter to escape from snow, slush and mud.
Moe the dog and his friend Arlene have a week of vacation and, tired of the weather, build a nifty tropical paradise at home.


Dangers of Predicting Children's Destinies
To the Editor:
The article, "State's Case Links Poverty to Students' Performance" (New York Times, Feb. 28), reveals a severe prejudice which has prevailed in Connecticut, despite the popularity of politically correct attitudes.
Instead of attributing deficiencies in students' academic performances to racial or ethnic inequalities, witnesses in the desegregation trial in West Hartford have reported that children's potential in school can be determined by their family's social and economic status.
One expert witness, Prof.
David Armor of George Mason University, was paraphrased in The Times as testifying that mastery test scores in Hartford and its suburbs can be predicted almost entirely by looking at the income, college education and number of single parents in each community.
He is wrong.


THE CHELSEA SHOW
If Frank Rich has a quarrel with the Clintons' rearing of their daughter, he might have made his point without using the child herself as a club to beat them with.
In describing the ways in which her parents exposed Chelsea to public scrutiny, he has missed no opportunity to make her appear ridiculous, all the while purporting to bewail her fate.
If Rich truly felt compassion for Chelsea, he would have written his piece differently, without what appears to be "the itch to defile," to quote John Updike.
FRANK VICK
Atglen, Pa.


It's All A Game
THE Transformation Game is more than just a game.
It can change your life.
It says so on the box.
Open the lid and behold the astral-blue board, the set of Universal Feedback cards, the Awareness Tokens.
Initiates are invited to begin by choosing "a particular personal issue that you are currently dealing with in your life, one that you would like to resolve by playing the Transformation Game." Players progress through four levels -- physical, emotional, mental and spiritual -- and may agree to stop the proceedings as soon as any player has finished his own "personal game."


Hearing the 'Sound of Subramaniam'
GIVEN several distinguished visitors, and local ensembles with far-flung musical ideas, it's turning into quite an international week in Connecticut.
Leading the way is the International Performing Arts Festival of Hartford, which in addition to its annual free-admission summer concerts, produces occasional events within its sacred traditions series.
One of them is a 7:30 performance tonight in Wilde Auditorium at the University of Hartford by L. Subramaniam, the violinist who will play composed pieces and improvisations on South Indian devotional songs.


THE CHELSEA SHOW
Chelsea is, after all, old enough to read a newspaper, and it must surely have been disheartening to find herself unfavorably compared with the Gore children.
It must have been even worse to learn that her parents are willing to "sacrifice their daughter on the altar of political ambition." CAROLYN LANE
Groton, Conn.


Corrections
The "What's Doing" column on March 7, about Baltimore, misstated the telephone number for the Shirley Madison Inn.
It is (410) 728-6550.
The number given, (410) 728-5829, is the inn's fax number.


Sound Bytes; Pushing the Frontiers of the Electronic Age
MITCHELL D. KAPOR is best known as the founder of the Lotus Development Corporation, maker of the Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet, perhaps the single most widely used personal computer application of all time.
He is less well known as a former disk jockey in Connecticut, a stand-up comic and an instructor in transcendental meditation, a trade he plied in Cambridge, Mass., and Fairfield, Iowa. ("I quit because I knew people couldn't fly," he said.) His wardrobe favors Hawaiian shirts.


If Apollo Had Played the Piano Instead of a Lyre . . .
Apollo had it easy.
He never had to contend with music critics.
If he had, some would undoubtedly have found his lyre playing cool, unemotional, uninvolved.
In fact, the criticism might well have resembled that accorded the great Italian pianist Maurizio Pollini over the years.
Mr.
Pollini, who will give his final New York recital of the season on Saturday evening at Carnegie Hall, seems to have cornered the market in qualified adulation.
"Technically, he already plays better than any of us on the jury," said Arthur Rubinstein, setting the tone for later commentary in 1960, when the 18-year-old Mr.
Pollini won the Chopin Competition in Warsaw.
Praise for Mr.
Pollini's godlike technique in the decades since has been virtually unanimous, but at least in the United States, many have found the pianist wanting in the temperament, flair and sensibility of the great virtuosos of the first half of the century, exemplified most recently by Vladimir Horowitz.
Even critics not wedded to fast-vanishing Romantic styles have carped at the modesty and reserve of Mr.
Pollini's playing, qualities that might in a kindlier light be called Apollonian.


New Venture Delivers Success (and Dinner)
RAIN, snow and gloom of night are the elements most prized by the owners of Cuisine on Call here, a company that has built a business by delivering restaurant meals to homes and offices.
"The worse the weather, the better for our business," said Sheryl B. Lutsky, who started the business in October with her partner, Deena S. Grotto.
"But what's most important is the repeat business we're getting that has nothing to do with weather, so we feel we've found a niche for ourselves."


In the Region: Westchester; 3 Megastores Proposed by Home Depot
A PROPOSAL by Home Depot, the home-improvement discount giant, to build three megastores in southern Westchester County has encountered some opposition, particularly in Yonkers, where an organization was formed just last month to block its plans.
But Robert Morris, chief executive officer of the Morris Companies, of Secaucus, N.J., which would develop a 100-acre complex anchored by Home Depot in Yonkers, called Westchester "the perfect site" for such projects.


Ah, Spring! and Time to Change Menus
THE minute the mind knows it is spring, the appetite changes.
And it has nothing to do with the weather.
Instead of featuring clunky root vegetables and hearty stews, the menu lightens.
In the market the search is on for tender young asparagus and artichokes to cook lightly and pair with chicken, seafood, delicate cuts of fresh pork and baby lamb.
Feathery herbs replace sturdy spices.
Strawberries begin to color desserts.


Out as Coach, Ditka Wants to Be an Owner
If one football team doesn't want you any more, what do you do?
Why buy your own team, of course.
That, at least, seems to be what MIKE DITKA, the former coach of the Chicago Bears, is trying to do.
According to The Miami Herald, Ditka and two Chicago investors have offered to buy a controlling interest in the Miami Dolphins from the children of Joe Robbie, who owned the team until he died in January 1990.
The children have reportedly been contemplating a sale because of the heavy estate-tax burden they face.
Ditka and his partners, BRUCE FREY, a real estate developer, and BURT KANTER, a lawyer, haven't disclosed the terms of their offer.
The team's president, TIM ROBBIE, reportedly hasn't decided whether to accept it. (AP)


Betty Y. Tannin, Paul M. Dicker
Betty Y. Tannin, a daughter of Phyllis Tannin of Chappaqua, N.Y., and the late Harold Tannin, was married last evening to Dr.
Paul M. Dicker, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Dicker of Roseland, N.J.
Rabbi Robert Fine performed the ceremony at Temple Bet Torah in Mount Kisco, N.Y.


Weather Demands a Proper Caution
As weather permits, remove winter protection from shrubs and perennials, but don't be too hasty.
Temperatures could still drop below freezing, as they did last week.
Remove protective mulch like salt hay and evergreen branches in stages, and the same goes for the soil you hilled up around the roses.
This is a tricky time of year, so play it by ear.
Continue pruning deciduous shrubs and trees, except those that bloom in the spring.
Finish pruning apple and other fruit trees.
Grapevines should be pruned by now.


Ms. Moo-Young, Eric Schreiber
Dr. and Mrs.
Alfred J. Moo-Young of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Andrea Moo-Young to Eric Schreiber, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Schreiber of Brooklyn.
No wedding date has been set.
Ms.
Moo-Young, 27, is an asset manager in Dallas at the Travelers Realty Investment Company, the real-estate subsidiary of the Travelers Corporation.
She and her fiance graduated from Emory University and received M.B.A. degrees from the University of Chicago.
Her father is a senior scientist at the Population Council, a nonprofit research organization in New York.


Ah, Spring! and Time to Change Menus
THE minute the mind knows it is spring, the appetite changes.
And it has nothing to do with the weather.
Instead of featuring clunky root vegetables and hearty stews, the menu lightens.
In the market the search is on for tender young asparagus and artichokes to cook lightly and pair with chicken, seafood, delicate cuts of fresh pork and baby lamb.
Feathery herbs replace sturdy spices.
Strawberries begin to color desserts.


Mutual Funds; The Power of A.M.T. Paper
TO lift yields as interest rates fell over the past few years, tax-free money fund managers increasingly invested in alternative minimum tax paper, which is issued by municipalities to finance student loans and other public projects considered nonessential.
Interest is free from regular income taxes but subject to the alternative minimum tax, a flat tax owed by people with large deductions or tax-favored income.
To compensate for the potential tax liability, A.M.T. issues pay slightly more than regular muni issues, which means higher yields for tax-free money funds owning big chunks of A.M.T. paper -- and higher yields for investors who do not expect to owe the A.M.T., said Ralph G. Norton, who edits the Money Fund Report in Ashland, Mass.


The Dangers of Declaring War on Doctors
WILL Washington soon be in the business of telling doctors and hospitals how much they can charge?
Hillary Rodham Clinton &amp; Company aren't saying, but you don't need trifocals to read the handwriting on this wall: The only way to expand access to health care without tapping new sources of revenue is to regulate prices.
While what Administration insiders term "interim cost containment measures" can be accomplished in other ways, the President will most likely extend the elaborate system used by the Government to limit reimbursement of doctors and hospitals for care of the elderly and disabled.


Figuring What It Would Take to Take Down a Tower
A homemade 1,000-pound bomb, delivered in a van that the police said had been rented by a suspect in his own name, killed six people and disrupted the lives of thousands.
Could a smarter attacker, with a bigger bomb and a better idea of where to place it, have knocked over one of the World Trade Center's 110-story towers?
If the bomb is huge enough, anything is possible, engineers say, and some warn that one day an attacker might have a small nuclear weapon.
But assuming that conventional means were used, knocking a building down would take far more explosives than the Feb. 26 blast.
And the larger the bomb or bombs, the harder it would be to position them without attracting attention.


Casino Issue Divides Mohawk Reservation in New York
There is a postcard quality to the winter scene outside Dave George's door, where birch forests and snow-swept wheat fields meet the St.
Lawrence River.
But to many Mohawk Indians, it is a landscape of bad memories, the scene of a divisive, unsolved crime.
In May 1990, two Indians died near here in a gun battle between rival Mohawk groups.
The shooting, for which no one has been arrested, was ostensibly over casino gambling on the reservation, but Mohawk leaders say it was rooted in more elemental conflicts over moral values, tribal traditions, money and power.


Called to Disturbance, Officers Slay Man
Police officers shot an unemployed doorman to death early yesterday morning after he pulled a gun on two uniformed officers as they investigated a disturbance at a 24-hour diner in Manhattan, the authorities said.
The man, Bekim Ahmeti, 20, of 83 Continental Place in the Mariners Harbor section of Staten Island, died at 8:15 A.M at St.
Vincent's Hospital with four gunshot wounds to the chest and abdomen, said Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a spokesman for the New York City Police Department.


Cal Repels Comeback and Dethrones Duke
Many teams during Duke's remarkable run as the staple of excellence in college basketball have tossed the book at the Blue Devils.
Every Duke opponent saves its best shot for Duke, and, most often, in the end, Duke simply delivers.
Not this time.


Like U.S., State Governments Look to Affluent to Pay More Tax
In the 1980's, one state after another followed the Federal Government's lead in cutting top income tax rates and eliminating loopholes.
Lately, however, states have made a U-turn.
More and more of them are raising taxes on their more affluent citizens -- or thinking about it.
Since 1990, when Congress raised the top Federal income tax rate to about 33 percent from 28 percent, a dozen states have increased their taxes on the more affluent.
Promises by conservatives like Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts to cut taxes have been shelved.


Can the Truth Help Salvador Outlive Hate?
In Argentina, Chile and Uruguay, where civility is a source of pride, those who threatened the political order in the 1970's were "disappeared." Men came in plainclothes and unmarked cars and seized their victims with dispatch; the bodies were rarely found.
During the most violent spasms of the 12-year civil war in El Salvador, a cashiered National Guard officer named Roberto D'Aubuisson preferred to go on television to denounce people he considered subversive.
Then they would be killed.
So when an investigatory panel sponsored by the United Nations reported last week on the Salvadoran war's worst violence, most of its findings rang familiar.
This Commission on the Truth was in some ways the culmination of the settlement that formally ended the conflict last December.
For a country that grew so polarized while at center stage in the cold war that priests became military targets and Mr.
D'Aubuisson nearly became president, the panel was meant in part to lay a basis for reconciliation.
And in a land where power stemmed from both terror and deniability, it was also meant to provide a clearer sense of reality.
But no sooner did the commission offer its conclusions than events in El Salvador began calling into question what effect even an impartial, internationally sanctioned view of the past can have on hatreds so impacted.


Beside a River's Troubled Waters, These Harbingers of Spring Dance On
It's spring. The sun crossed the Equator yesterday.
So what if New York still sits under ice, and snow falls on the prairie, and the robins have to puff themselves up on barbed wire fences to keep warm?


MARCH 14-20: Meat Inspection; Federal Hamburger Helper, For Safety's Sake
There is hardly anything the Government does in 1993 the way it was done in 1906 -- except inspect meat and poultry.
Last week, prompted by the deaths of three children in the Northwest, the Clinton Administration proposed revamping the methods for safeguarding America's hamburgers and chicken nuggets.
No longer would Agriculture Department inspectors rely solely on their eyes, noses, and fingers to spot diseased meat.
The proposal would deploy the most advanced techniques of microbiology and nuclear science in the slaughterhouse to eliminate the threat from invisible, virulent bacteria.
Scientists and inspectors would also be stationed on farms and feedlots for the first time to determine whether modern production practices are somehow contributing to contamination.


Aleck Leitman, Manufacturer, 105
Aleck Leitman, a manufacturer who supported Jewish causes and Israel, died on Thursday at the Hallandale medical center in Hollywood, Fla.
A resident of New York City and Hollywood, he was 105.
His death came after a two-month illness, said Norbert Efros, his nephew.


SPORTS PEOPLE: FOOTBALLFalcons Sign Geathers
Defensive tackle JUMPY GEATHERS, a 6-foot-7-inch, 290-pounder who played with Washington the last three seasons, signed a three-year contract with Atlanta Friday.
The eight-year pro has 38 1/2 sacks, has forced 15 fumbles and recovered 9.
Geathers played in every game for the Redskins last year.
The Redskins wanted to keep him, but were unwilling to match the Falcons' $2.9 million contract which reportedly includes a $500,000 signing bonus. (AP)


The Freest Generation
To The Editor:
My generation ("Lost in the Name Game," Feb. 14), much maligned, overly name-called, yet happily nameless, is probably the most exciting one since the turn of the century.


A Bitter Storm Leaves Winners and Losers
Last Friday, before the weekend blizzard blew in, Frank Santangelo Jr. had 46 tons of ice-melting rock salt piled in the lumber yard of his store, Franks Hardware, here.
On Monday night, it was all sold, along with most of his snow shovels.
Count him as one of the winners in the storm.
Also on Friday, Charles Peterson of Peterson's Nursery in Princeton had row upon row of daffodils, crocuses and mums carefully timed to bloom for what was supposed to be the first big weekend of the spring gardening season.
As the snow fell and shoppers stayed home, the flowers bloomed and drooped.
Count him as one who lost.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Extra Pediatric Service
WHEN Bonita Hope takes her children to the doctor, she always leaves a tip.
"I usually give $1," she said.
Not to the doctor, but to the doctor's parker.
A pediatric group in Great Neck is supplying valet parking along with its diagnoses.
"It's an added expense for us," said a pediatrician in the group, Dr.
Susan Swezey.
"But our patients are important, and we don't want them inconvenienced."


A Little Panache in Bosnia
For months, Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon had been the loyal soldier, insisting there was nothing wrong with the United Nations mandate in Bosnia entrusted to him as U.N. military commander -- a mandate that often has kept the U.N. force standing by virtually helpless as Serb nationalists practice "ethnic cleansing," emptying Muslim towns with tanks and butcher knives.
And then there was Srebrenica.
Without consulting his U.N. superiors, General Morillon decided this month to make a stand in the besieged Muslim town near the Serbian border.
The 57-year-old French officer tossed aside rationalizations and told the Serbian forces, in effect, that if they wanted to kill the 60,000 Muslims in Srebrenica, they would have to kill him first.
With a 20-man military escort, he encamped in the town's post office as Serbian forces advanced within 2,000 yards, and vowed not to leave until the Serbs offered guarantees for the town's survival.


Corrections
A map on page 15 of the Travel section today with two articles about Hungary misidentifies the country to the north of Hungary.
It is now known as Slovakia.
The map also misidentifies the country between Croatia and Romania.
It is Serbia.


The Ethics Window
The Democratic leaders of the House have put their heads together and decided that in the absence of a strong push from the White House they don't have to act on campaign finance reform this spring.
Trust us, they say.
We'll do it later in the session.
The timing doesn't matter.
But of course it matters.
There is time to avoid another Congressional election, in 1994, financed by special interests.
More important, history teaches that reform legislation withers on the vine during the heat of a Washington summer.


Banker's Balancing Act Cuts Yugoslav Safety Net
Wars always have their profiteers, their smugglers and their fixers, but seldom does a single wheeler-dealer stir the national enmity directed at Jezdimir Vasiljevic, a Serbian banker whose abrupt departure this month has accentuated the economic chaos here and thrown some light on the shady deals keeping Serbia afloat despite United Nations sanctions.
With prices quadrupling from month to month and one-third of the work force idled, Mr.
Vasiljevic, a self-styled "mystery man," made it his business to provide an unusual banking service to the people of Serbia as well as sanction-breaking diversions like the chess match he organized between Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky last year.


Lauren Judge and Brian Bartkus
June wedding plans have been announced for Lauren Elise Judge, the director of human resources for the Princeton (N.J.) Marriott, and Brian Edward Bartkus, the director of services for the Westchester Marriott in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Ms.
Judge, 35, graduated from Elmira College.
She is a daughter of Thomas and Barbara Judge of Little Silver, N.J.
Her father is the vice president and director of alternative investments at the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in Berkeley Heights, N.J.


The Global Village In the Classroom
MARSHALL McLUHAN'S vision of the world as a global village is becoming a reality in New Jersey high schools.
All across the state, more and more students are taking courses like Russian, advanced-placement economics and world geography from teachers who are hundreds or thousands of miles away, through a satellite hookup.
So far, 45 schools have signed on, and 32 more are expected to join in next year.
The system also provides training for the schools' teachers.


China Is Making Asia's Goods, and the U.S. Is Buying
For 150 years Westerners have dreamed of cracking the Chinese consumer market, ever since the British calculated that if each Chinese added just one inch to his shirttail, the mills of Lancashire could be kept busy for a generation.
Nobody bothered to look at it the other way around: If each American and European began buying Chinese-made shirts, the mills of Lancashire might be idled for a generation.
Yet these days, trade statistics suggest that may be a more likely prospect.


Tens of Thousands Flee Ethnic Violence in Zaire
Nearly 30,000 people are gathered in a small railroad station in this town at the core of Zaire's mineral riches, many of them living under cardboard and burlap huts without water, electricity and, more often than not, without food.
They came mostly from nearby Lubumbashi, the capital of Shaba Province, where they were driven from their homes last summer by mobs of Katangans, the region's main ethnic group, in one of the worst outbreaks of tribal violence in recent memory.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
116.00
118.07
133.85
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6365
1.6652
1.6714
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2471
1.2445
1.1985
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4890
1.4324
1.7130
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Wouldn't You Know It? Schottzie 02 Is in Doghouse
As one who has had a personal, although brief, acquaintance with Schottzie 02, I was more or less taken aback when I learned early last week that the young St.
Bernard, the mascot of the Cincinnati Reds, had been banned from the field by major league baseball owners.
I met Schottzie once, in the house of her owner, Marge Schott, before Schott herself was suspended from the game for a year by that same courageous group of owners.


Courting the Range Rover Crowd
Since 1853, the U. S. Trust Company has been money manager to the rich.
The nation's oldest trust company, its fabled client list includes Astors and Phelpses, Rockefellers and Whitneys.
It has seen the rise and fall of great fortunes and, all the while, provided investment counseling with the utmost discretion.
The rich, however, have traded their carriages for Range Rovers, and U. S. Trust, facing new competition from mutual funds, banks and investment boutiques, is entering a new battle for the new rich -- those with enormous wealth created in the 1980's.
But, unlike other old-line trust companies, which sniff at accounts under $5 million, U. S. Trust is targeting a younger and, well, less affluent crowd, while still trying to keep its traditional clients and cachet.


Corrections
The Art column on March 7, about a Black History Month exhibition at the Reader's Digest in Chappaqua, misidentified the creator of a work of tea bags on tea-stained canvas.
It is by Delphine Mann, not Bogdan Wisniewski.


To Keep Water Away From the Basement
BASEMENT leaks occur most often in the spring, when melting snow, thawing ground and frequent rains saturate the soil and raise water tables.
Taking precautions can prevent leaks and sometimes even stop those in progress.
The most important steps are making sure that gutters and downspouts work without leaking or overflowing and that splash blocks or drain hoses direct water from the gutters at least six feet away from the foundation.


Cynthia H. Post, Joshua D. Hyatt
Cynthia Helen Post, an associate at the Boston law firm of Roche, Carens &amp; DeGiacomo, was married yesterday evening to Joshua David Hyatt, a business reporter for The Boston Globe.
Rabbi Raphael Kanter performed the ceremony at the Mark Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Post, who is 33, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Oberlin College, as did her husband.
She received a law degree from Northeastern University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Isaac J. Post of Short Hills, N.J.
Her father is an orthodontist in Millburn, N.J.
Her mother, Alice Post, is a freelance writer.


Alison Wilbur, Mark Thompson
Alison Mary Wilbur, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elisha P. Wilbur 4th of Southport, Conn., was married there yesterday to Mark Jeremy Thompson, a son of Jeremy W. Thompson of Burnham Market, Norfolk, England, and Mrs.
Arthur P. Preece of Fakenham, Norfolk.
The Rev.
Loring S. Ensign performed the ceremony at the Southport Congregational Church.
Ms.
Wilbur, who is 25, is keeping her name.
She is a retail property consultant with Debenham, Tewson &amp; Chinnocks International Property Advisors in London.
She graduated with honors from Richmond College in London.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Southport Financial Corporation, a real-estate investment company in Southport.


Fire Safety Laws Need Strengthening
I read with interest your article "After a Fireman Dies, Questions About Staffing and Equipment"  [ March 7 ] , about the tragic death of the White Plains firefighter Warren Ogburn, who died during a blaze at Grant Manor, the high-rise apartment at South Lexington and Maple Avenues in White Plains.
I also read the comments of various fire officials indicating what can be done to reduce the chances of similar tragedies.
One of the actions that should be taken is for the New York State Legislature to authorize municipalities to have stronger fire laws than the state fire code.
In 1986, the State Legislature passed Executive Law S-379, which exempts factory-manufactured homes from local codes, which are more stringent than any other state building and fire-prevention code.
The Town of Greenburgh would like to mandate sprinklers in factory- manufactured homes.
The state is prohibiting us from adopting such legislation.


MARCH 14-20: The Glen Ridge Trial; A Verdict on Sexual Assault, And on the Retarded
Prosecutors argued that the ridicule of peers made the mildly retarded young woman so vulnerable that she viewed sexual attention, no matter how perverse, as a gesture of friendship.
Defense lawyers called her an oversexed aggressor.
Last week, after 23 weeks of testimony and argument, jurors gave their verdict in the Glen Ridge, N.J., sex assault trial, a case that galvanized advocates for women and retarded people.
Three former high school athletes were convicted of sexually assaulting the girl by thrusting a bat and broom handle into her four years ago.
A fourth was convicted only of conspiracy.


Rebuffing the U.N., El Salvador Grants Amnesty
Five days after the release of a United Nations report detailing official complicity in some of the worst human rights abuses of El Salvador's 12-year civil war, the National Assembly today approved a general amnesty for those accused of such abuses.
After two days of failed attempts to reach a consensus on the amnesty issue, deputies of the governing Arena party, who enjoy a large majority, passed the measure over the strenuous objections of politicians from parties of the center and the left.
The amnesty would apply to former guerrillas as well as to current and former military officials and other supporters of the Government, although the Government was accused of the worst abuses.


HOW JACK KEMP LOST THE WAR ON POVERTY
A major criticism leveled against the Bush Administration was that its members were apathetic and out of touch with the day-to-day problems faced by average Americans.
In light of that, DeParle's article was particularly ironic.
Jack Kemp defied traditional Republican conservative ideology by fiercely advocating the cause of America's poor and downtrodden.
It's a tribute to Kemp that his ideals have been embraced by members of all political persuasions and that he continues to be a favorite among conservatives.
To portray Kemp's efforts in any other way is patently unfair.
Even staunch supporters of the Bush Administration recognize that housing issues were low on the budgetary priority list.
It is a credit to Kemp that he continued to battle for what he believed was right despite constant opposition.
Perhaps the new administration will be more responsive to the nation's housing crisis.
If not, in four more years Jack Kemp may be given a real opportunity to empower America.
SHARON WEINGARTEN
Middle Island, N.Y.


Wall Street; Albertson's Shareholders Feast; Food Lion's Fast
WHEN it comes to buying groceries, most stores are pretty much the same.
But when it comes to buying grocery-store stocks, recent price movements show, the choices can be as different as caviar and coffee.
Take two popular grocery-store stocks, Albertson's and Food Lion.
Both companies operate in similar areas.
Both have many stores: Albertson's has 640, Food Lion about 1,000.
And for years, their stocks tracked.


Wendy Reeder, James Enelow
Mr. and Mrs.
Henry S. Reeder Jr. of Weston, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Wendy Baldwin Reeder to James Morton Enelow, a son of Sylvia and Dr.
Morton Enelow of New Orleans.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Reeder, 28, graduated from Kenyon College.
She is a legal assistant coordinator at the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.


Bring Back Old Amherst
To the Sports Editor:
"Amherst Re-evaluates Traditional Priorities" (The Times, Feb. 21) quotes college president Peter Pouncey as saying of football, "It can strip away our sense of proportion." It has done just that at Amherst.


Ward, Top Rookie of 1991, Gets First Tournament Title
Ricky Ward, the 1991 Professional Bowlers Association rookie of the year, won his first tournament title here today, capturing the Johnny Petraglia Open at Carolier Lanes.
Ward, a 24-year old from North Fort Myers, Fla., defeated Kelly Coffman of Topeka, Kan., 239-213, earning $34,000.
Coffman picked up $18,000.


THE CHELSEA SHOW
While he pretends to be neutral, perhaps even sympathetic, Rich goes at Chelsea with a verbal chain saw, suggesting her parents trot her out only to convey a "new, domesticated image" and that she got to play goalie in soccer practice on her first day only because her new school, Sidwell Friends, is "cunning about power." Score one for terminal meanness for Rich and The Times.
LORRAINE DUSKY
Sag Harbor, L.I.


Women, Beware the 'Scientific' Tides
To the Editor:
A word to women on any "scientific" studies on their relationship with their infants: Take them all, including the one in "Infant Bonding and Guilty Mothers" (At Work, Feb. 21) with many grains of salt.
Of course there is mother-infant bonding, but, like many other "scientific" theories, it can be used to help or hinder mothers' lives and child care.


Growing Up in the Shadow of the AIDS Virus
In a medical building in the Bronx, two girls and a boy sit around a table drawing with crayons, snacking on potato chips and chattering -- about summer camp, Michael Jackson and, in between, the virus that has haunted each of them since birth.
Once, when they were younger and unable to understand what afflicts them, growing up with H.I.V. meant mostly repeated trips to doctors and hospitals, medicine that tasted "nasty," and getting sick over and over.
But the boy, Johnny M., is now 13, and the girls, Marie D. and Donna W., are 11 -- old enough that the virus has now become a cause for fears about infecting others, about having a future, about premature death.


Depeche Mode Escapes the Cathedral
Some pleasures demand a sense of sin.
Just having fun isn't enough; there has to be a fillip of transgression, too, a feeling of deliberately and deliciously breaking some rule.
Those who worry that therapeutic ideas and other secular-humanist notions have dispelled old feelings of sinfulness can take some comfort in the continuing popularity of Depeche Mode, a band that finds fear in every desire and temptation in every fear.
"I give in to sin," the song "Strangelove" proclaimed in 1987, "because you have to make this life livable." But that doesn't prevent the band from agonizing over every passion on its new album, "Songs of Faith and Devotion" (Mute/Sire 4-45243; CD and cassette).
Depeche Mode, an English band whose name is French for "fast fashion," has become hugely popular, filling concert halls with screaming black-clad teen-age girls while going nearly unnoticed among people over 25.
At times, the group is just an inflection away from parody.
David Gahan, the singer, is a baritone crooner dispensing the emotional signals -- the breathy importunings, the broad vibrato -- of a particularly self-important lounge act; the music has an echoing grandiosity that verges on melodrama.
Yet that very solemnity assures adolescent listeners that others understand their private and encompassing dilemmas, providing a kind of consolation.
In "Personal Jesus," the singer offers to be "Someone to hear your prayers/ Someone who cares." A lot of fans want just that.


Young Mets Are the Stuff of Dreams
The flashes of the future have come one after the other, creating a sort of wild strobe effect of spring success.
The 21-year-old Butch Huskey mauls a ninth-inning home run against the Braves, his shot burning its way through the night sky and into the memory of anyone who at least tried to track its flight.


Loft to Luxury
To the Editor:
An article last Nov. 22 reported that MKF Realty and its architects, Platt + White of Manhattan, had great plans for 35 West 19th Street.
What the article did not report was the long struggle of the residential tenants -- artists and professionals and their families -- with their landlord.


Classic War Films, Contemporary Echoes
Many gay activists say they were stunned by the vitriolic reaction to President Clinton's promise to open the military to admitted homosexuals.
Veterans' groups protested, retired admirals said bigoted things, Congress was deluged with calls and letters leading up to last week's hearings.
All I could think was, what did gay activists expect?
Haven't they seen "From Here to Eternity?"
Movies are the closest most of us get to the military.
And while they may be dreams and fantasies, it is precisely this quality that gives them emotional truth.
Over the years, films have provided answers to questions about the armed forces that have suddenly become crucial.
What kind of people join up?
How are relationships formed in a narrow, unnatural world?
Most of all, how does the military solve its moral dilemmas?
The answers supplied by Hollywood are not exactly what gay activists want to hear.


A Period of Grace, Baseball Style
Spring training.
It is a time of rejuvenated hope, a time of restlessness, a time for stretching beyond the reality of muscles tightened by winter and the defeats of a season long past.
It is a time for winning: winning playful replies from your teammates; winning the enchanted gazes of children who are waiting for
your
autograph; winning praise from a coach, at last.
It is a time for the occasional prank; March baseball can be taken only so seriously.
Photographer Barton Silverman visited the Florida camps of the Yankees in Fort Lauderdale and the Mets in Port St.
Lucie and captured these days of spring 1993, tranquil days before the losses count.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Dr. Don C. Skemer; Pursuing the Stuff Dreams Are Made Of
IN keeping with the donors' wishes, the letters had sat for decades in a vault at the Princeton University Library -- 400 letters to and from Ernest Hemingway; 550 documents related to F. Scott Fitzgerald, including correspondence between Scott and his wife, Zelda, between 1919 and 1940.
The announcement that the letters were going to be made available to scholars set the literary world buzzing.
But the man in whose possession they rested took the whole affair with customary aplomb.
The work of a librarian or archivist, says Dr.
Don C. Skemer, curator of manuscripts at the library, is not so unexciting as some might suppose.


Leader of Cult Talks of Details of a Surrender
A senior official of the Federal Bureau of Investigation said today that negotiators had a four-hour telephone discussion with David Koresh on Friday night that was largely devoted to details of a possible surrender of the 103 members of Mr.
Koresh's religious sect who are holed up in their compound near here.
But the official noted that only two people had actually been allowed to leave in the past week.
If that rate of progress continued, he told reporters, it would take more than a year for everyone to leave.


Neither Malthus Nor a Luddite Be
To the Editor:
George Sai-Halasz's commentary on "Stanching the Loss of Good Jobs" ("Count In the Computer Effect," Letters, Feb. 28) puts the blame for rising unemployment on computers.
He asserts that as the cost of computers decreases and the tasks that they can do multiply, "the vast majority of the population, through no fault of its own, has no economic justification for drawing a sustenance."


How U.S. Actions Helped Hide Salvador Human Rights Abuses
The Reagan Administration knew more than it publicly disclosed about some of the worst human rights abuses in El Salvador's civil war and withheld the information from Congress, declassified cables and interviews with former Government officials indicate.
Charges that Reagan officials, and to a lesser extent the Carter and Bush Administrations, may have covered up evidence of abuses to win Congressional approval of aid to El Salvador were revived with the release this week of a United Nations-sponsored report documenting widespread human rights violations by the Salvadoran military.


How Does Your Garden Grow?; Stand Up For Hybrids
The controversy over hybrid versus nonhybrid vegetables and flowers for the home gardener has grown vigorously, a result of heavy fertilization by politically correct but scientifically uninformed garden pundits.
At stake is not only the success and satisfaction of millions of home gardeners across the country but also the value that society has placed on scientific truth.
Many gardening and environmental writers and editors tell fashion-conscious gardeners to grow nonhybrid plants and to avoid contemporary hybrids.
They argue that hybrids threaten the planet's biodiversity by shrinking the gene pool of vegetables and flowers -- an argument that attempts to play as heavily on our emotions as the threat of global warming.


Helping the Mentally Ill Return to the World
Reba Cherry used to lash out at people on the streets when she felt cornered.
In a psychotic daze, she was assaulted by her own hallucinations.
But the 36-year-old mentally ill and homeless woman was calm, cheerful and medicated enough on a recent Monday to be discharged from Bellevue Hospital.
Armed with a one-week supply of an anti-psychotic drug, three sets of clothing and discharge papers that spelled out after-care treatment, Ms.
Cherry was escorted from the hospital's 18 West unit to a supervised single-room occupancy hotel in Chelsea where medical attention and counseling were waiting.


Vegetarians Unite
To the Editor: At first I thought the title of Suzanne Berne's article, "How Do You Say, 'Vegetable'?" referred to an appeal for the enunciation of each of the word's four syllables, or to at least let go of its annoying baby talk version, "veggie."
Instead, the description of tactics devised and sacrifices made to avoid meat in faraway places was quite funny, but one obvious solution to the foreign menu problem was overlooked.
Why not just bring along a small homemade pictograph with a few hairy beasts inside the slashed circle "no" symbol and something like a happy face or "O.K." next to an illustration of fruits and vegetables?


Is Hostetler About to Become a Raider?
A person close to Jeff Hostetler says the free-agent quarterback spent all day Friday with Al Davis, owner of the Los Angeles Raiders, then dined with Davis in the evening, along with the player's agent, Marv Demoff.
"It's a pretty positive thing going on," said the person, who asked not to be named.


To Order, You Need A Credit Card, and Patience
Is Carolyne Roehm less adept with stock than her husband, the financier Henry Kravis?
Customers calling to order from her new clothing catalogue last week found that many items were unavailable.


Owners Have an Agenda: It's an Improved League
With labor peace achieved and a new free-agency plan intact, National Football League owners will seek other ways to improve their product when they convene today in their annual meeting, which will run through Thursday in Palm Desert, Calif.
It is unclear how much wheeling and dealing in free agency could occur during the meetings, which will have representatives from all 28 teams and a number of player agents in attendance.
Action on that front is expected, and the owners' agenda will also include the following:


What's a Little Snow?
Even with a blizzard, the benefit
must
go on.
Last Sunday, the Mayor's office made sure that the airplane carrying Kurt Masur, the music director of the New York Philharmonic, received a high-priority clearance to land at Kennedy International Airport, which had been closed for 28 hours.
Mr.
Masur, who was returning from Germany via Montreal, was expected that evening at "Music for Life," a concert at Carnegie Hall benefiting the Gay Men's Health Crisis.
"The flight was the second flight into Kennedy after it reopened," said Deborah Borda, the managing director of the Philharmonic.
"He had a police escort and arrived just 15 minutes before the rehearsal."


Marilyn Webb, John Sheedy Jr.
Marilyn Webb, a writer, was married yesterday to John Sheedy Jr., a marketing consultant, both in New York.
The Rev.
Eric Spiegel, a Buddhist minister of the New York Dharmadhatu, a Buddhist meditation center, performed the ceremony at the couple's residence in New York.
Ms.
Webb, who is keeping her name, is also an associate professor of journalism at Columbia University in New York.
She graduated from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia and a master's degree in psychology from the University of Chicago.
She is a daughter of Esther Halpert of Lake Success, N.Y., and the late William Salzman.


Search Is Pressed For Blast Suspect
Investigators continued searching for clues yesterday to the whereabouts and activities of Mahmud Abouhalima, whose apartment in Woodbridge, N.J., was searched on Friday, and who the authorities say has been emerging as a suspect in the bombing of the World Trade Center.


CALLS APRIL 25 REFERENDUM; Last Weapon: Plea to Public
Fighting back against an opposition that showed him little mercy last week, President Boris N. Yeltsin reached tonight for his last, and perhaps only, weapon: a direct appeal to an exhausted people to place their trust in him once again.
In effect, Russia's President is seeking to overturn the country's feeble and flawed constitutional system by popular mandate, rather than with tanks.
But for all its boldness, the President's gamble only revealed the weakness of his position, setting the stage for a conflict that promises to extend far beyond the walls of the Kremlin.


Stacey Daniels and Cas Trap
AT about 4 A.M. each weekday, Cas Trap bicycles from his Greenwich Village apartment to the flower district, where he works at the Dutch Flower Line shop on West 28th Street.
For years, he has sold flowers to Stacey Daniels, a freelance floral designer with a gravelly voice and the looks of Snow White.
When they started dating, about a year ago, he often arrived at her apartment by bicycle, with a bouquet of tulips zipped inside his jacket.
Mr.
Trap, who was born in Holland, and Ms.
Daniels were married at 7 P.M. on March 13, the day of blizzard '93, when television newscasters were calling Manhattan "a winter dangerland." About 65 intrepid guests (80 were expected) made it to Masterview Studios, a loft on West 31st Street, in a combination of foul-weather gear and formal attire, all with harrowing tales of how they got there.


Hope E. Zatz and Adam L. Suttin
Louis and Felicia Zatz of East Windsor, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Hope Ellen Zatz to Adam Lewis Suttin, the son of Gene Suttin of Boca Raton, Fla., and Doris Suttin of North Miami Beach, Fla.
A June wedding is planned.


Kathryn Breslin, Mason B. Wells 2d
Yvonne J. Breslin of Princeton, N.J., and Hugh F. Breslin of Brussels have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathryn Breslin to Mason Bacheller Wells 2d, a son of Peyton C. Horne of Chicago and David H. Wells of Duxbury, Mass.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Breslin graduated from Hamilton College.
She is a candidate for an M.B.A. degree at Columbia University.
Her father is the executive vice president and general manager of Snyder General International Inc., a manufacturer of air-conditioning and air-pollution control systems, in Brussels.


Many See Another Gaffe in NBC Dismissals
The investigation into a "Dateline NBC" report that used deceptive scenes of a truck crash appeared to be coming to a close this weekend much as it began: with a public relations gaffe.
On Friday afternoon, even before many NBC News executives had learned the results of the internal investigation, lawyers for the network contacted three producers from the news program and told them that their contracts would be terminated.
The lawyers asked the producers, including the show's executive producer, Jeff Diamond, to meet with them to discuss the terms of their departures.


America's Newest Industrial Belt
WALK down the long rows of huge machines, newly installed in the freshly painted Ford Motor Company factory.
Stop to examine the futuristic control panels that will run this automated factory.
Watch Mexican engineers fine-tuning the new machines.
And it becomes easy to imagine -- except for the Spanish and the low salaries -- that this most modern of engine plants is really in Dearborn, Mich., and not here on an arid plateau in northern Mexico.
Staffing the plant are people like Eleazor Faudoa, a 32-year-old technician equal in skill and motivation to the best in Dearborn, but earning only $1,000 a month, one-fourth the wage of an American counterpart.
Currently, Mr.
Faudoa heads a team completing the installation of machines that will grind the connecting rods for a new four-cylinder, multi-valve engine.
Illustrating the sort of initiative often sought from American workers, Mr.
Faudoa had a say in the machinery's design.
"The manufacturers agreed to incorporate some of our suggestions," he said, "like those for a simpler electrical system and for easier access for maintenance."


Money Doesn't Buy Misery for Indians' Lofton
As reporters approached, the young player rested his arms on his knees and hung his head, the body language screaming "go away."
Looks were exchanged and thoughts telegraphed instantly: another pro athlete has a major A, as in attitude, part of the sometimes seething class warfare that is waged more and more between the young and the richest and those charged with chronicling their every move.
"Ken," one reporter said, surrender in the air.
"Can we talk to you?"


For Defense of Los Angeles Officers, 4 Lawyers Come Together (Usually)
With cameras and microphones banned from the courtroom, the most exciting public event of the day in the trial of four police officers accused in the beating of Rodney G. King has been the often acerbic sound-bite analyses offered by the four defense lawyers.
As citizens of this anxious city strain for insights into the Federal civil rights trial, fearing a repetition of the rioting that resulted after acquittals in the state criminal trial, the defense lawyers have stirred their own controversy with highly charged comments from the courthouse steps.


Beefcake By the Ton
There's a new wave of interest, both scholarly and commercial, in homoerotic photography from the 1940's through the 1960's.
Bruce Weber collects it; even Sotheby's has included it in recent auctions.


Cleaning Out New York's 'Attic'
If the Smithsonian Institution is the nation's attic, then the 189-year-old New-York Historical Society is New York's.
Its treasures -- which embrace everything from Audubon's extraordinary watercolors for "The Birds of America" to an edition of the first translation of the Bible into an Indian dialect -- are manifold.
But so are its troubles, and they have recently made the society's bankruptcy and dissolution seem inevitable.
So sad an end to so great a collection, however, is no longer a certainty.
The proposals of an independent advisory committee could give the society a new lease on what has already been a long life.


Who Needs Yet One More 'Romeo and Juliet'?
Because ballet is an art of action, it is no wonder choreographers love to tell stories that keep moving by means of tragic blunders or comic misadventures.
And by creating full-evening ballets, choreographers can spin rousing narratives on the grandest of scales.
The trouble is, they keep telling the same stories.
They borrow from Shakespeare and other literary classics, or they choose a well-known fairy tale.
The results are often bores -- epic bores.
A dull one-act ballet will come to an end in, say, half an hour.
But a lackluster full-evening work natters on for act after act.
Who needs another plodding "Romeo and Juliet," simpering "Midsummer Night's Dream" or saccharine "Cinderella"?
Yet year after year those kinds of ballets clog the repertories of companies around the world.


Cutting Back Now to Behold Future Profits
PRUNING continued.
Those who have cabin fever should be glad that they have one important task to complete now before the spring rush.
One category of plants that deserves proper attention are the bramble fruits, especially the red raspberries.
Unless the plantings are managed properly these thorny, vigorous-growing plants can get out of control in a single season.


One More Page In the Album
To the Editor:
In a lengthy interview  [ "The Name Is Barrymore, but the Style Is All Drew," March 7 ] , Drew Barrymore mentions all her acting relatives but one: her grandmother Dolores Costello (John Barrymore's third wife).
Costello was a fine actress and one of the great beauties of movie history.
Anyone doubting that should catch her last performance in Orson Welles's "Magnificent Ambersons" on late-night television.
Drew should look at it, too.
RICHARD HECHT New York


Florida Seeks Inquiry on Late Storm Warning
Gov.
Lawton Chiles has asked the National Weather Service to investigate why its forecasters failed to warn residents along the Florida coast to seek higher ground before a hurricane-like storm struck last weekend, killing 44 people, including 13 who drowned in 9- to 12-foot tides.
A tape recording of communications between state officials and the Weather Service indicates that forecasters misjudged the storm's ferocity until after the high tides began lashing the coast between Apalachee Bay and St.
Petersburg, Mr.
Chiles said.


On Eve of Spring, The Storm of '93 Blankets the County
FIRST came the predictions, the hourly updates, the program interruptions, the warnings.
Alerted and apprehensive, people jammed supermarkets and scanned the skies for "the storm of the century," perhaps a bit disappointed that the icy snow failed to live up to its billing.
When it was over in Scarsdale, elderly women climbed mountains of snow to put coins in parking meters.
Chic boutique owners used whatever was handy to hack away the ice in front of their stores.
And adventurers climbed 20-foot peaks created by snowplows to have their photographs taken atop temporary Everests.


Who Is Playing Games With Mandate Relief?
Mandate relief is not political "claptrap," as characterized by Supervisor Benjamin L. Zwirn  [ "2 Counties Press Their Cases Against Mandates," Feb. 28 ] .
The goal of mandate relief is to allow local government home rule and self-determination.
County Executive Gulotta's lawsuit should be applauded rather than criticized, because it seeks to free us from costs imposed by the state.
Mandates are tantamount to the state government's telling local government how to spend money.
Mandates have increased the local real property tax we pay to our county, towns, villages and school districts.
To opposed the mandate-relief lawsuit is to be a foe of the effort to lower real property taxes and streamline government.


Sanchez Vicario Runs Off With Title
Part retriever, part spark plug, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario chased every ball that came her way and chugged past top-seeded Steffi Graf, 6-4, 3-6, 6-3, to retain her title in the Lipton Championships.
"Sometimes I don't think they expect the ball to come back, but it comes back," Sanchez Vicario said about her bragging rights to being the most dogged opponent on the Kraft Tour.
"The key thing today was to hang in there and try to put everything back, and I did that."


Judith Dickstein and Jack Remondi
Judith Barbara Dickstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Dickstein of West Nyack, N.Y., was married last evening to Jack Remondi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Remondi of Boston.
Rabbi Benjamin Rudavsky and the Rev.
John Arens, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Astors' Beechwood in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Remondi, 26, graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is an account supervisor at Corporate Communications Marketing Group Inc., a public relations company in New York.
Her mother, Alice Dickstein, is a supervising editor at Scholastic Inc., a publishing company for educational books in New York.


Here's One Vote For New Ticket
To the Sports Editor:
If President Clinton's proposal to deny businesses deductions for executive compensation over $1 million is enacted, wouldn't that sound the death knell for the outrageous salaries paid to professional athletes?


Megan P. Shea, Cyrus Cook
Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Shea of New Milford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Megan Patricia Shea to Gavin Cyrus Cook, a son of Anita T. Cook of West Paris, Me., and the late Roy E. Cook.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Shea, 31, and her fiance, 37, are English teachers at Choate Rosemary Hall, a preparatory school in Wallingford, Conn.
She graduated from Bates College and received a master's degree in English from Middlebury College.
Her father is the chairman of the history department at Canterbury School in New Milford.
Her mother, Patricia T. Shea, is a saleswoman at Devoe Realty, a real- estate brokerage there.


Using Psychology On Canada Geese
The Feb. 28 article "Canada Geese: A Long Search for a Solution" mentions the nuisance the geese create in residential and recreational areas.
It would be interesting to know what farmers think.
In summer it is common to see large flocks feeding unmolested in fields of deep green plants.
Judging from articles about the problem, just about everything has been tried.
But not one mentioned psychology.
It works.


A Change Of Face But Not Name
Mirabella is no longer being run by its namesake.
Though Grace Mirabella is still publication director, she has ceded daily operation of the magazine to its editor in chief, Gay Bryant.
The change comes in the wake of the departure of Amy Gross, the editor, and three other top editors for Elle magazine earlier this month.


Christopher Brawer, Wendy Horng
Dr. and Mrs.
Meng Y. Horng of Bloomington, Ill., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Wendy Shiaw-wen Horng, and Christopher Paul Brawer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Brawer of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Ms.
Horng, 24, graduated from the University of Michigan, as did Mr.
Brawler.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in public administration at Columbia University, from which her fiance received a master's degree in international affairs.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Bloomington.
Her mother, Linda T. Horng, is the office manager for the medical practice.


Crenshaw And Putter Push Ahead
Playing with the rhythm and putting touch that have been vital parts of the most successful weeks in a 21-year career, Ben Crenshaw pushed past Davis Love 3d today to take the third-round lead in the Nestle Invitational.
The 41-year-old Crenshaw rolled in three perfect putts late in the round to shoot a three-under-par 69 over a windswept Bay Hill Club.
It gave him a 54-hole total of six-under-par 210 and a chance at his 17th victory on the PGA Tour.


A Slow, Methodical Calming of the Mind
There is a moment in the 1962 motion picture "The Manchurian Candidate" that never fails to jar the contemporary viewer.
Laurence Harvey, the brainwashed assassin in the film, walks into a Madison Square Garden-like auditorium in which a political convention is being held.
A rifle is in his attache case.
He enters disguised as a cleric, walks through the auditorium and then up a series of stairs to a room in the building where he hides and waits for the candidate he is to kill to come within the sights of his weapon.
The scene remains riveting. What is jarring is that
no one
examines Harvey's bag as he enters or walks about the building; there appears to be no security at all.


No Headline
The Congress declined to heed the voice of the country.
It rejected the opinion of the overwhelming majority of voters.
But the Congress is not yet a state itself.
The Congress does not mean Russia.
Under such conditions, the President is forced to assume responsibility for the country.
PRESIDENT BORIS N. YELTSIN  [ 12:6. ]


Deals and Discounts
CLUB MED WILD CARD Club Med's Wild Card program offers discounts to travelers who let the company choose their destination.
Vacationers must make their reservation at least four weeks in advance, knowing only that their trip will be to a Club Med in Mexico or the Caribbean.
Two weeks before departure, Club Med tells them which resort they are assigned to.
With the discount, vacationers flying from New York, Miami, Chicago and San Francisco pay a flat fee of $999 for a one-week package, including air fare; the price from Los Angeles is $888.
The program is available for three weeks in May, four in June and four in September.
The Family Villages in Ixtapa, Mexico; Sandpiper, Fla.; Eleuthera, the Bahamas; Punta Cana, the Dominican Republic; St.
Lucia, and Copper Mountain, Colo., are not participating.
Club Med is also offering travelers 60 and over a discount of $150 on weeklong vacations at six villages: Caravelle in Guadeloupe; Paradise Island and Eleuthera in the Bahamas; Ixtapa and Cancun in Mexico, and Sandpiper in Florida.
The dates when the discount is in effect vary depending on the village.
In addition, children 5 and under can stay free at Family Villages during certain times of the year.
Call: (800) 258-2633.


Baby Moguls: From Pablum to Porsche
Obituaries for Hollywood luminaries usually limn octogenarian actresses and septuagenarian directors.
But Mark Rosenberg's was different.
A movie producer and Hollywood fixture, Mr.
Rosenberg died of heart failure last November on the set of "Flesh and Blood," which was being shot near Odessa, Tex.
Mr.
Rosenberg led a rich, full life, complete with adventure, action and hit films like "Risky Business," "The World According to Garp," "The Killing Fields" and "Presumed Innocent."


Junior Colleges Supply Crew for Major Match
Cincinnati Coach Bob Huggins has quit defending his use of junior college transfers to bolster his Bearcats squad.
He doesn't even like to talk about the philosophical ramifications anymore.
New Mexico State Coach Neil McCarthy believes there is still a certain stigma attached to recruiting junior college players.
He feels an ugly prejudice at work in college basketball that says it is somehow unsavory to take JUCO's -- as they are euphemistically referred to -- because it sullies the time-honored approach of slowly building a championship team with high school recruits.


A Novel's Worth of Complexities in a Single Frame
His name was Gyula Halasz, but he changed it to Brassai in honor of Brasso, his native city in Transylvania.
He went to Paris in 1924 to paint (as everyone did except the Americans, who went to write) and worked as a journalist for a while.
Eventually he tried just about all the arts: sculpture, drawing, theater decor, cinema and writing.
His first film, made at the zoo, won a prize at Cannes, and by the time he died, in 1984, he had written many books, including a novel and a treatise on Henry Miller.
He is best known today for photography, which he took up in 1929, the year he turned 30, when Andre Kertesz lent him a camera.
He merely wanted to record the Paris that interested him: the city that came alive when night came on, a city where stone gargoyles kept watch above the smoky halos of the street lamps and every man was a lover if he had a little cash.


Susan T. Tsao, John C. Esty 2d
Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas Tsao of Virginia Beach, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Tracy Tsao to John Cushing Esty 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter T. Esty of San Francisco.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Tsao, 27, and her fiance, 28, graduated from Amherst College.
She is an assistant to the executive director of the Presidio Pacific Center, a nonprofit organization that is converting the Presidio, the Army base in San Francisco, into a civilian town.
Her father is the medical director of the Tidewater Psychiatric Institute, a psychiatric hospital in Virginia Beach, and the managing partner in Atlantic Psychiatric Services, a Virginia Beach psychiatric clinic, where her mother, Joyce Haswell Tsao, is a clinical social worker.


Elizabeth Gavin, David A. Scott
Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Gavin of Rumson, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Anne Gavin, to David Andrew Scott, a son of Anne Scott of Point Pleasant, N.J., and the late Jack H. Scott.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Gavin, 25, is a marketing coordinator in the corporate division at Tiffany &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Rosemont College.
Her father is a quality manager at the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in Basking Ridge, N.J.
Her mother, Suzanne E. Gavin, is a kindergarten teacher at the Deane-Porter School in Rumson.


Thousands Delayed After Subway Death
A man was struck and killed last night by an IRT subway train near the station at 66th Street and Broadway, delaying thousands of riders for nearly two hours, a spokesman for the Transit Authority said.
The man, who was not immediately identified, was already on the track when a southbound No. 2 train hit him at around 7:30 P.M., said the spokesman, Robert E. Slovak.
He was killed instantly.


THE JACKPOT IN TELEVISION'S FUTURE
Peter Carlin correctly identifies interactive television to be at the core of future American (if not global) communications, retailing and entertainment industries ("The Jackpot in Television's Future," Feb. 28).
But he fails to report that more than a year ago -- months before Barry Diller's interactive epiphany -- the Federal Communications Commission created the entirely new wireless Interactive Video Data Service (I.V.D.S.).
To date, the F.C.C. has accepted more than 4,000 license applications, to be awarded by lottery, including nearly 800 applications for the market comprising the New York metropolitan area.
Futuristic innovation thus may have sprung first from the unlikeliest parent: a Government agency.
J.
D THOMAS
Washington


Jennifer S. Furet, David Gorsline Jr.
Jennifer Suzanne Furet, a director of training and development at Bergdorf Goodman, was married yesterday to W. David Gorsline Jr., an associate managing director at Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, the investment banking firm, both in New York.
The Rev.
Robert R. Sala, an Epiphany Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at the University of Virginia Chapel in Charlottesville, Va.
Mrs.
Gorsline, 32, graduated from Wellesley College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Furet of Miami.
Her father is the first vice president and senior advisor in Miami for the American Express Bank International, a division of the American Express Company, based in New York.


State's Disaster Plan Faces 'the Acid Test'
AT 9 o'clock on the morning of March 13, a dozen officials gathered in a bombproof bunker beneath the New Jersey State Police Headquarters in West Trenton.
Their job, for however long it would take, was to coordinate a statewide army of rescue and relief workers in a battle against what was billed as one of the fiercest storms of the century.
Three minutes after 9, the first call for help arrived as high winds and heavy snow battered the state.
The caller, a Cape May County official, asked that National Guard trucks and troops be dispatched to nine municipalities in the state's southernmost county.


Venus de Milo Problem: Where Are the Arms?
Before their teams played the other day, Buck Showalter, the Yankees' manager, and Tom Kelly, the Minnesota Twins' manager, were discussing mutual problems.
"Buck said to me, 'Do you have any pitchers available?' " Kelly related.
"I said nope. I have some outfielders to give up but no pitchers. We're all looking for pitchers. I said: 'Buck, you're better off than I am. Don't come to me.' "


Tabitha Soren For President?
To the Editor:
Whether or not Tabitha Soren ever heard of Thelonious Monk does not matter. ("From MTV To NBC," March 14.)
What does matter is that if she or her viewers were to hear the musical offerings of this American genius, they would consider them boring or corny or both.
They would judge the masterpieces of Ellington or Armstrong in the same way.


Bavaro to the Eagles?
Tight end MARK BAVARO, the former Giant star who played 16 games with the Cleveland Browns last year after the Giants decided his knees were no longer up to professional standards, may have hit a free-agent jackpot in Philadelphia.
According to The Record of Hackensack, N.J., and the Daily News, Bavaro will sign a two-year $2.2 million deal with the Eagles.
The team, which said no deal has been struck, has been looking for a tight end since KEITH JACKSON, a pioneer free agent, went to Miami last season. (AP)


Ah, Spring! and Time to Change Menus
THE minute the mind knows it is spring, the appetite changes.
And it has nothing to do with the weather.
Instead of featuring clunky root vegetables and hearty stews, the menu lightens.
In the market the search is on for tender young asparagus and artichokes to cook lightly and pair with chicken, seafood, delicate cuts of fresh pork and baby lamb.
Feathery herbs replace sturdy spices.
Strawberries begin to color desserts.


THE CHELSEA SHOW
Rich presumably intended to be funny.
He was not; he was snide and cruel.
He seemed to have made a list of all the circumstances that would be embarrassing to a shy, 13-year-old girl thrust into the Washington limelight, and used them as his framework.
His article bordered on child abuse.


A Man of the Mountains Loves the Undersea Life
THE first time Armand Zigahn came down from his native Utah mountains and spied the Pacific Ocean, he recalled, "It scared the blazes out of me." These days, Mr.
Zigahn, now a resident of Rye, has gone to the opposite extreme as the founder of Beneath the Sea, a nonprofit organization devoted to increasing awareness of the ocean as an essential resource.
This weekend Mr.
Zigahn will take his annual underwater exposition "Beneath the Sea" to the Westchester County Center in White Plains.
The dive show, one of the largest events of its kind in the country, will offer 60 seminars on topics ranging from exotic travel adventures to marine education along with photography exhibits, workshops and programs for children.


BBC Chief Survives Dispute, but the Static Lingers
The director general of the British Broadcasting Corporation won the support of its board of governors this week, surviving a nasty controversy over an arrangement that allowed him to pay lower taxes by working as a consultant rather than a salaried employee.
The scandal involving the director general, John Birt, may seem mild by American standards but has shaken the morale of the BBC staff and the institution's image of rectitude among much of the British public.


Study Seems to Ease Fear on Low Cholesterol Level
A new study should ease lingering concerns that some people may be harmed by reducing their blood cholesterol levels.
A previous study had shown a link between very low blood cholesterol levels and higher death rates.
But according to the findings described Friday at a scientific conference in Santa Fe, N.M., certain health problems and harmful living habits account for the increased number of deaths -- from disease, accidents and suicide -- among men with low cholesterol levels.


The Happy Hacker
APPROACHING ZERO
The Extraordinary Underworld  of Hackers, Phreakers, Virus Writers,  and Keyboard Criminals.
By Paul Mungo and Bryan Clough. 247 pp.
New York: Random House. $22.


Thunderous Wings Herald a Change of Season


Nuclear Plants Said to Be Vulnerable to Bombings
The bombing of the World Trade Center and the ease with which an intruder invaded the Three Mile Island nuclear plant in February suggest that nuclear power plants may be far more vulnerable to terrorist attacks than previously assumed, experts told a Senate subcommittee today.
The two incidents underscored a suddenly worrisome gap in current regulations, they said: plant owners are prepared for attacks by well-trained commandoes, but they are not required to safeguard against car bombs.


All That Jazz, Blues and Zydeco
TO some of us, the honking and wailing that Hamiet Bluiett can coax from his baritone saxophone is a pleasurable noise.
On this spring day, the surroundings make it even more so.
Mr.
Bluiett and the other members of the World Saxophone Quartet are playing at the Jazz and Heritage Festival in New Orleans, an annual extravaganza that attracts more than 400 jazz, blues, rhythm-and-blues, zydeco, Cajun, gospel, Latin and country-and-western musicians.
It is a warm, sunny afternoon, and though the World Sax Quartet is playing in a tent, there are openings at the back to let in a breeze.
Somewhere nearby, crayfish is cooking.
The quartet plays for about 40 minutes, weaving ribbons of sound around the rhythms of an African drummer.
There is applause and an encore, after which the musicians mingle with some of the crowd.
Reluctantly my companion and I leave.
It would be nice to stick around and chat with these jazz men, but Irma Thomas, the soul queen of New Orleans, will soon be cranking up on another stage.
If we move it, there might be time for crayfish before she starts.


Let Cablevision Enter A Competitive Arena
Once again, as it does regularly, Cablevision, the communicator of our decade, has raised its prices for its services.
At a time when most things connected with electronics have either maintained status quo price wise or have reduced same, Cablevision just goes on its merry way burrowing deeper into the public's purse.
To its credit and justification, Cablevision tells us about the new fiberoptic network it is installing, plus its new programs and other heroic accomplishments that this monopolistic enterprise with no competition has.
It justifies its price increase by saying that it is only raising prices by x amount while other things have gone up higher.
This is comparing apples with oranges, as no details of costs and expenditures are provided.


She Can Act, Too
To the Editor:
Will Crutchfield's appreciative article on Jarmila Novotna was a joy to read  [ "Once, the Voice Was Melody Itself. In Fact, It Still Is," March 7 ] .
It brought back many memories to me, as it must to all who know her recordings and most particularly those who were fortunate enough to have heard her at the Metropolitan.


Leslie Miller, Paul Gulielmetti
Leslie Miller, president of the Grenfell Press Ltd., and Paul M. Gulielmetti, a senior partner in the New York law firm of Gulielmetti &amp; Gesmer, were married yesterday.
Justice Bruce McM.
Wright of New York Supreme Court performed the ceremony at the Knickerbocker Club in New York.
Ms.
Miller, who is 36 and is keeping her name, works in New York for Grenfell, a publisher and printer of limited editions of books and prints.
She graduated from the New School.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul L. Miller of New Vernon, N.J.
Her father, now retired, was the president of the First Boston Corporation in New York.


A St. Patrick's Day Call From the White House
St.
Patrick's Day was a political challenge for Mayor David N. Dinkins, who had sided with homosexuals in their unsuccessful effort to march openly under their own banner in the annual parade.
Mr.
Dinkins's support of an inclusive parade -- and his refusal to march in the traditional affair put on by the Order of Ancient Hibernians -- no doubt will hurt him among some Irish-American voters this fall.
But, because it was also the Mayor's lawyers who obtained a court order last week preventing the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization from staging its own march on Fifth Avenue before the parade, several advocates for gay and lesbian causes said that Mr.
Dinkins might have lost support among some homosexual voters as well.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  YELTSIN TO RULE BY DECREE


THE CHELSEA SHOW
After the interview on "60 Minutes," Chelsea Clinton's father asked her, "What do you think?" She answered, "I think I'm glad you're my parents." Only by taking it out of context, as Rich does, can "I think" be called ambiguity.
ANN KIRSCHNER
Brooklyn


Inside White House: Long Days, Late Nights
It's not as if they've replaced the oil portrait of George Washington in the Cabinet Room with a velvet rendering of Elvis.
And President Clinton was only joking the other night when he said, "We expect our own McDonald's to be completed by fall."
But he did invite an Elvis impersonator into the Oval Office last weekend. (Actually, it was Mark Alan Stamaty, creator of "Washingtoon," who turned up his collar, fluffed out his hair and broke out in an a cappella rendition of "All Shook Up" during a meeting for cartoonists.)


THE ART WORLD BUST
It's hard for me to fathom the fuss about "nouveau poor" artists ("The Art World Bust," by Deborah Solomon, Feb. 28).
Most artists have never been affected by the recession because they were never affected by the boom.
I have never made my living from my art.
Unfortunately, the prevailing opinion is that if an activity doesn't bring in the dough, it's only a hobby, ironically mirroring the money-based merit system of the art world.


Lead Paint Moves Up as Housing Issue
THE first time Marlene Zarfes ever worried seriously about lead-based paint was in February when officials of the New York City Department of Health called.
They told her that her pediatrician had found a dangerously high level of lead in the blood of her 15-month-old son, Adam.
They also told her that they were coming to inspect her co-op apartment in the Cobble Hill section of Brooklyn for the source of her son's lead poisoning, probably chips or dust particles of lead paint.


Hey! Women Dribble Too!
To the Editor:
We were excited to see "Madly Dribbling Away Nights and Weekends" (The Executive Life, Feb. 28).
We were appalled that there was not one word about women who compete!
There are several organized New York City women's basketball leagues where corporate women and women lawyers compete.
ANNE F. KEATING  New York, March 3  The author is a member of the Free Agents, a women's division of the Lawyers Basketball League of New York.


Watson Relinquishes Major Role at Lab
"I WAS 25 and too old to be unusual," Dr.
James D. Watson ended his memoir "The Double Helix: A Personal Account of the Discovery of the Structure of DNA." Despite his resolve in a career spanning 40 years, the Nobel laureate, for a discovery that changed the course of biology, could not help being unusual.
The writer of five books and recipient of 15 honorary degrees and the Presidential Medal of Freedom, Dr.
Watson has directed the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory for 25 years.
Beginning next year, he will take over the new position of president of the laboratory.


Helen Hayes Is Remembered in Church She Loved
It seemed fitting that the last curtain for Helen Hayes was drawn today in the unprepossesing red-brick church where the great actress worshiped for many years, across the street from the close-packed clapboard houses of this village on the Hudson.
John Cardinal O'Connor came to celebrate the funeral Mass in St.
Ann's Roman Catholic Church, at the intersection of Third and Jefferson, far from the towering arches of his cathedral in Manhattan.
And there was a sprinkling of notable guests.


Technology; The Electronic Umpire That'll Call the Shots at the U.S. Open
PROFESSIONAL tennis players might become calmer and throwing a racquet in anger over a linesman's call might become as rare as tossing the caber if a small Australian firm has its way.
TEL Proprietary Ltd. hopes to commercialize a new technology for automatic line calling, the first full-court system to be accepted by the United States Tennis Association for tournament use.
It will be used at the United States Open in New York this summer.
Professional tennis has lagged behind such sports as auto racing, swimming and track in utilizing advanced technnology, although not for want of trying, and one system has won limited use at the service line.


Lifters Are Red, White and Blue
To the Sports Editor:
The United States Weightlifting Federation was disheartened with "U.S.O.C. Debates a Hands-On Policy" (The Times, Feb. 18).
Filip Bondy writes:


Here's to the Winners: Walton, Transit Tech, August Martin
Walton High School of the Bronx, the top-seeded team in the Public Schools Athletic League tournament, put four players in double figures and defeated second-seeded Abraham Lincoln of Brooklyn, 66-60, yesterday in the boys' A championship game at Madison Square Garden.
This was the first trip to the class A final for Walton, and its first P.S.A.L. title.


Health Task Force Moving in Right Direction; Interns Discouraged
To the Editor:
Re "Sensing Loss of Control, More Doctors Call It Quits" (front page, March 9): Demoralization about the future of health care in this country is indeed prevalent among physicians.
Even many a newly minted physician has become old, gray, cynical and despairing.
Just because we have been raised on "managed care" -- as it is euphemistically called -- does not mean we like it.


A Glittering Hungarian Treasury
GOLD, precious stones, enamel and the richest embroidery -- the Hungarian church, from the 15th to the 19th century, apparently could not have enough splendor.
Happily, all those sumptuous materials were shaped by bold and skillful artisans, and today, at the Treasury in Esztergom, they glitter as brightly as ever.
Overlooking a bend of the Danube some 35 miles upstream from Budapest, a huge basilica is the seat of the primate of Hungary.
It also shelters a third-floor museum that offers, in great abundance, the riches of the past.
The basilica itself is not a success.
Built in a bloated and awkward neo-classical style at a time -- the 1840's and 50's -- when neo-classicism no longer came naturally, it manages to look at the same time too big and oddly shrunken, in part because the flattened dome sits so unpleasantly on the rest of the church.
That hardly matters, though: ignore the facade and go right in, averting your eyes from the hugely enlarged and hideous copy of Titian's "Assumption" in colored marble, cross over to the door in the right transept, go up the stairs, and you will find the museum.


Queens Commuters' Gift: Free Transfers on Buses
Hoping to address a longstanding complaint about mass transit in Queens, the Dinkins administration announced on Friday that it would soon allow commuters in the borough to transfer free from city buses to private ones.
The change, which will cost the city about $275,000 a year and take effect on April 1, is intended to reduce commuting expenses for thousands of people who live in the far reaches of Queens and must rely on buses to travel to jobs or subway lines.


Wedlocked


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended March 6  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $318,000
120 West 20th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, dining area, fireplace, exposed brick walls, 3 exposures; maintenance $780, 41% tax-deductible (Brokers: Silverman Group-Ambrose Mar-Elia)  SoHo  $265,000
292 Lafayette Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; raised dining area, 11-ft. ceilings, exposed brick walls; maintenance $595, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: Eychner Associates)  Upper East Side  $1.1 million
641 Fifth Avenue  (Olympic Towers)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned elevator, south exposure; common charge $1,214, taxes $1,362 a month (Brokers: Corcoran Group-Charles H. Greenthal)  Upper West Side  $775,000
50 Riverside Drive (77th St.)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,100-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room, 2 exposures, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,819, 40% tax-deductible (Brokers: Halstead Property Co.-Klara Madlin Real Estate)  West Side  $1.78 million
25 Central Park West (63d St.)  (Century)  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 3,500-sq.-ft. condo in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room, library, terrace; common charge $2,900, taxes $1,677 a month (Exclusive Broker: Donna Ellen Berg)  BRONX  City Island  $195,000
588 Minneford Avenue  2-family detached house; 2 bedrooms, dining area in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath in each; 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  Riverdale  $175,000
402 West 263d Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, semi-attached brick house; dining room, renovated kitchen, finished attic, semifinished basement, 1-car garage, 20- by 75-ft. lot; taxes $1,470 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  BROOKLYN  Brooklyn Heights  $339,000
227 Front Street  2-family detached former firehouse; two 1,600-sq.-ft. lofts, each with 1 bath; 3-car garage, 2,000-sq.-ft. of commercial space on the first floor, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,300 (Broker: Marilyn A. Donahue)  Park Slope  $450,000
417 Fourth Street  2-family, 3-story limestone; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, study in other; parquet floors, 1-car garage, 20- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $1,607 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Real Estate)  Park Slope  $358,000
677 10th Street  3-family brownstone; 2 bedrooms, 2 baths, eat-in kitchen in primary duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, study in other units; 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,050 (Broker: Susan N. Breen Realty)  QUEENS  Astoria  $225,000
31-49 32d Street  2-family attached brick house; 1 bedroom, 1-bath, dining room in each unit; 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,863 (Broker: Century 21/Tri-Boro Terrace Realty)  Forest Hills Gardens  $525,000
65 Continental Avenue  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, one-family detached Tudor; dining room, maid's quarters, solarium, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage, 45- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $3,500 (Broker: Sarah Jones Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Livingston  $160,000
148 Davis Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached frame colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, detached 2-car garage, 37- by 219-ft. lot; taxes $1,317 (Broker: Salmon Realty)  Stapleton Heights  $105,000
155 Wright Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, front porch, new electric service, private driveway, 30- by 60 1/2-ft lot; taxes $699 (Broker: Gateway Arms Realty Corp.)


Roosevelt Unbound
FDR
Into the Storm 1937-1940: A History.
By Kenneth S. Davis. 691 pp.
New York:  Random House. $35.


When the Weather Says No, Florida's Ladyfish Still Say Yes
When the wind is up and the temperature is down, when the water is too high in the Everglades, when heavy rains turn off the snook and redfish in the estuaries, the angler who visits Florida can still have a productive day fishing for ladyfish.
Often passed over by the flats fishermen, out for the more glamorous bonefish and permit, the ladyfish is a satisfying and challenging fighter.
Our guide, Steve Anderson, came highly recommended.
Anderson had spent years on the famous bonefish grounds of the Bahamas.
Now he sticks closer to home and the waters of Hobe Sound, and in particular the grass flats that run along its western shore.
At one time, many of the estuaries from Biscayne Bay to Palm Beach held similar flats that abounded in snook and redfish, but dredging, channelization and the building of sea walls has removed most of this abundant habitat from the coastal waters of southern Florida.


'The Way Things Ought to Be'
To the Editor:
The popularity of Rush Limbaugh reminds me of another phenomenon.
Remember how the Hula-Hoop captured the fancy of millions?
That too was a large round object with nothing in it.
MIKE DENNEHY Washington Township, N.J.


All Aboard; Clinton's Plan Gets Moving
Democrats have been saying for four months that Government gridlock is over, now that they control both the White House and Congress.
Last week they proved it, at least tentatively.
"Lawmaker," a word reporters use casually when seeking a synonym for a member of Congress, may at last be literally applicable at both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue.
Friday morning, after staying in session for nearly 14 hours, the House of Representatives passed President Clinton's deficit-boosting $16.3 billion economic stimulus bill.
A few hours earlier it voted for his $500 billion deficit-cutting budget plan.
In the meantime Democrats in the Senate were successfully defending the plan against Republican attacks there.


As Cliff and Norm Drink Up, In Walks Seinfeld
The night's episode of "Cheers" is winding down, and you sit poised on the edge of the couch, ready to spring for the kitchen and the box of sourdough pretzels.
There'll be plenty of time before the start of "Seinfeld" to grab the pretzels, make a stop in the bathroom, maybe even a quick phone call.
But here comes Jerry Seinfeld's opening monologue, right after the "Cheers" fade-out.


RECORD BRIEF
Michael Feinstein: 'Forever' Elektra 61423; CD and cassette.


Manhattan Quartet in Season Finale
TWO sources of free concerts are ready to call it a season, but not before offering a final dash of chamber music.
The Pleasantville Chamber Music Society has rung up a proud record of presenting top-notch ensembles, but the unquestioned favorite for about a dozen years has been the Manhattan String Quartet.
In what has come to be an annual event, the quartet returns to the Pleasantville Presbyterian Church this afternoon at 3 o'clock.
Eric and Roy Lewis, violinists; John Dexter, violist, and Christopher Finckel, cellist, will play Schubert's A minor Quartet and two Shostakovich quartets, Nos. 11 and 12.
No tickets are needed, but to learn more about the society, the number to call is 769-1827.


The Roaring Anger of Not Being in Charge
VAN GOGH'S ROOM AT ARLES
Three Novellas. By Stanley Elkin. 312 pp. New York: Hyperion. $22.95.


Q and A
Seats at Oktoberfest
Q.
We would like to reserve a table at this year's Oktoberfest in Munich.
How can we do so? -- Dolores T. Rode, New York, N.Y.


To Keep Water Away From the Basement
BASEMENT leaks occur most often in the spring, when melting snow, thawing ground and frequent rains saturate the soil and raise water tables.
Taking precautions can prevent leaks and sometimes even stop those in progress.
The most important steps are making sure that gutters and downspouts work without leaking or overflowing and that splash blocks or drain hoses direct water from the gutters at least six feet away from the foundation.


The Waif Farers
Did someone stick a giant hatpin into the supermodels, or what?
The new beauties edging Linda, Christy and Naomi off the international runways are
half
their size.
They're less daunting, more delicate -- and the designers seem to love layering the sheer spring fashions around their bone-thin bodies.
In fact, there's nothing intimidating about this collective of waifs and neo-hippies.
Some are downright odd-looking, and most aren't even tall -- in a business where 5 feet 9 was once considered short, Kati Tastet is succeeding at 5 feet 6!
Which in the end may be precisely the point.
After a decade of bionic beauty, fashion seems to be moving in the opposite direction, as if pumped-up perfection has gone the way of all excess.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about corporate responses to boycotts rendered the name of a New York public relations executive incorrectly.
He is Howard J. Rubenstein, president of Howard J. Rubenstein Associates.


Minnows Make for Intriguing Matchup
George Washington versus Southern, a basketball game that would normally be more suited for a nondescript holiday tournament, is now an extolled matchup.
George Washington had a 1-27 record in 1989, but went on recruiting trips to Boston and Nigeria in search of legitimacy.
Southern hails from what had been a trivial conference, the Southwestern Athletic, but gains its energy from a preaching head coach.
Examined further, it might not be such a fluke that these two schools upset New Mexico and Georgia Tech, respectively, here on Friday in West Regional games of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.


New Papers For Superior Prints
THE finest color prints available today may be those made from color transparencies -- and not from color negatives.
Richard Mackson, a Sports Illustrated contract photographer and the chief executive of Westside Processing, in Santa Monica, Calif., says the secret of printing from transparencies is the quality that can be attained from newly developed color-reversal printing paper, like Kodak's Radiance Type R, Fuji's Super Glossy and Ilford's Ilfochrome.


No Peace Without the Palestinians
Do President Clinton and Israel's Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, who met recently in Washington, believe Middle East peace talks can move forward without Palestinian participation?
If they don't, Israel needs to honor the spirit of the bargain it made with Secretary of State Warren Christopher two months ago and suspend its deportations of Arabs from occupied territories.
The deportation crisis began with a wave of violence last December, provoked by the Islamic group Hamas in a bid to disrupt the peace talks.
With plenty of inadvertent help from Israel, Hamas achieved its goal.


Cablevision Converts A Cost Into an Asset
Missing from "Cable Rates Rising; Choices to Multiply"  [ Feb. 28 ]  on Cablevision's restructuring, retiering of programs and rate increases is an account of their plan to bill subscribers directly for the franchise fee paid to some communities that they serve.
This billing constitutes a price increase that has been held to be improper by the State Commission on Cable Television.
Moreover, the amount billed to subscribers exceeds the amount paid to the community as a franchise fee.
It is a greedy attempt to institutionalize an unfair practice before the newly passed regulatory legislation becomes effective.


Tiring of Cuts, District Plans to Close Schools
A thick snow fell on the stark jack pine forests of this northern Michigan town as teachers at the local high school raced through quadratic equations or skipped whole tenses in Spanish, the seniors picked up their mortarboards and the junior concert band started rehearsing the first bars of "Pomp and Circumstance."
There will be no midterms or finals.
Spring break is irrelevant.
Unless the state devises some last-ditch rescue plan, school ends on March 24, nearly three months early.


Clinton and Aides Plan Strategy for High Court Nomination
President Clinton met with top advisers today to plot a strategy for choosing a new Supreme Court Justice, a process that aides said could take until the end of the Court term early this summer.
White House officials said no names were mentioned at the hourlong meeting.
Nor did they discuss requirements for a Justice.
Instead, they said, the talk centered on timing and mechanics.
Participants included Vice President Al Gore, Thomas F. McLarty 3d, the White House chief of staff; Bruce Lindsey, the personnel director; Vince Foster, the deputy Presidential counsel, and Ronald Klain, associate counsel and a former law clerk to retiring Justice Byron R. White.


A Bond That Only a Gambler Would Consider
FIFTEEN percent.
In this age of 5 percent Treasuries and 3 percent bank rates, doesn't that number make you nostalgic?
Wouldn't you love an investment that promised that kind of return?


Marc Steinberg, Stephanie Hurowitz
Stephanie Jill Hurowitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Monte M. Hurowitz of New York, was married last evening to Marc Andrew Steinberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Steinberg of Salem, Mass.
Rabbi Sol Roth performed the ceremony at the Pierre Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Steinberg graduated cum laude from Tufts University.
She is a candidate for an M.B.A. at Columbia University.


Mutual Funds; Investing as the Rules Change
WITH President Clinton's economic package now on the table, and higher taxes for many at the core of it, some fine tuning of fund portfolios may be in order.
The Administration is proposing higher tax rates, a wider gap between the top rates on income and capital gains and policies that favor some market sectors over others.
But advisers stress that only small adjustments, if any, should be made in light of these proposals, and those only with an eye to the long term and a firm grasp of the basics.
Uncertain times, they counsel, call for exceptional discipline.


Chinese Teams Enter U.S. Spring Nationals
THE Spring National Championships of the American Contract Bridge League, now in progress in Kansas City, have an unusual flavor: Two Chinese women's squads are competing in the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams, beginning today, and in other events.
The group most likely to succeed includes Gu Ling, Zhang Yalan, Sun Ming and Liu Yuquian, who have won two Far East titles and captured bronze medals at the 1991 world championships in Japan.
Their teammates are Yan Ru and Zhu Xiaoying.
The second Chinese team, consisting of Wang Liping, Gao Ronghua, Wang Honli, Wang Wenfei, Ran Jingrong and Ran Qin, are less experienced but own the national women's team title.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Feb. 93
Jan. 93
Feb. 92
Rents
182.4
+0.7
+1.5
Homeowner's costs
181.2
-0.2
+3.8
Fuel and utilities
108.5
-0.6
+3.1
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.65
7.57
9.15
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.97
4.96
6.21
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.52
7.48
8.95
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.74
4.80
6.08
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.52
7.46
9.04
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.54
4.50
6.08
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.68
7.64
9.23
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.43
5.44
6.62
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.39
3.30
4.64
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.49
7.49
8.02
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


Erica Kerner, Daniel Loeb
Mr. and Mrs.
Jonathan C. Kerner of Armonk, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Erica Lynn Kerner to Daniel W Loeb, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome T. Loeb of St.
Louis.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Kerner, 25, and her fiance, 26, graduated cum laude from Tufts University and work for Nike International Ltd. in Guangzhou, China.
She is the marketing manager, he the general manager.


Jacqueline Fern, Michael Winston
May wedding plans have been announced for Dr.
Jacqueline Sherry Fern and Dr.
Michael Howard Winston.
Both are dermatologists, she in New York and he in Port Jefferson, L.I.
Dr.
Fern graduated from Brown University and received a medical degree from New York University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Mattis I. Fern of Roslyn, L.I.
Her father is a dentist in Manhattan and Roslyn.


Bowe vs. Ferguson? Maybe
JESSE FERGUSON, the man who upset RAY MERCER's apple cart last month, seems headed for a May 23 date with RIDDICK BOWE at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium in Washington.
According to published reports, the heavyweight title match will be announced on Tuesday.
Mercer, who had been Bowe's designated victim for his second title defense, lost a unanimous decision to Ferguson at Madison Square Garden on Feb. 6, the same night Bowe disposed of his first challenger, MICHAEL DOKES, in a first-round knockout.


Charles Willis, Innovator in Aviation, Dies at 74
Charles F. Willis Jr., a pilot hailed as a hero in World War II and an aviation industry pioneer who was instrumental in persuading Dwight D. Eisenhower to run for President, died Tuesday at a hospital in Washington.
He was 74 and lived in Washington.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


THE ART WORLD BUST
Solomon's article was both illuminating and disheartening.
The current economic situation has without a doubt affected all of us to greater and lesser degrees.
What it seems to have done for the art world is to reveal just how many artists no longer see art as a creative medium of expression, but, like hog bellies and defense contracts, a commodity to be traded, bought and sold according to the demands of the marketplace.
MICK CALHOUN
New York, N.Y.


Amnesty for the Accused
Led by the governing party, El Salvador's National Assembly approved an amnesty for people accused of atrocities in the civil war.
Page 11.


FRENCH ARE VOTING IN TWO-ROUND TEST
Some 30 million French voters cast ballots Sunday in the first round of crucial legislative elections that are ultimately expected to give a huge parliamentary majority to an opposition conservative coalition.
In districts where no candidate wins more than 50 percent of the vote on Sunday, runoff elections are to be held on March 28 between candidates receiving more than 12.5 percent of the vote in the first round.
In the runoff, the top vote-getter is the victor even if he falls short of 50 percent.


Why Won't South Beach Go Away?
You are the last reporter to wade ashore after the Great Media Invasion of South Beach. (Think Dunkirk with leather bustiers and sunblock.) Now you are drying off in the lobby of the Raleigh Hotel and drinking mango iced tea.
Everything about this lobby is curvy.
You are deep in the Art Deco district of Miami Beach, known as South Beach or SoBe, seated at a table with a flowery 40's cloth.
Only a few days ago, you are told, Claus von Bulow had this seat.
And Barry Diller was at the next table and, over by the window, a group from Universal Studios was schmoozing.


Toward Sweet Survival
NAME: Lauren Hutton.
IDENTITY: Model, actress, Camille Paglia adherent, special projects editor at Harper's Bazaar.


Ladysmith Raises Its Voice on Broadway
Nine unaccompanied male voices are all Ladysmith Black Mambazo needs to summon the sound of community.
Harmonizing on a sustained chord, the group has the depth of a cathedral pipe organ; singing rhythmic riffs, it has the drive of a steam turbine.
For more than two decades, Ladysmith, a South African choir, has lent its voices to songs about traditional culture and Christian beliefs.
But now, as the binding element of a play by Tug Yourgrau, "The Song of Jacob Zulu," the group comes face to face with the politics of modern South Africa: with apartheid and terrorism, with police brutality and factional disputes.


At Mosque, Muslims Protest News Coverage of Bombing
More than 1,000 Muslims, according to police estimates, gathered outside a mosque today to protest what they said was unfair news coverage of the investigation into the Feb. 26 bombing of the World Trade Center, in which the authorities have named several Muslims as suspects.
The protesters said that Muslim immigrants in the New York area were hard-working and peaceful, but were being lumped together as radical religious zealots and terrorists.


Westchester Guide
GERMAN PRINTS
An exhibition of German prints opens today at the Katonah Museum and continues through May 9.
The show is on a national tour from its point of origin at the David and Alfred Smart Museum of Art at the University of Chicago.


Karen Glassman, Richard Harriton
Karen Lynn Glassman, the vice president of Papamarkou &amp; Company, securities dealers, was married yesterday evening to Richard Harriton, the president of the Bear Stearns Securities Corporation and a director of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.
Rabbi Michael Klayman performed the ceremony at the Muttontown (L.I.) Club.
Mrs.
Harriton, who like the bridegroom works in New York, graduated from Ithaca College.
She is the daughter of Roberta and Dr.
Ephraim Glassman of Brookville, L.I.
Her father is a professor of medicine and the director of the cardiac catheterization laboratories at New York University Medical Center in New York.
Her mother is the president of RBG Consultants, a fund-raising corporation in Glen Head, L.I.


A Reckoning May Be Due For British Landlords
Pity poor Gerald Cavendish Grosvenor, otherwise known as the sixth Duke of Westminster.
He had the foresight to have as a forebear one Thomas Grosvenor who in 1677, trying to recoup losses incurred by choosing the wrong side in the civil war, married 12-year-old Mary Davies.
Her dowry was a water-logged cabbage farm called Ebury Manor.
To cut the story short: the family held onto the farm, London grew around it.
Today the Duke is one of the two or three richest people in Britain, owning 300 acres in posh Mayfair and Belgravia that could fetch a cool $5 billion.
The plot contains, among other things, Claridge's, the Connaught Hotel, the United States Embassy, Belgrave Square and the shops and homes of about 4,000 leaseholding tenants, many of whom live in dark brick townhouses trimmed with cream-colored wood and lined up as neat as chocolates in Thorntons' window.


Q and A
Leaks in a Co-op Question: I live in a co-op where a leak within the wall caused some water damage to the wall and the ceiling of my apartment.


The Ice-Cream Sorcerer
The packaging is finished: a pint carton with a tie-dyed look and "Wavy Gravy" written on the front.
A photograph of the rock persona Wavy Gravy with the ice-cream gurus Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield graces the lid.
Two quotes from Wavy Gravy are printed on the back: "The 90's are the 60's standing on your head" and "We are all the same person trying to shake hands with ourselves."
The carton's ready. It's just that there's no ice cream to put in it.


Health Task Force Moving in Right Direction; Physician Scorecards
To the Editor:
"Opening Up on Health Care" (editorial, March 7) lists "freedom of choice" in doctors as the first of the "gritty questions" to be answered by the Clinton health proposal.


The Fine Art Of Complaining
COMPLAINING has become a subspecies of travel literature, to judge by the daily mail.
But a close reading of the copies of complaints that readers send to hotels, cruise lines and tour companies shows that most have not been effective: They are already in round 2 or 3 and have not got what they want.
In fact, they often have not specified what they want, which is a major mistake.
To recast the line about how crucial location is in real estate, the three most important aspects of complaining are timing, timing and timing.
A complaint must be lodged while something can be done to make things right because, as one tour executive put it, money does not replace lost vacation time.
A letter sent a month after a traveler returns from a trip is less likely to get results than a phone call made on the spot, saying, for example, that a hotel does not correspond to the description in the brochure.
When the issue is services not provided, delay may make it impossible for management to track down who did not do what for whom.


The Truth Is Great, and Shall Prevail
As a prisoner in a cold, damp prison basement in Siberia, Anna Larina -- then the young widow of Nikolai Bukharin, the Bolshevik leader who was executed by Stalin after a grotesque show trial in 1938 -- used to lull herself to sleep repeating the last testament her husband had made her memorize on the eve of his arrest.
"He wrote it very quickly, he was upset and hysterical," recalled Ms.
Larina, now 79 years old, a small woman with a bright laugh that seems a miracle after a lifetime of hardship and pain.
"He dictated and I repeated it, phrase after phrase. It became my lullaby. When I would fall asleep, I would cover myself up and start mumbling the words."


IN SHORT: FICTION
BERJI KRISTIN Tales From the Garbage Hills. By Latife Tekin. Marion Boyars, $21.95.


St. Ferghana Preserve Us!
DON'T ASK
By Donald E. Westlake. 327 pp. New York:  The Mysterious Press. $18.95.


Department Of Magnification
To the Editor:
After reading Vicki Goldberg's essay "Peering Into Places That Mere Eyes Cannot See"  [ Feb. 21 ] , I could hardly wait to visit the exhibition at the James Danziger Gallery.
But I have a bone to pick.
The word "microphotography" was used inappropriately to describe the work of Gary Schneider and Roman Vishniac.
The proper word would have been "photomicrograph." Specifically, a photomicrograph is a photograph of a small object, the image of which is magnified more than approximately 40 times by means of a compound microscope.


Town Puts Prostitutes on Videotape
As a prostitute picked up a customer walking along the main thoroughfare here, Linda Soucy, a 36-year-old mother of four, followed closely in her tan minivan and told her partner to start videotaping.
Fed up with the streetwalkers who have invaded residential streets and schoolyards, Mrs.
Soucy and members of her neighborhood watch group are patrolling their streets with video cameras as part of community policing program.


Corrections
A picture caption in the Arts and Leisure Guide on Feb. 28 characterized the movie "Serpico" incorrectly.
It was Al Pacino's first starring vehicle, not his first major film.


The French Funk
It took long and agonizing debates, but the Chateliers finally decided to do the unthinkable on their farm deep inside the green heart of France.
In an ancient stone barn that always held grain, they are now installing washbasins and toilets.
And from their farmhouse, the view of sheep, gentle hills, woods and a medieval chateau will soon be filled by tents and mobile homes.
The new campsite, though, is all that stands between them and bankruptcy.
"I love the land, the animals, the space," says Guy Chatelier, the farm's soft-spoken and bearded owner.
"It's the end if we have to leave." But the day is getting closer.
Two other sheep farms in this region of Vendee, in western France, south of Nantes, have already closed.
And after the latest slump in mutton prices, the family of six is living largely off welfare payments and farm subsidies.
"The campsite is our last hope," he says glumly.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Filibuster: Vote to cut off debate and force a vote on a bill intended to make it easier for new voters to register nationwide.
Failed, with 59 in favor and 41 opposed (one vote short of the 60 needed), March 16.
2.
Voter Registration: Vote on passage of a bill that would allow a person to register to vote when applying for a driver's license.
Approved 62 to 37, March 17.
3.
Energy Tax: Vote on an amendment to a budget plan that providing for tax increases and cuts in Government spending that would drop President Clinton's proposed energy tax.
Rejected 53 to 46, March 18.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
Y...Y...N  Lieberman (D) . . .
Y...Y...N  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
Y...Y...N  Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y...Y...N  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
N...N...Y  Moynihan (D) . . .
Y...Y...N  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
House
1.
GOP Budget Plan: Vote on a Republican sponsored budget plan that sought to cut the deficit without any tax increases.
Rejected 295 to 135, March 18.
2.
Alternative Budget Plan: Vote on a budget plan offered by the Congressional Black Caucus that would cut military spending more heavily to provide more money for domestic spending and foreign aid to countries like Somalia.
Rejected 335 to 87, March 18.
3.
Clinton Budget: Vote on passage of a fiscal 1994 budget that embraces President Clinton's economic plan.
Approved 243 to 183, March 18.
4.
Stimulus Package: Vote on passage of a measure intended to create jobs and stimulate the economy by spending $16 billion this year.
Approved 235 to 190, March 19.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . . N...N...Y...Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . . N...N...Y...Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . . N...N...Y...Y
4. Shays (R) . . . Y...N...N...N
5. Franks (R) . . . Y...N...N...N
6. Johnson (R) . . . Y...N...N...N New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . . N...N...N...Y
2. Hughes (D) . . . N...N...Y...Y
3. Saxton (R) . . . Y...N...N...N
4. Smith (R) . . . Y...N...N...N
5. Roukema (R) . . . N...N...N...N
6. Pallone (D) . . . N...N...Y...Y
7. Franks (R) . . . Y...N...N...N
8. Klein (D) . . . N...N...Y...Y
9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
N...N...Y...Y  10.
Payne (D) . . .
N...Y...Y...Y  11.
Gallo (R) . . .
Y...N...N...N  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
Y...N...N...N  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
N...P...Y...Y New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . . N...N...Y...Y
2. Lazio (R) . . . N...N...N...N
3. King (R) . . . N...N...N...N
4. Levy (R) . . . Y...N...N...N
5. Ackerman (D) . . . N...N...Y...Y
6. Flake (D) . . . N...Y...Y...Y
7. Manton (D) . . . N...N...Y...Y
8. Nadler (D) . . . N...Y...Y...Y
9.
Schumer (D) . . .
N...N...Y...Y  10.
Towns (D) . . .
N...Y...Y...Y  11.
Owens (D) . . .
N...Y...Y...Y  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
N...Y...Y...Y  13.
Molinari (R) . . .
Y...N...N...N  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
N...N...Y...Y  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
N...Y...Y...Y  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
N...Y...Y...Y  17.
Engel (D) . . .
P...Y...Y...Y  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
N...N...Y...Y  19.
Fish (R) . . .
Y...N...N...N  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
Y...N...N...N  21.
McNulty (D) . . .
N...N...Y...Y  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
Y...N...N...N  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
N...N...N...Y  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
Y...N...N...N  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
Y...N...N...Y  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
N...Y...Y...Y  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
Y...N...N...N  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
N...N...Y...Y  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
N...N...Y...Y  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
Y...N...N...N  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
Y...N...N...N  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Glad to Be Counted Out
To the Editor:
In reading Roberta Smith's overview of the Whitney Museum biennials and annuals  [ "A Remembrance of Whitney Biennials Past," Feb. 28 ]  I was struck by an interesting statistic: the artist shown most times -- namely, 38 -- was Raphael Soyer.
Yet rare is the New York art student who knows Soyer's work or name.
I presume that while the museum exhibited works by Soyer as American classics during the last decades of his life, the young Soyer must have been on one "cutting edge" or another.
So much for the Whitney validation.


In the Region: Westchester; Recent Sales
Mount Kisco, N.Y.  $150,000
73 Park Drive  2-bedrooms, 1 1/2-bath condominium; eat-in kitchen, dining room, deck, full basement; common charges $130.96, taxes $2,135.
Eastchester, N.Y.  $244,000
73 Johnson Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 65-year-old colonial; entry hall, fireplace, family room, 1-car garage, attic; taxes $3,614.
Rye, N.Y.  $1.6 Million
1 Norman Place  7-bedroom, 8 1/2-bath, 73-year-old Tudor, sunken living room, fireplace, library, exercise room; 1.5 acres; taxes $33,696.
Bethany, Conn.  $160,000
249 Bear Hill Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 17-year-old ranch; large family room, deck off kitchen, family room with fireplace, 1.5 acres; taxes $2,614.
Milford, Conn.  $161,000
29 Berry Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 27-year-old split level; updated kitchen, gas heat, 2-car attached garage, 80- by 160-foot lot; taxes $2,684.
Wallingford, Conn.  $110,000
37 North Turnpike  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 70-year-old colonial; w/ b stove, pantry, needs work; taxes $1,675.
OTHER AREAS Forked River, N.J.  $124,000
2061 Brookdale Park Drive
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old ranch; cathedral ceilings, skylights, two-story entrance foyer; taxes $1,966.
Edison, N.J.  $107,500
150 Temple Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial, formal dining room, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $1,990.
Albertson, L.I.  $223,500
140 Albertson Parkway  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, gas heat; taxes $3,400.


THE CHELSEA SHOW
Watch out, Socks!
Frank Rich does not like cats of any variety. (Just ask Andrew Lloyd Webber.) As the premier White House pet, you are quite likely to be the next subject for a catty article by Rich.
Oh well, Socks, keep your whiskers brushed and your chin up, because soon his review of your sweet mistress Chelsea will be just a fading memory.
MARLENE BENJAMIN
Aurora, Ohio


Consumer Group Says Stonehenge Is a 'Disgrace'
Stonehenge is a tourist's bad dream, visited each year by two million people who, says Britain's largest independent consumer organization, have to put up with no guided tours, inadequate information displays, cramped and cold visitors' facilities, a cafe with no place to sit and "rotting lavatories."
In a report published earlier this month in "Holiday Which?" a travel magazine published by the nonprofit Consumers' Association, the organization was sharply critical of visitor facilities at Britain's 10 most popular tourist sites, arguing that with one or two exceptions the attractions are "expensive, dated or dull."


Catastrophe Is Silencing
To the Editor:
Into Nancy Mairs's complicated stew of how-to, lamentation, homily and gripe ("When Bad Things Happen to Good Writers," Feb. 21), I'd like to toss a couple more old chestnuts from my own larder.


Puzzle Tie
WHAT: A crossword-puzzle tie, 100 percent polyester, made in Korea.
Available in black and white, red and white and purple and white.
Featuring a shine that cannot be dulled by even the harshest detergent.
Highly flammable.
Price: $2 for reporters, but, for anyone else, free from . . .
WHO: Abraham Jacob Hirschfeld, born in Poland on Dec. 20, 1919, logorrheic parking-garage magnate, hotel (Ramada Pennsylvania) owner and fitness-center (Vertical Club) developer, would-be Lieutenant Governor, Senator, Congressman and deity and, as of Friday, the owner of The New York Post.
He sold or gave the tie to most everyone who crossed his path last week.


Gallego Doesn't Hear the Word 'Trade'
The rumors seem to wash in and out like the tide, but Mike Gallego does his best to ignore them.
He has seen too many spring trainings, heard too much unfounded gossip, to listen now and wonder if there is reason to be concerned.
Gallego is trying to win an everyday job with the Yankees, but he is also trying to avoid becoming the center of a trade that could occur before the end of the month.


CALLS APRIL 25 REFERENDUM; Rivals Resist Move
Declaring it his duty "as a citizen, as a patriot and as a decent man," President Boris N. Yeltsin today assumed virtually unlimited powers and ordered national balloting to decide how and by whom Russia is to be governed.
Mr.
Yeltsin's dramatic appeal to the nation in a televised address plunged the country into an immediate crisis.


Anna McCain, William Madonia
Thomas T. McCain and Sara S. McCain, both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Anna Tobin McCain, to William James Madonia, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Vincent Madonia of Garden City, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss McCain is an assistant director of development for Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts Inc. in New York and the founder and director of Tobin Fine Art, an agency representing visual artists in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College.
Her father, now retired, was a stockbroker in New York.
Her mother, a retired vice president of the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company in New York, is a partner in Sheerlund Properties, a retailer of Christmas trees and decorations in Reading, Pa.
The prospective bride is the stepdaughter of Wendy Adams.


Computers Replace The Traffic Cop
THE police officer who used to stand at a busy intersection directing traffic has been replaced in several Connecticut cities by a personal computer that sits on a desktop miles away counting cars and controlling signal lights.
Systems that control traffic from afar through computers and telephone lines have been put in place over the last couple of years in Greenwich, Stamford, Norwalk, Waterbury and Bristol.


Kasparov Sweeps The Field in Linares
GARY KASPAROV of Russia once again demonstrated his dominance of the game by winning the Linares International Tournament in Spain on March 14.
The 28-year-old world champion scored 10-3 in the elite invitational competition, which included an imposing selection of his chief rivals.
Kasparov's prize came to less than $10,000, a paltry amount for such an important event.
But that does not tell all: the real money in Linares is in the appearance fees, and these are kept secret.
FINAL STANDINGS
Player
Pts.
Kasparov
10
Karpov
8 1/2
V. Anand
8 1/2
A. Shirov
8
V. Kramnik
7 1/22
V. Salov
6 1/2
V. Ivanchuk
6 1/2
A. Belyavsky
6
G. Kamsky
5 1/2
Y. Bareyev
5 1/2
A. Yusupov
5
J. Timman
5
B. Gelfand
4 1/22
L. Ljubojevic
4
Kasparov's tremendous skill in attacking shone forth in his Round 10 victory over the former world champion Anatoly Karpov of Russia.
The first surprise was Kasparov's recapture, 10 . . .
Ne5!?, which amounted to a sacrifice of the d6 pawn -- on 11 b3 Ne8, there would have come 12 c5!
On 13 . . .
Nfd7, Karpov could not develop with 14 Ng3?
Nf3 15 gf Bc3.
And 14 Bd4 Re8 (threatening 15 . . . Bf8!) 15 Be5 Re5 16 Qc6 Ra6 17 Rd7 Qe8! 18 Qc7 Bd7 is lost for White because his tiny material advantage is no compensation for Black's enormous lead in development.
Karpov tried 14 f4, but Kasparov struck back sharply with 14 . . . b4!, one point being that accepting the second pawn offer with 15 Qb4 would have allowed 15 . . . c5! 16 Bc5 Nc5! 17 Rd8 Ned3 18 Kd2 Nb4 19 Rf8 Kf8, winning a piece for two pawns.
And, on 15 Na4, Kasparov would have had 15 . . .
Ra4! 16 ba Nc4 17 Qd3 Nb2 18 Qc2 Nd1 19 Qd1 Qa5 20 Kf2 Nf6 21 Ng3 Ng4 with strong attacking chances.
Karpov tried 21 h4 in the hope of getting his KR to help out with 22 Rh3, but Kasparov sacrificed a pawn to open lines with 21 . . . c4! (22 bc? would permit 22 . . . b3! followed by 23 . . . Qa5).
After 22 Nc1, Kasparov charged in with 22 . . . c3! 23 Na2 c2.
Had Karpov defended by 24 Rc1, there could have followed 24 . . . cb/Q 25 Rb1 Ne5! 26 Rd1 (26 Qe3 Ng4!) Qa5 27 fe Qa2 28 Qe3 Nc3 29 Rc1 Re8 30 Rc3 bc 31 Qc3 Bg4 32 Bd3 Rc8 33 Bc4 Qb1, winning a rook.
Perhaps the most remarkable twist of Kasparov's onslaught was that, after 24 Qd4 cd/Q 25 Kd1 (25 Qd1 Qb6 is a nightmare for White), he forced the exchange of queens by 25 . . .
Ndc5! 26 Qd8 Rd8 without giving up anything of his mighty momentum.
After 27 Kc2 (27 Ke1 Bg4! 28 Be2 Be2 29 Ke2 Ng3 garners a rook) Nf2, Karpov overstepped the time limit.
That spared him the agony of 28 Rg1 Bf5 29 Kb2 Rd1.
KING'S INDIAN DEFENSE
White
Black
Karpov
Kasparov
1
d4
Nf6
2
c4
g6
3
Nc3
Bg7
4
e4
d6
5
f3
O-O
6
Be3
e5
7
Nge2
c6
8
Qd2
Nbd7
9
Rd1
a6
10
de
Ne5
11
b3
b5
12
cb
ab
13
Qd6
Nfd7
14
f4
b4
15
Nb1
Ng4
16
Bd4
Bd4
17
Qd4
Ra2
18
h3
c5
19
Qg1
Ngf6
20
e5
Ne4
21
h4
c4
22
Nc1
c3
23
Na2
c2
24
Qd4
cd/Q
25
Kd1
Ndc5
26
Qd8
Rd8
27
Kc2
Nf2
28
Forfeit


Behind the Plate
Growing up in Amarillo, Tex., Todd English had a plan.
He was a catcher, and he wanted to play major league ball.
For a while, things went as smoothly as a doubleheader favoring the home team on a balmy and cloudless day.
English went away to Guilford College in North Carolina and spent less time in the library than he did on the playing field.
Then, something happened.
English -- now 32 and the chef and owner of Olives, a Boston restaurant, as well as a nearby cafe called Figs -- recalls no moment of epiphany; at some point, he just began tasting food as keenly as he tasted victory.
He subsequently wanted to cook as much as he wanted to call for a curveball.
But at the time, no university with a decent culinary program was also recruiting major league prospects.
The aspiring catcher-chef was stuck between two plates.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
RUBY MAE HAS SOMETHING TO SAY
Written and illustrated by David Small.
Unpaged.
New York:  Crown Publishers. $12.  (Ages 4 to 9)


Christine Bird, C. M. Martin
Rodney T. Bird of Worcester, N.Y., and Elizabeth M. Bird of St.
Petersburg, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Christine Elizabeth Bird, to Christopher Miles Martin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Martin of Camden, Me.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Bird, 28, is the personnel director at the New York advertising agency of Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor.
She graduated from Lynchburg College.
Her father, now retired, was a vice president and corporate secretary of the Discount Corporation of New York, a dealer in government securities.
The prospective bride is the stepdaughter of Beatrice Bird of Worcester.


Archie Gottesman and Gary DeBode
Margery Sue Gottesman, a daughter of Paula and Jerome Gottesman of Morristown, N.J., was married there last evening to Gary Scott DeBode, a son of Capt.
Donald DeBode, U.S.N., retired, and Patricia DeBode of Oak Harbor, Wash.
Rabbi David Nesson performed the ceremony at the Morristown Jewish Center.
Ms.
Gottesman, 29, who is keeping her name, is known as Archie.
She is the vice president of real estate at the Edison Parking Corporation, a chain of parking garages in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father is the chief executive and a founder of Edison and of Manhattan Mini Storage, a chain of storage facilities in New York.
Her mother, now retired, was a lawyer in New York.


VERBATIM
JEAN HARRIS: I haven't felt a lot of trauma or a lot of adjusting.
I've been traumatized by the price of things.
People are so casual about blouses that cost $165, and I just can't believe that someone would pay that, you know.
KATIE COURIC: Have you ever been to Loehmann's?
MRS. HARRIS: Yes, indeed I've been to Loehmann's.
MS. COURIC: You've got to hit Loehmann's. You'll feel much better.
-- From March 12 interview of Mrs.
Harris, who served 12 years for the murder of Dr.
Herman Tarnower, on NBC's "Today."


British Portraitist Makes the Most of the Romantic Moment
THOMAS LAWRENCE received his first major commission in 1789.
Thomas Gainsborough had just died and Joshua Reynolds's eyesight was failing; so with the disappearance of the two giants of English portraiture, the field was wide open.
Incidentally, William Hogarth, no mean portraitist himself, claimed that the reason for English supremacy in the field was that while "in Holland, selfishness is the ruling passion; in England, vanity is united with it." Thus, "Portrait painting," he added, "ever has and ever will succeed better in this country than any other."
Lawrence (1769-1830), a self-taught prodigy, was ready for success, having been prodded by his father, a customs and excise officer-turned-innkeeper.
The commission was for a painting of Queen Charlotte, no less, and it was given to the young man on the strength of the portrait he had done of Viscountess Cremorne, who was William Penn's granddaughter.


A Restaurant Transformed Into a Bistro
ALMOST nothing is the same at DiBenardo's Bistro.
In the last few months the Commack restaurant, formerly called just DiBenardo's, has changed not only its name, but also its location, type of food, style of service and spirit.
When DiBenardo's opened in a tucked-away corner of the Peppertree Commons nearly four years ago, the food and service were haute Italian.
The dining room, filled with fresh flowers, candlelight and tuxedo-clad waiters' concocting Caesar salads at tableside, shouted special occasion.


Sports of The Times; Playing In the Park: L.T. to R.W.
OF all the descriptions of pro football free agency, the Jets' defensive coordinator, Pete Carroll, defined it best.
"It's like playing football in the park when you're a kid," Carroll said.
"You want to play with the best players."


Bull Inthe Heather Not a Mistake
The Florida Derby threw the Kentucky Derby picture into total confusion today when the 29-to-1 long shot Bull Inthe Heather came storming through the muddy homestretch at Gulfstream Park to win by two lengths over the undefeated favorite Storm Tower.
Bull Inthe Heather, whose name looks like a typographical error, had won only once in six starts before winning the big one against a dozen of the prime colts in this year's wide-open 3-year-old division.
But he is a son of Ferdinand, who won the Kentucky Derby in 1986, and today the son took some giant strides on the road that the sire traveled to Louisville seven years ago.


Big East is Victim of a Second-Round Knockout
Western Kentucky, the seventh-seeded team in the Southeast and not seriously regarded as a contender for the national championship, pulled one of most shocking upsets of the N.C.A.A. tournament this afternoon by defeating second-seeded Seton Hall, 72-68.
With 5-foot-8-inch Mark Bell leading the way, Western Kentucky out-scrapped, out-shot and outplayed the highly rated Pirates, snapping Seton Hall's 12-game winning streak.
With the victory, the Hilltoppers earned a berth in next week's round of 16 game against Florida State, a 94-63 winner against Tulane in the first game here this afternoon.


Gita C. Panjabi, Timothy Trelease
Dr.
Manohar Panjabi of North Haven, Conn., has announced the engagement of his daughter Gita Cecilia Panjabi to Timothy Michael Trelease, the son of Brian and Mary Trelease of Longmeadow, Mass.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Panjabi, 25, is a freelance scriptwriter and a poet in Providence, R.I.
She graduated from Yale University.
She is the daughter of the late Elisabeth Panjabi.
Her father is a professor of orthopedics, rehabilitation and mechanical engineering at Yale in New Haven.


Dana R. Paul, T. C. Swimmer
Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond A. Paul Jr. of Downingtown, Pa., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Dana Reina Paul, and Theodore Carl Swimmer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald E. Swimmer of Rye, N.Y.
Ms.
Paul, 24, teaches English at Downingtown (Pa.) Senior High School.
She and her fiance graduated from Lafayette College, and she received a master's degree in English and secondary education from Boston University.
Her father, now retired, was the treasurer of the Sun Company, the oil company in Radnor, Pa.


BENEFITS
Cancer Care Award
MONDAY -- Cancer Care will hold its annual Human Services Award Dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria starting with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
The black-tie event with dinner, dancing and entertainment will honor Linda Ellerbee for "informing and enlightening about cancer." Tickets, $500, from (212) 997-0100.
Off Off Broadway Party
MONDAY -- The Naked Angels theater company will hold a benefit party at Industria, 775 Washington Street between Jane and West 12th streets, starting at 6:30 P.M.
Dinner will be served at 7:15 P.M., followed at 8:30 P.M. by dancing and a cabaret.
Tickets, $250, or for the party alone, $100, from (212) 727-0012.
Benefit for Danspace
MONDAY -- Since 1974, the Danspace Project at St.
Mark's Church in-the-Bowery has provided a site for independent experimental choreographers.
It will hold its annual fund-raiser, "Dinner at Eight," at Michael Wager's Loft, 126 Fifth Avenue at 18th Street.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner and a dance performance.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 674-8112.
Aiding Regional Theaters
MONDAY -- The National Corporate Theater Fund, the national fund-raising organization for 10 regional theaters, from the American Conservatory Theater in San Francisco to the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven, will hold a benefit party.
Cocktails at 6 P.M. at the Marriott Marquis will be followed by the 8 P.M. performance of "The Goodbye Girl" at the Marquis Theater.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 393-6252.
Jewish Committee Award
MONDAY -- At the Plaza, the American Jewish Committee will present its 1993 Learned Hand Human Relations Award to Arthur L. Liman, a partner in the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison and former chief counsel to the Senate Iran-Contra committee.
Senator Daniel K. Inouye, Democrat of Hawaii, will deliver the keynote address.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 751-4000, ext. 338.
Sherry and Two Pianos
TUESDAY -- The Spanish Institute, a center for American-Spanish cultural affairs, will stage a piano recital by David Bradshaw and Cosmo Buono at the center, at 684 Park Avenue at 68th Street.
Sherry at 5:45 P.M. will precede the 6 P.M. recital.
Tickets, $10, or $5 for students and those over 60, from (212) 628-0420.
To Prevent Blindness
TUESDAY -- Chuck Scarborough, the Channel 4 news anchor, and Jack Avrett, chairman and chief executive of the advertising firm of Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, will be the recipients of the annual People of Vision Award, sponsored by the New York division of the National Society to Prevent Blindness, at Tavern on the Green.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and entertainment.
Black tie.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 980-2020.
Honoring Fulbright
WEDNESDAY -- Former Senator J. William Fulbright of Arkansas, who will be 88 next month and whose name identifies the exchange program in which thousands of students and teachers from around the world have participated since 1946, will be honored by scores of the former exchange students who have attained prominence in many fields.
Cocktails at 6:15 P.M. at the United Nations (Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali was a Fulbright scholar) will be followed by dinner.
Black tie.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 431-1195.
Juniors for Cancer Care
WEDNESDAY -- The junior committee of Cancer Care will have a benefit party from 8 to 10:30 P.M. at the Surf Club, 415 East 91st Street.
Tickets, $20, at the door.
Information: (212) 221-3300, ext. 468.
For Disabled Israeli Children
WEDNESDAY -- The young professionals division of the Foundation for Developmentally Disabled Children in Israel will hold a benefit party at the Cafe Wha?, 117 MacDougal Street, between West 3d and Bleecker streets.
Starting at 6 P.M. there will be music, drinks, snacks and a comedy show.
Tickets, $45, from (212) 586-2464.
Heart Share's Spring Party
WEDNESDAY -- For 79 years, Heart Share Human Services of New York has sought to help children and young adults make the transition from institutional life to the workaday world.
Providing services from child adoption to living arrangements and support services for adults, the charity assists more than 4,000 people a year.
A benefit party for the agency will be held at the Marriott Marquis starting with cocktails and an auction of trips, tickets to various events and gift items at 6 P.M.
Dinner and dancing follow.
Tickets, $225, from (718) 330-1101.
Mrs.
Guggenheimer Honored
THURSDAY -- Elinor Guggenheimer will receive the Family and Child Advocate of the Year Award from the Institute for Families and Children at a cocktail reception from 5:30 to 7:30 P.M. at the Chemical Bank headquarters, 49th floor, 270 Park Avenue near 47th Street.
Last year's recipient, Matilda Cuomo, the wife of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, will make the presentation.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 233-5051.
Dance Theater of Harlem
THURSDAY -- Jessye Norman will give a special performance of "Songs of Mahler" along with the Dance Theater of Harlem at the New York State Theater to benefit the dance theater.
The 7:30 P.M. performance will be followed by a champagne supper and dancing.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 967-3470.
Backstage at the Ballet
THURSDAY -- Dancers of the American Ballet Theater will hold a backstage benefit for the company at which the dancers will informally talk about and demonstrate their art.
The dancers will also prepare and serve a buffet supper at the company's home base in the Lawrence A. Wien Center for Dance at 890 Broadway at 19th Street.
The benefit starts at 6 P.M. and will include an auction of memorabilia from the company.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 477-3030.
Student Exchange Program
SATURDAY -- A black-tie dinner and dance at the Union Club, 101 East 69th Street, will help raise funds for the newly established Hungarian-American Student Exchange program, which, starting in 1995, will provide for year-long stays by students in the two countries.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $115 or $220 a couple for dinner and dancing; for dancing alone starting at 9:30 P.M., $55 or $95 per couple, from (212)321-3310.
Gambling for a Cause
MARCH 28 -- An evening of casino gambling, dancing, raffles and a chance to make cash bids for dates with young men and women will benefit the Children's Pavilion Project at the Hadassah Medical Center and Young Judaea, the Zionist youth movement in the United States.
The party at the Roosevelt Hotel starts at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $60, from (212) 765-7050, or $75 at the door.
Both prices include $10 in gambling chips.
Showcase for Artists
MARCH 28 -- Friends of Baroque New York is a nonprofit program on community television that provides a forum for young artists and writers.
From 6 to 9 P.M., a fund-raising party for the program that will feature an exhibit of primitive masks and a buffet will be held at an apartment at 350 East 78th Street.
Contributions of $30 are suggested.
Reservations: (212) 223-4054.
Day-Care Benefit
MARCH 28 -- A concert of Broadway show tunes sung by 25 performers at the Central Presbyterian Church, Park Avenue at 64th Street, will benefit the Iris House Childcare Center, a soon-to-open day-care center in East Harlem for children whose mothers have AIDS.
A reception follows the 7:30 P.M. performance.
Tickets, $40, or for the performance alone, $20, from (212) 753-8194.


Zimbabwe Tale


On Sunday; Where Guns And Lives Are Cheap
"THE generation I'm in is going to be lost," said Charles Campbell, who is 20 years old.
"Of the circle of friends I grew up in, three are dead, four are in jail and another is out of school and just does nothing. When he runs out of money he'll sell a couple of bags of weed."
The conversation in East Orange, N.J., last week was about guns: how young people get them, why they carry them, why people are killing one another.
It took place two days after the New Jersey Senate voted unanimously not to overturn a state ban on assault weapons, the toughest in the nation.
The vote on Monday was seen by many proponents as signifying a historic transformation in the national gun debate.
After the vote, the Attorney General, Janet Reno, called Gov.
Jim Florio to congratulate him.


To Keep Water Away From the Basement
BASEMENT leaks occur most often in the spring, when melting snow, thawing ground and frequent rains saturate the soil and raise water tables.
Taking precautions can prevent leaks and sometimes even stop those in progress.
The most important steps are making sure that gutters and downspouts work without leaking or overflowing and that splash blocks or drain hoses direct water from the gutters at least six feet away from the foundation.


Unconditionally Yours
LOYALTY
An Essay on the Morality of Relationships.
By George P. Fletcher. 211 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $21.


The Hoodwink Aspect of Engine Tech
IT is rare when I admit that I don't know something, when I confess to having missed the point or being just generally benighted.
But this is one of those times.
Color me chagrined.
For years, I have wondered silently about the fact that cars seem to perform perfectly well despite horsepower that has been consistently eviscerated in the quest for ever-better fuel economy.


Mysterious Pre-Columbian Artifacts
DESCENDING the staircase to the lower galleries of the Art Museum at Princeton University is akin to climbing down into an archeological dig.
Although there is no dirt to sift through, visitors can experience the thrill of discovering treasures from pre-Columbian civilizations.
The cases are filled with more than 300 intriguing small ceramic figures, masks, textiles and jewelry that convey silent and mysterious messages from the past.


Ms. Goldsmith, Benjamin Adams
Mark L. Goldsmith and Dr.
Arlene G. Goldsmith of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Lynn Goldsmith, to Benjamin Crowninshield Adams, a son of Mrs.
John Quincy Adams of Dover, Mass., and the late Mr.
Adams.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Goldsmith, 25, is a student in the premedical program at Columbia University, where her fiance is a candidate for an M.B.A. degree.
She graduated cum laude from Bowdoin College.
Her father is the founder and president of Inventory Management Systems, a barter company in New York.
Her mother is the executive director of New Alternatives for Children, a social-services agency in New York.


Radio Rights: A Move to Auction Licenses That Sell
For years, the Federal Government has auctioned off timber rights in the national forests and offshore oil and gas leases on the continental shelf.
Now the Clinton Admininstration is pushing hard to auction off what is arguably the Federal Government's biggest remaining free-lunch program for the rich: rights to the airwaves of the radio spectrum.


Some Shovel, Some Shave
TREES fall in forests and nobody hears them, and sometimes wheels spin in the snow to deaf ears.
At 2 A.M. last Sunday, Cecithe Londono, a cashier at Tavern on the Green who had just worked a double shift, was spinning her wheels in a snowbank that had been plowed up against her Ford Escort on Central Park West.
A petite but robust 26-year-old who was born in Cali, Colombia, and now lives with a roommate in West New York, N.J., Ms.
Londono works in an enclosed booth in the restaurant's kitchen.
She had been trying for nearly an hour to dig herself out with a broken shovel borrowed from the restaurant.


Empty Beds, Empty Nests, Empty Cities
THE FATHER
By Sharon Olds. 79 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $20.
LOOKING FOR LUCK
Poems.
By Maxine Kumin. 94 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company.
Cloth, $17.95.
Paper, $8.95.
HOTEL INSOMNIA
By Charles Simic. 66 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Cloth, $18.95.
Paper, $10.95.


Flower Shows
To the Editor: I enjoyed the article "Flower Shows: Pick of the Bunch" (Jan. 31) and would like to draw your attention to the Cincinnati Flower Show, which was not included.
The Cincinnati Flower Show has recently been endorsed by the British Royal Horticultural Society and is the only show outside Britain to receive such an endorsement in the 188-year history of the society.
The dates this year are April 21 to 25.
MARY MARGARET ROCHFORD President, Greater Cincinnati Flower and Garden Show Society


Premiere of a Musical, 'The Fields of Ambrosia'
A RECIPE for the new kind of musical that "The Fields of Ambrosia" means to be: take the essence of black comedy, smatter it with the stock ingredients of violence, sex, romance and sentiment, and -- this is crucial -- make sure the concoction is through composed, without dialogue, so that it can pass for art.
If the result comes out half baked, or quasi-artistic, that's because pretension got in the way of aspiration, and imitation was mistaken for innovation.


A Modern Feminist Takes Comfort In Shaw's 'Candida'
This Thursday, when Mary Steenburgen makes her Broadway debut in the title role of George Bernard Shaw's "Candida" at the Criterion Center, she will be thinking of her mother.
In an impassioned speech in the play's third act, Ms.
Steenburgen noted, the serenely competent Candida at last explains to her good-hearted but obtuse husband that it is her tireless, careful management of their household that enables him to carry on his far more visible work outside it.


Parking Lots, Reborn as Beauty Spots
PARKING lots do not have to look like parking lots.
They can be bathed in greenery.
They can be havens for bicycle riders.
They can have pedestrian walkways, shops and museums.
Passers-by may even have to look twice to see the cars in a parking lot.
And when the vehicles are gone, a lot can take on another role, as a park or marketplace.


Rail Europe's Russian Pass
Visitors to Russia and other countries of the former Soviet Union will soon be able to use the same kind of rail pass available in much of the rest of Europe.
On April 1, Rail Europe, the marketing arm of the European railroads in the United States and Canada, will start selling the Russian Flexipass.
It will provide unlimited rail travel on major routes for any four days in a 15-day period at a cost of $298 a person in first class, $198 in second class.
Additional days may be purchased at $65 a day in first class, $40 a day in second class.
By combining the new Russian Flexipass with a Eurail Flexipass, for example, travelers could go from Shannon, Ireland, to Vladivostok, on the Pacific coast of Russia.
The trip between Shannon and Helsinki could be made on a five-day Eurail Flexipass, the rest of the journey on the new Russian Flexipass with a one-day extension.
The approximate rail price for the 10-day trip would be $661 in first class and $458 for second class, a Rail Europe spokesman said.


When Being An Old Hand Becomes A Handicap
BRACING himself against a wintry blast that whipped across the platform at Greystone Station here one recent morning, Roy Podorson waited with the throngs of commuters for the next express train to Manhattan.
The silver-haired advertising executive, who has been out of work for seven months, was continuing to make the rounds -- sending out resumes, phoning prospective employers and scheduling interviews.
Mr.
Podorson -- 52 and vying with many aggressive younger workers -- said he was undaunted by a stiffly competitive job market and an economy that is, at best, merely crawling out of the recession.


THE CHELSEA SHOW
As the mother of a 16-year-old daughter who, at 13, had frizzy hair, braces and went through that "awkward stage" common to all teens, I can only hope Rich's children glide through adolescence like swans through still water.
DEBORA MELTZ Newton, N.J.


Oilers to Pay Duncan
It took a while for the Houston Oilers to figure it out, but as the team put it in a statement last week, $7,500 "is not worth damaging in any way our relationship with a member of our team." The player is receiver CHRIS DUNCAN, whose contract called for a $15,000 bonus if he was selected to the Pro Bowl, as he was.
But because Duncan finished in a tie in the voting with a teammate, ERNEST GIVENS, the Oilers figured he was entitled to only half the bonus.
After Duncan filed a breach-of-contract suit, the Oilers changed their mind, sort of.
They said Duncan would get the other $7,500, but made a point of adding that "this is not necessarily money the Oilers feel is owed." (AP)


Even Hungarians Lead Ordinary Lives
To the Editor:
"Communostalgia," William Safire's March 11 essay from Budapest, is new proof of the undue insensitivity and hysteria with which Eastern Europe has long been treated in the American press.
The column depicts a country catapulted from the evil grip of Communist dictatorship into an equally alarming morass of social deviance, pervasive chaos and abject lawlessness.


Rhodes to Rhodes: On the Inside Looking In
Forget The New Republic.
In Washington, this week's hot book may be the privately circulated quarterly published by the Association of American Rhodes Scholars.
Where but in the pages of The American Oxonian might the Secretary of Labor submit a chatty letter reporting on the doings of his classmate the President?
Where else might the Ambassador at Large for Russia advise his former roommate to "keep your sense of humor" in the White House?


THE ART WORLD BUST
Many stones have been cast at the roaring 80's from our supposedly superior vantage point in the 90's.
By and large, I find art in the 90's to be esoteric second-guessing, and worse, politically sanctimonious.
I am tired of hearing how corrupt we were then, and how virtuous we are now.
It is bewildering to read the painter Elizabeth Murray's statement that "artists have made enough money." Perhaps in her circle of friends this is so, but many talented artists I know are hanging on by the skin of their teeth.
We are not better off culturally because finances have shrunk.
No matter how you slice it, less is less.
JEFF JOYCE
Leonia, N.J.


Needed: High-Tech Tools for the Elderly
To the Editor:
What a fascinating juxtaposition.
"Video Games in a Big Way" (Tech Notes, Feb. 28) describes an extra-large video-game control pad, costing $2,000, that is designed for video-game fanatics.
"Selling Books to a Generation That Won't Sit Still" (Profile, also Feb. 28) goes on about this new niche being exploited by Dove Books in "publishing" (producing?) an audio library of literary works.


How Violence Moved Center Stage
FIRST you wince.
A director of violence?
As if there isn't enough of that in the streets, on television, in the movies.
And you object.
Why should anyone have to be subjected to people-bashing in the theater?
That's where only words harm.
Then you meet David Leong and you get over it.
He is mellow.
He is polite.
He is analytical.
At 5 feet 6 inches and weighing in at 145, Mr.
Leong looks gentle, positively cherubic when he smiles.
And he explains the place of violence in theater.
Calmly.


Not Too Old to Hear
In an ode to an aging generation, Bob Seger once offered the musical assurance that rock-and-roll never forgets.
Maybe not, but once you get past a certain point -- out of school, off the club circuit, with a job and perhaps a couple of kids -- it certainly falls into a deep, dark rut.
At any rate, Mr.
Seger is hardly one to offer solace: his tunes, once ambient music for impassioned make-out sessions in the back seats of Chevys, are now used by Chevrolet itself to hawk its wares.
Music defines generations, and the one that begot the record industry is now on the wrong side of the gap, the side that says, "Turn down that noise" when a Sonic Youth video pops up on MTV.
If the music industry cared a fig, radio stations would advertise Retin-A as often as Oxy-5, and superstores like Tower Records wouldn't have clerks with pierced eyebrows and bell-bottoms who sneer at the mention of Joan Armatrading.


Aiding Dogs and Cats Through Car Tags
On behalf of the Humane Society of the United States Mid-Atlantic Regional Office, I want to let readers know that there is another license plate in the works ("New Look in Car Tags to Aid Wildlife," Feb. 28).
It is an animal-welfare license plate that people who care about dogs and cats can purchase.
Assemblyman Walter J. Kavanaugh, Republican of the 16th District, announced the introduction of a bill that provides for money raised through the sale of animal-welfare license plates to benefit the state's Animal Population Control Fund.


Catherine White, G. J. Flattmann Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. White of East Orleans, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Catherine Louise White to Gerald Joseph Flattmann Jr., a son of Mr.
Flattmann of New Orleans and Gayle Christensen of San Bernadino, Calif.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss White is a graduate student in biological anthropology at New York University.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received a master's degree in physical anthropology from the University of New Mexico.
Her father is the publisher of Applied Microwave, an engineering magazine, in Lexington, Mass., where her mother, Eloise J. White, is a neuropsychologist.


A Bad Call By Pitino
To the Sports Editor:
Jamal Mashburn, the University of Kentucky's star junior forward, has chosen to forgo his final season of college eligibility and, apparently, a degree, for the money and fame the National Basketball Association can provide.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Albertson  $223,500
140 Albertson Parkway  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, gas heat; taxes $3,400.
Garden City Park  $187,000
40 Second Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 68-year-old colonial; dining room, deck, 1-car attached garage; taxes $2,500.
Locust Valley  $275,000
247 Buckrum Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, finished basement; taxes $4,000.
Mineola  $165,000
19 Geranium Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 65-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, attic; taxes $2,300.
Roslyn Heights  $180,000
58 Harvard Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, laundry room, 1-car garage; taxes $2,800.
Williston Park  $184,000
240 Broad Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 62-year-old colonial; dining room, den, finished basement, attic, patio, 2-car garage; taxes $2,600.
OTHER AREAS Forked River, N.J.  $124,000
2061 Brookdale Park Drive
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old ranch; cathedral ceilings, skylights, two-story entrance foyer; taxes $1,966.
Mount Kisco, N.Y.  $150,000
73 Park Drive  2-bedrooms, 1 1/2-bath condominium; eat-in kitchen, dining room, deck, full basement; common charges $130.96, taxes $2,135.
Bethany, Conn.  $160,000
249 Bear Hill Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 17-year-old ranch; large family room, deck off kitchen, family room with fireplace, 1.5 acres; taxes $2,614.


Cutting Back Now to Behold Future Profits
PRUNING continued.
Those who have cabin fever should be glad that they have one important task to complete now before the spring rush.
One category of plants that deserves proper attention are the bramble fruits, especially the red raspberries.
Unless the plantings are managed properly these thorny, vigorous-growing plants can get out of control in a single season.


Trade Center Inquiry: A Web of Clues and Puzzles
As it enters its fourth week, the investigation into the World Trade Center bombing has come further than law-enforcement officials had initially expected, but not as far as they would like.
With three suspects under arrest and indictment and with a fourth suspect being sought, the officials say they have sketched the outlines of the conspiracy.
They say they know a van carried the bomb into the trade center garage and they know who leased it, who leased a storage locker where bomb-making chemicals were kept and who made telephone calls from the locker a day before the Feb. 26 blast that killed 6 people and injured more than 1,000.


Park Cutbacks Over the Years Cause Distress
Just a few yards from the edge of the manicured Long Meadow in Brooklyn's Prospect Park -- where the New York Philharmonic plays each summer -- are pathways so trampled that they now have deep holes.
Nearby trees are diseased and dying.
An ornate archway, recently refurbished, is besmeared with graffiti and many of the catch basins are clogged, destroying the park's intricate drainage system.
After three years of cuts that have whittled the Parks and Recreation Department's budget and work force by 20 percent, the problems in Prospect Park are indicative of the distress that New Yorkers can expect to find in the city's vast network of parks as the warmer weather of spring begins to bring people back outdoors.
And officials say that a decline in personnel and maintenance will make the job of restoring the parks a costly and difficult challenge.


Immigrants, Don't Be in Such a Hurry to Shed Your Accents
To the Editor:
You report that immigrants in New York City are turning to speech classes to reduce the sting of discrimination against them based on accent (news article, March 2).
I'd like to tell all my fellow immigrants taking accent-reduction classes: As long as you speak fluent and comprehensible English, don't waste your money on artificially removing your accent.


U.S. and Monaco Honor Grace Kelly
THE United States Postal Service plans several novelties in the next few weeks to appeal to new collectors.
On Wednesday, the United States and Monaco are jointly issuing a stamp to honor Grace Kelly, as she is called on the American version, and Princesse Grace, as the Monegasque version calls her.


THE CHELSEA SHOW
Would anyone be writing about Chelsea and the Gore girls' looks if they were, say, boys?
LISA CUSHMAN CURRAN
Wilton, Conn.


INSIDE
Paving Path to New Justice
President Clinton met with top advisers on choosing a replacement for Justice Byron R. White, focusing not on names or qualifications but on the best timing and mechanics for the nomination.
Page 26.
Growing Up With H.I.V.
A growing number of children born with H.I.V. are surviving longer, even into their teens, raising new medical issues and a host of difficult psychological questions.
Page 33.
States Also Raising Taxes
Once again following the Federal Government's lead, more than a dozen states are raising taxes on their more affluent citizens, or at least thinking about it.
Page 28.
Budget Cuts and the Parks
After three years of budget cuts, New York City's parks are facing problems due to deferred maintenance and a shrinking work force, parks officials and advocates say.
Page 33.
Summer Break, Too Early
In Kalkaska, Mich., school will end next Wednesday, nearly three months early, unless the state devises a last-minute rescue plan.
Page 20.


POSTINGS: New B.I.D. Headquarters; Straightening Out Union Sq. Area
The 14th Street-Union Square Business Improvement District couldn't be happier with its new office at 223 East 14th Street, between Second and Third Avenues.
The 750-square-foot storefront, renting for $1,200 in a five-story 1890 tenement, once the Grafton, is next to the former New Way Deli, a drug den shut down last year.
"We've done things from the edge, now we're going to have to live there, too," said Robert W. Walsh, executive director of the 14th Street- Union Square Local Development Corporation and the district, which covers First Avenue to Avenue of the Americas and Union Square.


Fighting for the Votes of the Nonvoters
Any American steeped in the culture of student council democracy and Washington field trips had to be befuddled last week by the Senate's invective-splattered debate over what seemed civics book legislation: the motor-voter bill.
The bill sets up procedures to register millions of new voters at government offices and by mail.
Its message to grown-ups is the same that was drummed into them years before by high school social studies teachers: Get out and vote.
Yet the Senate endured two weeks of ugly filibuster before it passed the bill, 62 to 37.
What was there to argue about?
Every clause and comma, for starters.
But the mud wrestle was mostly over how to craft a law that would fatten the ranks of new Democratic voters at the expense of Republicans -- or, if one was a Republican, vice versa.


...And the Sanctity of Resistance
THE CHURCH AND THE LEFT
By Adam Michnik.
Edited and translated by David Ost. 301 pp.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. $24.95.


'The Way Things Ought to Be'
To the Editor:
As a member of the culturally handicapped, socially offensive and all-around despicable crowd of losers that has found at least one member of the news media, in Rush Limbaugh, who does not forever live in the land of George Orwell, I hoped Walter Goodman could address the ideas expounded in "The Way Things Ought to Be" (Feb. 21).
But the review consisted of the same wearying condescension that should be expected from the religious left.
The contempt Mr.
Goodman feels toward those who do not find solace in the superiority of indecision is best described as follows: What is the definition of a bigot?
Anyone who is winning an argument with a liberal.
STEVEN P. SORENSON Hinsdale, Ill.


Sun Signs Of Spring
A burst of color is anticipating spring's arrival.
The serape jacket, poncho or skirt, with its familiar bands of Southwestern sunset colorings -- blazing reds, oranges, yellows and streaks of turquoise blue -- is being worn from upper Fifth Avenue to Greenwich Village.
There are boxy jackets that slip comfortably over suits or sweaters, ponchos to envelop the wearer and long wrap skirts that make the most of the serape's colored striations.


Business Diary/March 14-19
THE ECONOMY A House Cheer for the Budget Plan; Next: The Messy Part  So far, so good for the Clinton vision of the economic future.
In a ringing show of unity, nearly all the House Democrats came into line behind their President last week, as the House passed his broad deficit-cutting plan with a solid majority.
With Senate action expected this week, final passage is possible before lawmakers break for Easter.
With a goal of cutting the $300 billion deficit to below $200 billion in four years, the resolution would set firm limits on total spending and taxes.
In a sense, though, this is the easy part.
A family might calmly decide to put a firm limit on, say, spending for food, but then find it a lot harder to pass by the steak counter and head for the rice and beans.
Individual committees must soon climb into the ring to wrestle this beast, trying to translate a sweeping, faceless mandate into a nasty spending cut here, a biting tax increase there.
"The real budget work will be done in the trenches," said Representative Robert Michel.
Will unity last?
Taking a High-Tech Look at Meat


SURFACING
PETS --
Dog Beanies:
Like some parents who force their children into fashion victimhood with tiny cowboy boots and the like, some pet owners are turning their pets into mini-humans with mini-hats that are modeled after hunting caps, leather biker hats (complete with chain) and nerdy propeller caps.
Chester, above, strikes a cool pose with his neon-orange visor with shades attached.
LANGUAGE --
Trustafarian:
A young adult, usually white, definitely wealthy, who is inclined toward neo-hippie styles of clothes, Rastafarian hairstyles, world music and pot.
Variations include the Telluride ski bum (Patagonia meets dreadlocks), and the London night crawler (Sloane Ranger meets grunge).
DRINKS --
Clear beer:
The "clear" revolution in product marketing rolls on: antiperspirants, dishwashing liquids, mouthwashes, colas and, now, Miller Clear and Zima Clearmalt, a malt beverage from Coors.
Hey, what about that stuff that comes out of the faucet?


Jennifer Blum, Paul Weinschenk
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Blum of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Lisa Blum, to Paul Stephen Weinschenk, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Weinschenk of Charlottesville, Va.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Blum, 26, is a law clerk in the Washington law firm of Arnold &amp; Porter and a law student at Catholic University.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Bangser Klein Rocca &amp; Blum.
Her mother, Barbara B. Blum, is the president of the nonprofit Foundation for Child Development in New York.


MARCH 14-20: The Trade Center Bombing; Restorative Work, Incendiary Words
As the investigation of the World Trade Center bombing produced indictments and new international intrigue last week, life in the complex began to return to normal, or at least something closer to it.
The authorities began allowing tenants to return to the complex's Tower Two, with Governor Cuomo leading the way by reclaiming his 57th-floor offices.


The High Price of Hate
HATE ON TRIAL
The Case Against America's Most Dangerous Neo-Nazi.
By Morris Dees and Steve Fiffer.
Illustrated. 280 pp.
New York: Villard Books. $21.


The Executive Computer; The Latest Microsoft Venture? Accounting Software
The Microsoft Corporation has introduced a Windows accounting program for small businesses that it prefers to call a business management tool.
That's because "accounting" is one of those words that causes many small-business owners to reach for the aspirin.
But whatever its name, Microsoft Profit for Windows is a relatively painless, training-wheels accounting package for home offices and businesses with 25 or fewer employees.


Wall Street; Mutual Funds That Cry Foul Copy
IT must be the irritating weather, because it certainly isn't as if business is bad.
Whatever the reason, a few players in the mutual fund industry are getting a bit touchy when bad press comes their way.
The Vanguard Group filed suit on Feb. 11 against the investment newsletter The Vanguard Adviser, a 2-year-old publication with 15,000 subscribers.
Though trademark infringements were cited as reason for the suit, it happens that the newsletter's editor has been an occasional critic of Vanguard, perhaps raising the hackles of Vanguard's chairman, John Bogle.


A Slow, Methodical Calming of the Mind
The problem began for Maria one night five years ago when her boyfriend answered his apartment doorbell and a man burst in -- perhaps a drug dealer, but Maria never knew for sure -- and knocked him to the floor.
Maria threw herself over her boyfriend; a bullet, meant for him, hit her in the shoulder.
As she tells the story, Maria turns, pulls back the sleeve of her shirt, and reveals a puckered scar near the top of her left shoulder.
"The bullet cut two nerves," Maria says.
"My whole arm was completely paralyzed from my shoulder to my hand. It was curled up next to me." She pulls her left arm in like a furled wing to demonstrate.


Jets Know: If You Pay, They'll Come
Amid all the recent love-ins in which the Jets paraded out 30-ish former Pro Bowl players, there was this unspoken possibility: Any one of them, or all of them, could be around for only one season, despite multiyear contracts.
It all depends on a number of factors, including the following:


A Couple Of Fallacies
To the Editor:
Congratulations on Michael Kimmelman's article about the risks versus the benefits of moving art  [ "When Art Takes Wing, Cross Your Fingers," March 7 ] .
I was pleased to see the balance in his understanding of the extraordinary precautions and technology that are brought to bear these days, and the risks that obtain when art does
not
move.


Grappling With Feminism and Femininity
ONE show by female artists does not necessarily deserve another, but two may merit comparison.
A current example is "My/Self: Your/Other" and "Female Body Parts: From Geography to Fetish." The first is on view at the Castle Gallery at the College of New Rochelle; the second is at Longwood Arts Gallery in the Bronx.
Though both address the issue of woman as victim, the first is more genteel than the second -- as indicated by the titles.
Susan Canning, the curator of "My/Self: Your/Other" and an associate professor of art history at the college, concedes in an essay that women have made progress but that they must still remember "who makes the rules." Nevertheless, Dr.
Canning says the 15 artists she has selected "offer a diverse vision of identity inspired by personal experience and conviction rather than by the outdated formulas and tired conventions that the dominant culture continues to sustain."


Commercial Property: The Bombing Aftermath; Landlords Act to Bolster Both Safety and Security
THE aftershocks of the World Trade Center explosion continue to ripple through the metropolitan commercial real estate market as tenants seek reassurance that what happened there cannot happen to them.
"Every building has kicked up security at least a notch, and some a lot more than that," said John C. Santora, a director of management at Cushman &amp; Wakefield, which manages 85 buildings in New York.


So Why Aren't There More Rich 7th Graders?
BEATING THE STREET
The Best-selling Author of "One Up on Wall Street" Shows You How to Pick Winning Stocks and Develop a Strategy for Mutual Funds.
By Peter Lynch with John Rothchild.  318 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


Amy S. Berger, David S. Collins
June wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Berger of Trumbull, Conn., for their daughter Amy Sharyn Berger and David Scott Collins, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Collins of Huntington Station, L.I.


BEST SELLERS: March 21, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he commits suicide, presents serious problems for an 11-year-old boy.
2
1
32
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
2
4
THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The fourth and concluding volume in a series about a fantasy land.
4
2
THE CHILDREN OF MEN, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $22.) In 2021, when Britain is a police state and the human race is approaching its end, an Oxford historian struggles with his fate.
5
5
2
NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) In Victorian-era Minnesota, a servant hopes to win an heiress's heart by helping her family win a yacht race.
6
4
7
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a psychopathic serial killer in Washington.
7
3
8
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $23.) The case of a woman journalist charged with killing an eminent novelist.
8
6
29
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
9
10
17
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
10
8
5
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) A series of fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905.
11
7
9
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
12
13
2
TO GREEN ANGEL TOWER, by Tad Williams. (DAW, $25.) The third and concluding volume in the fantasy series "Memory, Sorrow and Thorn."
13 *
1
MCNALLY'S RISK, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $22.95.) The sleuth Archy McNally investigates the history of a Palm Beach woman and the mysterious deaths that are linked to her.
14
9
37
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
15
3
DISNEY'S ALADDIN, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works/Penguin USA, $6.98.) An illustrated retelling of the ancient story of a street boy and a genie who provides unexpected experiences.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians, scientists, therapists and patients about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
2
2
27
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
3
32
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
4
5
3
OFFICIAL AND CONFIDENTIAL, by Anthony Summers. (Putnam, $25.95.) The life of J. Edgar Hoover, head of the F.B.I. from 1924 to 1972.
5
4
18
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
6
6
40
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
7
2
ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA, by John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Investigations into the geological history of California.
8
1
PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, by Paul Kennedy. (Random House, $25.) A Yale historian assays social and political forces and how they will affect the future.
9
7
26
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
10
8
14
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
11
10
4
MARLENE DIETRICH, by Maria Riva. (Knopf, $27.50.) The legendary actress as remembered by her daughter.
12
11
5
AROUND THE CRAGGED HILL, by George F. Kennan. (Norton, $22.95.) Philosophical meditations on the world and its future.
13 *
16
9
NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.
14
12
7
MAKING THE MUMMIES DANCE, by Thomas Hoving. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The reminiscences of the former director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
15
14
8
LIBERATION MANAGEMENT, by Tom Peters. (Knopf, $27.50.) How American industry is reorganizing to deal with changing times.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Advice about investing in stocks and mutual funds.
2
1
54
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $15.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
3
2
36
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf from a legendary teacher.
4
3
4
COOKING WITH REGIS &amp; KATHIE LEE, by Regis Philbin and Kathie Lee Gifford with Barbara Albright. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips on cooking and more than 150 recipes from the talk show hosts.
5
5
54
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,997 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
HEISENBERG'S WAR: The Secret History of the German Bomb, by Thomas Powers. (Knopf, $27.50.) Did the Nobel laureate deliberately retard Germany's progress toward an atomic bomb?
Mr.
Powers, in this thorough, exciting book, argues that he did.
DEATH BENEFIT: A Lawyer Uncovers a Twenty-Year Pattern of Seduction, Arson, and Murder, by David Heilbroner. (Harmony/ Crown, $20.) How a straight-arrow lawyer ran to earth, despite the apathy of insurance companies and law enforcement agencies, the appalling psychopath who killed a client's daughter.
THE MISBEGOTTEN SON.
A Serial Killer and His Victims: The True Story of Arthur J. Shawcross, by Jack Olsen. (Delacorte, $21.95.) A veteran true-crime writer's fascinating and forceful account of a life devoted to torture, mutilation and homicide.
UNDUE INFLUENCE: The Epic Battle for the Johnson &amp; Johnson Fortune, by David Margolick. (Morrow, $23.) Mr.
Margolick, a Times reporter, skillfully explicates the fabulous litigation between the wife and the offspring of a man who left $402 million.
THE HEATHER BLAZING, by Colm Toibin. (Viking, $20.) A novel that explores the Irish national psyche, concentrated in the forces that collide and are reconciled within a single family.
EXPOSURE, by Kathryn Harrison. (Random House, $20.) This almost-didactic novel yields a thoughtful discussion of the artist's effect on the world as it narrates the breakdown of a famous photographer's daughter, her father's favorite model.
THE MARRIAGE OF CADMUS AND HARMONY, by Roberto Calasso. (Knopf, $25.) Greek mythology retold for the 90's, conspicuously lacking in the Victorian innocence and decorum that inform the versions most of us are familiar with.


How to Tell the Debt From the Deficit
To the Editor:
In "Perot Continues His Campaign on Capitol Hill" (front page, March 3), you once again mix up the debt and the deficit, referring to Ross Perot's pounding away at the evil of the $4 trillion Federal deficit.


Another Bridgeport Emerges As a Leader With a Past
WHEN the leaders of eight Connecticut cities met last month for what was described as a summit on violence, it seemed appropriate that Bridgeport was the site.
It has the highest per capita homicide rate in the state.
But forgetting the violence, which in Bridgeport is hard to do because of the unending series of crimes involving drugs and guns, particularly on its grimy East Side, the city has a terrible image.
It has evolved with such public embarrassments as its huge illegal dump known as Mount Trashmore, the attempt by a former mayor to throw the municipality into bankruptcy, and the furor that resulted when an arm of the Unification Church, led by the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon, bailed out the university that bears the city's name.
Neighborhood Pride
Despite all that, there is another Bridgeport.


Battery Park City Has a New Tenant (for a While)


Official Said to Be Leaving Leslie Fay
The chief financial officer of the Leslie Fay Companies is leaving his post, two company officials said yesterday, despite repeated statements by the company and its senior executives that he had no knowledge of the accounting scandal that has bedeviled the dress and sportswear maker since February.
The two officials and others familiar with the accounting fraud investigation, who all spoke on the condition of anonymity, said that John J. Pomerantz, the company's chairman and chief executive, and Michael Babcock, the president, had traveled to the company's administrative headquarters in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., on Friday to dismiss the financial officer, Paul F. Polishan.


U.N. Aide Seeks Deal on Stranded Serbs; Yugoslav Role in Bosnia
In an operation that demonstrates the extent of their logistical coordination, the Yugoslav Army and Serbian nationalist forces have in effect cordoned off Bosnian territory around besieged Srebrenica.
Throughout the war in Bosnia, the Serbian-dominated Yugoslav Army and the Serbian militia in Bosnia have said there is no link, logistical or otherwise, between them.
The current operation against Muslims living in and around Srebrenica buttresses the contention of Bosnia's Muslim-led Government that the Serbs rely heavily on Yugoslav military might and supplies.


Clinton and Foreign Issues: Spasms of Attention
The subject was Haiti and the President was not happy.
Gathered around the Cabinet table in the Roosevelt Room, Mr.
Clinton's foreign policy advisers had just presented him with their latest proposals for restoring democracy to Haiti, in advance of the President's meeting with the exiled Haitian President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Emily's List Showed What Democracy Can Do; Threatened?
To the Editor:
Emily's List was so successful last year in electing pro-choice Democratic women to the House and Senate that it re-energized the efforts of other groups such as the Women's Campaign Fund and the National Women's Political Caucus (both bipartisan) and the newer WISH List (Republican pro-choice) to support a record number of female candidates.


In His Mind's Eye and to Others, Justice Cuomo?
IT was the summer of 1956 and Judge Adrian P. Burke's law clerks, both graduates of St.
John's University, were about to begin rooming together at the Wellington Hotel in Albany around the corner from the Court of Appeals.
They were struggling young men of different temperaments who shared a love of the law.
Shortly after the junior clerk arrived, though, Judge Burke expressed a reservation.
"I think you're going to have to take him in hand," the judge told his senior clerk, who had already grasped the younger man's obsession.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Southeast; Willard Puts the W. In Front of Kentucky
Close to midnight on Saturday, Ralph Willard sat in a darkened, closed-off section of the hotel dining room.
As Western Kentucky fans scurried back and forth, carrying their celebrations into the lobby, Willard, the third-year coach of the Hilltoppers, sipped on a diet soda and savored a phone conversation he had had moments ago with Rick Pitino, his close friend and former boss with the Knicks and at the University of Kentucky.
During the conversation, Pitino had been ecstatic.
Five hours earlier, Willard's Hilltoppers had pulled off one of the major upsets of the N.C.A.A. tournament, defeating Seton Hall, 72-68, in the Southeast Regional.


German Rates: How Strong a Tonic?
Germany's latest reduction of interest rates is a needed tonic for Western Europe's ailing economies.
But Germany's neighbors, and indeed entire European industries, remain afflicted by problems that will slow an economic recovery.
The Bundesbank's decision on Thursday to cut its discount rate by half a point, to 7.5 percent, continues a policy of small, cautious reductions by the powerful central bank, and will make it easier for other European nations to stimulate their economies by encouraging borrowing and business expansion.


Amnesty in Salvador Denounced As Against Spirit of Peace Pact
One day after the passage of a sweeping amnesty for people implicated in atrocities during El Salvador's 12-year civil war, opposition politicians and religious leaders denounced the measure as a dangerous departure from the spirit of the country's peace agreements.
Most Government opponents had long expected the amnesty, and many even supported it.
But many were dismayed by the refusal of rightist Nationalist Republican Alliance, the governing party, to commit itself to reforms urged by the United Nations in exchange for broad support for the amnesty.


Food Pesticide Ban Won't Reduce Cancer
To the Editor:
In "No More Pesticides for Dinner" (Op-Ed, March 9), Al Meyerhoff of the Natural Resources Defense Council advocates legislation to regulate pesticide levels in food.
Such legislation would result in a negligible benefit to public health.


DOCTORS PLANNING CAPITAL PROTESTS
A thousand doctors are expected to pour into the nation's capital this week in an upscale version of a protest march, giving doctors a chance to express their views on overhauling the health-care system.
Since the march is organized by the influential American Medical Association, the doctors will get an audience on Wednesday with Donna E. Shalala, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and a number of other officials of the Clinton Administration, as well as leaders from both houses of Congress.


Review/Theater; A Family of Women Conjured Up by One
To the outsider, the shore town that is the setting for Susan Van Allen's "Jersey Girls" would seem unremarkable.
For Ms.
Van Allen, it is a microcosm filled with the inescapable reality that no one ever escapes from there.
Even the one young woman who has pursued a professional career in San Francisco always carries a sense and a sound of New Jersey with her.
One day in California, to her embarrassment, she actually finds herself asking for "a cuppa cawfee." The accent is only half of it.
The approach in this solo show is related to that of John Leguizamo, but with a gentler satiric spirit.
The play is running at the One Dream theater in TriBeCa through Wednesday.
With artful brush strokes, Ms.
Van Allen embodies five Italian-American women: relatives and friends living in one tight little community, where they are bound by the limits of their aspirations and by the demands of their family relationships.
Shifting from one to another, she conjures a resonant group portrait.


In Merger, Chemical Is Mr. Nice Guy
If bank mergers were a race, the Chemical Banking Corporation would be a lap behind.
Three of the country's four largest banks were formed by huge mergers negotiated in 1991, and Chemical has been the slowest of the three in combining branch systems.


College Seedings Favor Maine, Lake Superior
Maine, the Hockey East champion with the best overall record in the nation, was seeded first in the East for the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I tournament.
The event begins on Friday at two sites, the Centrum at Worcester, Mass., and Joe Louis Arena in Detroit.
The Black Bears (38-1-2) defeated Boston University, 5-2, for the Hockey East crown on Saturday night and thus received an automatic bid, as did the three other conference champions: Clarkson of the ECAC, Lake Superior State of the Central Association and Minnesota of the Western Association.


Lisa Mandel, Robert Golden
Lisa Mandel, a daughter of Frederick and Patricia Mandel of New York, was married yesterday to Robert Golden, a son of Jerri Golden of San Francisco and the late Daniel Golden.
Rabbi Robert Alper officiated at the Manhattan Penthouse in New York.
Ms.
Mandel, who is keeping her name, is a producer of educational features for the Prodigy Services Company, the on-line computer information services company, in White Plains.
She graduated from the State University at Buffalo.
Her parents are partners in the New York law firm of Mandel &amp; Mandel.


Abroad at Home; The Catharsis Of Truth
In the 1980's the United States spent $6 billion supporting a Salvadoran Government that was dominated by killers.
We armed them, trained their soldiers and covered up their crimes.
All that is made painfully clear by the report of the Truth Commission set up as part of the peace settlement in El Salvador.
The commission found that Salvadoran military and political leaders were responsible for most of the atrocities it investigated, the guerrillas for a smaller number.


Dance in Review
'A Tin Soldier on the Seashore of Jerusalem' Arie Bursztyn  The Kitchen


Books of The Times; A Novel Within a Novel and the Ex-Wife Who Both Reads and Learns
Tony and Susan By Austin Wright 334 pages. Baskerville Publishers. $20.


State Without Acid Rain Is Dealt Another Problem
When Congress established strict rules in 1990 to control acid rain by ordering coal-burning power plants to reduce emissions of sulfur dioxide, the managers of the South Carolina Electric and Gas Company estimated they would have to spend up to $300 million over five years to comply.
To say they were angry understates their reaction.
The reason: There is no acid rain in South Carolina because the state has no problem with sulfur dioxide.
Winds generally blow anything in South Carolina's air out to sea, not to nearby states.


Erika A. White and Gary Glass
Erika Alexandra White, the daughter of Barry and Marcia White of Newburgh, N.Y., was married yesterday to Gary Glass, a son of Richard and Jane Weisglass of New York.
Rabbi Hirschel Jaffe officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 23, graduated from Emory University.
She is a law student at Fordham University.
Her father is the senior vice president of Lightron of Cornwall Inc., a lighting company in New Windsor, N.Y.


U.S. Shift On S.&amp; L. Asset Sales
The Clinton Administration has begun a wide-ranging review of the strategies used to sell off properties seized from bankrupt savings and loan associations, with an eye toward broadening opportunities for smaller investors, women and minorities.
The current approach, developed by the Bush Administration, was based on the premise that the faster the assets were unloaded, the better off the Government would be.
To achieve quick sales, the Resolution Trust Corporation would often bundle properties and loans into large portfolios to be bought by big investors.


Essay; Obey The Law Of S.&amp; D.
In the long-ago days when I was a hotshot flack, I hired a young woman to place our clients on radio and television shows.
She was terrific in ways it is no longer correct to use as criteria -- quick mind, great legs, go-get-'em attitude -- and after six months at $65 a week, she asked for a $10 raise.
Look, kid, I said with insufferable avuncularity, you deserve the 10 bucks.
But there's this economic thing that restrains me called the Law of Supply and Demand.


CLINTON CONSIDERS MEASURES TO HELP TROUBLED AIRLINES
The Clinton Administration, seeking to reverse the financial plight of the nation's airlines, is considering loan guarantees and tax relief for the companies and the lifting of restrictions on foreign ownership of airlines.
The proposals are part of a broad approach that includes creation of a 15-member commission that will have 90 days to come up with recommendations.
The commission has been authorized by the House; the Senate is expected to approve the idea shortly.


A Window on the Fast-Growing Audience of Asian-Americans
In a spare 600-square-foot office in Manhattan with three computers, a laser printer, a fax machine and two phone lines, an unusual small publication called A. Magazine has been started.
The magazine, a quarterly that made its debut in August, is a typical blend of commentary, fashion and news.
What sets A. Magazine apart is its market: It is written for and about Asian-Americans.


Susan Levine, Barry Kahane
Dr.
Susan Melanie Levine and Dr.
Barry Andrew Kahane, dentists in Forest Hills, Queens, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Eliezer Teitz performed the ceremony at Congregation Kneseth Israel in West Lawrence, L.I.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from Fairleigh Dickinson University.
She and her husband received dental degrees from Boston University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard J. Levine of Wyckoff, N.J.
Her father, a pharmacist, owns the Plaza Pharmacy in Closter, N.J.


METRO DIGEST
FAR FROM TRADE CENTER, FEW RECALL SHEIK Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman has become an object of great interest to American officials since three men who worshiped at a mosque where he preached in Jersey City have been arrested in connection with the bombing of the World Trade Center.
According to Egyptian and Western security officials, the sheik commands a limited following of about 10,000 to 15,000 young supporters in his native Egypt.
But in the dusty streets surrounding the Hadqa area in the lush oasis town of Fayoum, where Sheik Abdel Rahman's family members live, neighbors and merchants claim they have never heard of the sheik.
B4.
SUSPECTS SEEN TOGETHER ON EVE OF BLAST Witnesses have told Federal investigators that they spotted two of the suspects in the World Trade Center bombing together on the night before the blast, Federal officials said.
That account, if true, could add another important piece to the puzzle as it helps investigators into the bombing fill in the critical hours and events between the afternoon of Feb. 25, when they believe a van, rented by one of the suspects, Mohammed A. Salameh, was seen near a Jersey City storage building where the authorities say the bomb was mixed, and on Feb. 26, when the bomb, inside the van, exploded inside the trade center garage in Manhattan.
B4.


Schizophrenia Doesn't Fit the Job Description
To the Editor:
The misuse of the word "schizophrenic" in "Will Janet Reno Run Justice?" (editorial, March 12), on the new Attorney General, illustrates again your unawareness of the great differences as illnesses between schizophrenia and multiple personality disorder.


Giants Pick Up Bailey From Bills
After hesitating to get their feet wet, the Giants have jumped into the new free-agency pool with a big splash, signing Buffalo Bills linebacker Carlton Bailey to a three-year contract for about $5.2 million.
Despite his relegation to a backup role with Buffalo last season, Bailey becomes the Giants' highest-paid linebacker, above the likes of Lawrence Taylor and Carl Banks.


Sports of The Times; Big Freeze Brings Down a Key Ranger
ALL week long in Murmansk-on-the-Hudson, the glacier refused to yield.
The stricken city could not provide enough laborers or implements to hack away at the encrusted mounds.
Little old ladies staggered with their shopping bags.
Children clawed their way over the ice banks.
Somebody was going to get hurt.
You just knew it.
Roger Neilson had been right all along.
While he was coaching the Rangers, Neilson had tried to get all the Rangers to move out of this dangerous place, this Manhattan.
He knew that the big city is not safe for hockey players.


Treasury to Sell Bills and Notes This Week
The schedule of Treasury financings this week includes today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills, followed by auctions of two- and five-year notes.
Traders said that by late Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.95 percent and the rate on a six-month bill was 3.06 percent.
On Wednesday, the Government will auction a two-year note, which was being offered on Friday at a price to yield 3.97 percent when it is issued.
The five-year note, which is to be auctioned on Thursday, was being offered at a price to yield 5.20 percent.


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about Jay E. Raeben, founder of Visual Information Systems Inc., omitted his last title with the company.
He was chairman.


State Without Acid Rain Is Dealt Another Problem
When Congress established strict rules in 1990 to control acid rain by ordering coal-burning power plants to reduce emissions of sulfur dioxide, the managers of the South Carolina Electric and Gas Company estimated they would have to spend up to $300 million over five years to comply.
To say they were angry understates their reaction.
The reason: There is no acid rain in South Carolina because the state has no problem with sulfur dioxide.
Winds generally blow anything in South Carolina's air out to sea, not to nearby states.


Press in Moscow Is Choosing Sides
"Hang in there, Boris Nikolayevich," a television announcer, Svetlana Sorokina, said encouragingly in the middle of the Channel 2 nightly news, one of the more obvious statements of support for the President broadcast today.
At an emergency session of Parliament today, legislators accused the press of taking a "pro-presidential position." After months of pleading for more objective reporting, some legislators have urged that parliament control television stations.


Corrections
An entry in the People listing on the Media Business page on Tuesday about the appointment of James Putnam as chief of staff of Media Inc. misstated his previous title.
He was a vice president at Corinthian Media.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Clinton Administration is considering loan guarantees and tax relief to reverse the fortunes of the nation's airlines.
The proposals are part of a broad activist approach that would include lifting restrictions on the foreign ownership of U.S. carriers.  [ Page A1. ]
The Administration has begun a wide-ranging review of the strategies used to sell off properties seized from bankrupt savings and loans, with an eye toward broadening opportunities for smaller investors, women and minorities.  [ D1. ]


Meulens Waits It Out With Yanks, but Hopes for Steady Work
Hensley Meulens sat alone in the dugout at Fort Lauderdale Stadium today, his eyes fixed on the field and on his future.
He sat and he thought and he wondered aloud about how the month would end, how the season would begin.
But he offered no answers, and the sunglasses he wore seemed to be there just to hide his emotions.


Europe Cautiously Supports Yeltsin
Germany, France and other European countries sided cautiously today with President Boris N. Yeltsin as the elected leader of Russia in his showdown with the Russian Parliament, a holdover from the Communist era.
In statements that reflected a consensus that Mr.
Yeltsin was the best hope for continued democratic and economic change, European leaders expressed hope that the confrontation would be short-lived and peaceful.


Carla Hills Forms Firm
Carla A. Hills, who was the United States trade representative throughout the Bush Administration, has announced the formation of her own international business consulting firm, Hills &amp; Company.
Joining Mrs.
Hills will be Julius L. Katz, the senior deputy United States trade representative for the last four years, and two top career officials from her former agency.


Dance in Review
'The Gag' Annie-B Parson and Big Dance Theater Company Bessie Schonberg Theater


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Southeast; Kentucky Has That Final-4 Look
Utah Coach Rick Majerus did not want to name a team in the country that he thinks could beat the Kentucky Wildcats.
It's too big a risk.
Majerus thinks his own squad is a good team, perhaps a great team, but the final score today was Kentucky 83, Utah 62.
This game was no aberration.
Not for Kentucky, which hasn't won by fewer than 10 points since heading to the Southeastern Conference tournament.
This weekend, the first of the N.C.A.A. tournament, so many favorites had trouble.
Indiana struggled, and so did Michigan.
Duke, Arizona and Seton Hall lost.


World Economies


Review/Pop; Along with the Soul, There's a Heart of Glitter
James Brown may be known as the godfather of soul, but the 64-year-old singer is also an all-American entertainer in the gaudy, Las Vegas tradition of Elvis Presley, Liberace and Wayne Newton.
The show that he put on at Radio City Music Hall on Friday was part old-time soul revue, part modern showroom extravaganza, complete with glittering costumes and sexy dancers and the singer presiding over the festivities like a former heavyweight champion at his own tribute.
If vocally and acrobatically Mr.
Brown is but a shadow of his former self, what surprises is his continued agility considering his age.
He didn't attempt any of his famous leaps and splits.
The best he could manage was a couple of well-timed whirls and a few moments of fancy footwork and knee gyrations.


Review/Music; A Tribute To Female Composers
On Tuesday night at the Kosciuszko Foundation, the Aviva Players honored Women's History Month with a concert devoted to female composers.
By no means reflecting the full breadth of achievement in its chosen field, the program tended toward the intimate and unambitious.
Cecile Chaminade's "Concertino," for flute and piano, and Mrs.
H.
H.
A.
Beach's Three Pieces, for cello and piano, were both agreeable turn-of-the-century confections.
Jane L. Komarov's "Suite From 'My Name Is Natasha' " and Jacqueline B. Hairston's bluesy "Melismodal Suite," both for piano, were witty and bluesy, respectively.
Tamara Bliss's Three Pieces for piano and Beth Anderson's "Doctor Blood's Mermaid Lullaby," for cello and piano, were both nondescript.
A trio for flute, cello and piano by Marcelle de Manziarly (1899-1989) began in a spacious post-impressionist idiom, although it turned dull in a concluding "ecossaise." Mira J. Spektor, Aviva's director, contributed an aria from her opera in progress, "Mary Shelley," and also an operettalike number, "Guinevere Among the Grapefuit Peels"; these were hard to judge out of context but seemed lyrically underpowered.


Shuttle Program's Cost Fuels Effort to Streamline
The nation's fleet of winged spaceships appears increasingly adrift without a real job, even as one of the ships is being prepared for launching Monday morning on a nine-day mission.
The enormous cost of the shuttles, now estimated at up to $1.7 billion a flight, with a total expenditure to date of more than $80 billion, is driving the Clinton Administration away from the fleet amid a rush to streamline the nation's space program.


Intelsat to Lease Russian Satellites
Scrambling to meet soaring demand and fend off new competitors in the booming Asia and Pacific markets, Intelsat, the global satellite consortium, is planning to lease three new Russian spacecraft.
The deal is the first in which Intelsat, which is owned by organizations representing more than 120 governments, has relied on satellites owned by an outside organization.
And the deal comes as Intelsat, while facing a a worldwide shortage in satellite capacity, contends with intense competition from undersea fiber-optic lines and new satellite rivals.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: West; Michigan Rallies For Narrow Escape
Michigan took today's first half for granted and then spent the rest of the afternoon sweating profusely.
Forced into a confusing overtime period by U.C.L.A., the Wolverines won, 86-84, on guard Jimmy King's disputed rebound basket with 1.5 seconds remaining and advanced to the Round of 16 of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
U.C.L.A.
Coach Jim Harrick sullenly wondered afterward if he had been swindled.
His reserve center, Rodney Zimmerman, converted 1 of 2 free throws to tie the game at 84-84 with 48.4 seconds left, setting up a finish that begged for instant replay.


Review/Pop; A Party Based on the Grit of Rap
In the factionalized world of hip-hop, Naughty by Nature has pulled off a nearly impossible maneuver: garnering pop hits while holding on to street-level credibility.
Most rappers have to choose one or the other, and hardcore rappers regularly vilify their pop colleagues.
But with "O.P.P.," based on a pop hook from the Jackson Five, and with the new "Hip Hop Hooray," Naughty by Nature has made itself heard on pop radio stations, while its concert on Tuesday night at Radio City Music Hall flaunted the raw language and ghetto-centrism of hardcore hip-hop.
As one song title from the band's new album "19 Naughty III" (Tommy Boy) puts it, "The Hood Comes First."


Walter Wechsler, 79, An Ex-Budget Director
Walter Wechsler, a former New Jersey State budget director, died Friday at Robert Wood Johnson Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J.
He was 79.
The Associated Press reported that he died of complications from diabetes and of kidney failure.


Perot Calls For Politics Of Renewal
Ross Perot bought himself another $500,000 of network television time tonight and served notice on American voters in general, and the Washington establishment in particular, that he intended to keep playing the political game, all-out.
"It's time to pick up a shovel and clean out the barn," he said as he concluded a 30-minute program on NBC in which he roundly lambasted Congress as greedy, wasteful and unethical and called on President Clinton to lead an unrelenting fight for deficit cuts and government change.


Russia and Realpolitik
As events unfold in Moscow with dizzying speed and unpredictability, the Administration is struggling to temper its strong support for President Boris N. Yeltsin with a dose of Realpolitik.
Ultimately, the Administration knows that what is most important in Russia -- the continuation of democratic and economic reform -- transcends the personal fortunes of one man.


Lid on Malpractice Gets It Wrong
To the Editor:
Contrary to the unnamed Clinton Administration officials you cite in "Clinton May Seek Lid on Doctor Fees and Liability Suits" (front page, March 9), medical malpractice restrictions will not reduce our country's health care expenditures.
Malpractice insurance premiums constitute less than 1 percent of this country's health care expenditures.


No Headline
A sewer system isn't sexy.
It's expensive to fix, and nobody wants to hear about it.
So people focused on what they understand -- and they understand that sewage and the sea don't seem nice together. -- HOWARD GOLUB, chief engineer of the Interstate Sanitary Commission.  [ B8:1. ]


Emily's List Showed What Democracy Can Do; Monumental Work
To the Editor:
"Emily's Loophole" (March 10) fails to recognize the monumental work the members of Emily's List have done since 1986 in helping to triple the number of Democratic women in the House and elect the only five Democratic women in the history of this country ever to serve in the Senate in their own right.


Motor Vehicles Moves to Shed Its Poor Image
Aware that they run New York State's most hated bureaucracy, officials in the Department of Motor Vehicles are planning a broad overhaul of services that promises to make the agency trimmer, more efficient and much more user-friendly within 18 months.
The officials, who have requested $6 million from the Legislature for the changes, say that their primary aim is to improve customer service and that they hope to eventually shed the unpleasant image that has long been associated with their agency.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9 RUSSIAN CONGRESS STRIKES BACK
A shaken Russian Parliament resolved to take Boris N. Yeltsin to the Constitutional Court, but the angry legislators stopped short of directly moving against him or trying to block the emergency powers he claimed against them.
A1


A Welcome Signal on College Aid
Back in 1990, the Bush Administration ruled that colleges receiving Federal funds could not award scholarships based on race.
That set off a firestorm of criticism and confusion.
Now Education Secretary Richard Riley suggests he's prepared to ease the ban.
A final policy is still evolving, but the signal is encouraging.
For two decades, colleges have set aside special scholarship money to attract qualified minority students.
These special funds are enormously helpful to recruiters in attracting such students.


Mets Say 'Be Happy'; Pitchers Can't Quite
Bret Saberhagen has been without his best fastball.
Sid Fernandez today was under wraps, a return of tendinitis flaring in his left shoulder.
Dwight Gooden, his earned run average stuck at 10.50, has had one start scratched because of injury, another put off because of rain.
Frank Tanana, who warned everyone there would be days he would be hit hard, hasn't been hit softly yet.
So far, though, the Mets have derided suggestions of alarm about their starting pitching, barely acknowledging that concern of any kind could be raised.
The numbers don't mean much, the manager says.
The setbacks are frustrations, not obstacles, the pitching coach maintains.


Nicaraguan Hostages Set Free in Costa Rica
Five armed Nicaraguan men who seized their country's Embassy here on March 8 released the last of their hostages early today in exchange for a $250,000 ransom and passage out of the country, said Interior Minister Alfredo Mendieta of Nicaragua.
Around 12:45 A.M. the 10 remaining hostages were escorted from the Embassy by Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo of Nicaragua, who was one of the mediators, and others.


Clinton Visits Ill Father-in-Law in Arkansas


Corrections
An article and a headline on Tuesday about the arrest of a New York City Human Resources Administration employee on embezzlement charges described her job incorrectly.
The employee, Cynthia Greene, was initially a welfare caseworker, then a supervisor of caseworkers.


Tokyo Stocks Gain
Reuters Japanese stocks advanced today.
The Nikke index of 225 issues closed up 247.22 points, or 1.33 percent, at 18,784.39.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Ace Ltd., 14.2 million ordinary shares, J. P. Morgan Securities.
American Studios Inc., 3 million shares. Robinson-Humphrey.
Apache Corp., 5.3 million shares. Merrill Lynch.
Applied Signal Technology Inc., an initial public offering of 2.2 million common shares.
Cowen &amp; Co.
Autotote Corp., 3 million common shares. Oppenheimer &amp; Co.
Bankers Life Holdings, 15 million shares, 12 million in the U.S. Merrill Lynch.
Barefoot Inc., 1.5 million shares. William Blair &amp; Co.
Big B Inc., $35 million of convertible subordinated debentures due in 2003.
Morgan Keegan.
Biovail Corp.
Intl., an initial public offering of 2.5 million common shares.
Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
BRE Properties Inc.,1.5 million common shares. Dean Witter Reynolds.
Brookstone Inc., 2.75 million shares. Robertson Stephens.
Chico's Fas Inc., 1.4 million common shares. Robert W. Baird &amp; Co.
Commonwealth Associates Growth Fund Inc., 1.5 million common shares.
Commonwealth Associates.
Federal Realty Investment Trust, 2.5 million shares. Merrill Lynch.
First Data, 32 million common shares, 25 million in the U.S. Lehman Brothers.
Imco Recycling, 1.5 million common shares. Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Inco Homes Corp., 2.6 million shares. Montgomery Securities.
Information System Acquisition Corp., an initial public offering of 2 million units (1 common share and 2 redeembale warrants).
GKN Securities.
KBL Healthcare Acquisition Corp., 2.5 million units of specified-purpose acquisition return commitment securities (each consisting of 1 share and 2 redeemable warrants).
GKN Securities.
Kendall Square Research, 2.8 million shares. Alex. Brown &amp; Sons.
Life Partners Group Inc., 11.4 million shares, 9.12 million in the U.S.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Life USA Holding Inc., 4.5 million shares. Stephens Inc.
National Steel Corp., 10 million shares, J. P. Morgan Securities.
Parallan Computer Inc., 2 million shares. Montgomery Securities.
Transcor Waste Services Inc., 1 million shares. Whale Securities.
Urethane Technologies Inc., 1 million shares. Whale Securities.
WCT Communications Inc., 3.2 million shares. Oppenheimer &amp; Co.
Zebra Technologies, 2.63 million shares. William Blair &amp; Co.
Zonagen Inc., 1.35 million shares. Reich &amp; Co.
Source: MCM CorporateWatch. Ratings: Moody's/ Standard &amp; Poor's.


The Knick Steamroller Goes on a Sunday Drive
No matter who they play, the Knicks are having their way.
During an unbeaten March, the Knicks have played their finest basketball of the season.
They have been consistent enough to win nine consecutive games, a season-high winning streak.
They have been dominant enough to embarrass strong teams like Cleveland and San Antonio.
They have been focused enough to maintain the best record (45-18) in the Eastern Conference.
And they have been good enough to make the entire National Basketball Association take notice.


Corrections
A report in the Book Notes column on Wednesday about the cancellation of a book signing referred incorrectly to the Florida newspaper that had cast doubt on part of the book.
It is The Fort Lauderdale Sun-Sentinel.


Mexico City Has a Vote: Should It Have the Vote?
For years, as Luciano Ortiz has watched the potholes widen on the street outside his storefront office, the sewers overflow beneath it and the sidewalks crack alongside it, he has wondered: Where are the repairmen?
Where are the authorities?
"The problem," says Mr.
Ortiz, 53, who runs a referral service for lawyers in a working-class neighborhood, "is precisely that we don't elect anybody."


Amsterdam News's Blunt Publisher Still Has Visions of Running The Post
To many, the news that The New York Post's prospective owner, Abraham Hirschfeld, had agreed on Friday to rehire Pete Hamill, the newspaper's editor, seemed to suggest that there would be no role at the paper for Wilbert A. Tatum, the publisher of The Amsterdam News, whom Mr.
Hirschfeld had previously announced as his choice for editor.
But for Mr.
Tatum, there is no such assumption.
"I will be the co-publisher and editor in chief-designee," he said in an interview Friday night.
"As co-publisher, I am essentially going to be Pete's boss. As co-publisher, I am in a position of authority."


Tobacco Country Is Quaking Over Cigarette Tax Proposal
The farmers of tobacco country wear worried expressions these days.
Their concern is not their harvest prospects or even the campaigns of anti-smoking groups, whose efforts they have weathered for years.
Instead, this time the adversary perceived by the farmers, as well as the tobacco industry's manufacturers and brokers, is a far more potent one: the Clinton Administration.


The Iceman Warms to the Hot Hand
What George Gervin would have given for a shot at Patrick Ewing yesterday.
Actually, many shots, because when the Iceman got going, he was not about to settle for just a few.
"I tried to tell our guys, 'Ayy, this is New York, this is the place to market yourselves,' " said Gervin after the Knicks' 115-96 demolition of the Spurs yesterday.
"But it wasn't me out there."


U.N. Aide Seeks Deal on Stranded Serbs
Continuing his effort to protect residents trapped in the Muslim town of Srebrenica in eastern Bosnia, the United Nations military commander here sought today to negotiate an accord under which the Muslim-led Bosnian Government would allow hundreds of Serbs to leave the Government-held city of Tuzla.
In return, the Serbs would allow passage of food shipments to the besieged town of Srebrenica.


Natalie Gittelson, Morton Lachman
Natalie Gittelson, an author, was married yesterday to Morton B. Lachman, a television producer, director and writer.
Judge Jack Tenner, who is retired from State Superior Court in Los Angeles, performed the ceremony at the bridegroom's home in Malibu, Calif.
Mrs.
Lachman is an author of two books: "Dominus: A Woman Looks at Men's Lives" and "The Erotic Life of the American Wife." She graduated from New York University.
She is the daughter of the late Celia and Abraham H. Leavy.
Her father was the owner of Congress Textiles, a textile printing company in Hawthorne, N.J.


Far From Trade Center, Few but Family in Oasis Town Remember a Sheik
Abdallah, the 17-year-old son of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, gave the only palpable sign that someone in this little oasis town was aware that the blind sheik, a fiery cleric who the Egyptian authorities have accused of commanding a network of Islamic fundamentalist terrorists, once lived here with his two wives and eight children.
"He called Friday night," Abdallah said.


Harold Messing, 57, Entertainment Lawyer
Harold Messing, a lawyer specializing in the entertainment industry, died on Friday at Cedar Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 57 and lived in Beverly Hills, Calif.
His stepdaughter Shelley Cohn Schmidt said the cause was leukemia.


Traffic Alert
Alternate-side-of-the-street parking remains suspended through Saturday in all New York City boroughs, according to the Department of Transportation.


Miscellany
*
The Publishers Information Bureau, New York, said magazine advertising pages in February increased 4.6 percent from February 1992, to 13,385.9.
For the first two months of 1993, pages rose 4.2 percent, to 23,371.8.


State Without Acid Rain Is Dealt Another Problem
When Congress established strict rules in 1990 to control acid rain by ordering coal-burning power plants to reduce emissions of sulfur dioxide, the managers of the South Carolina Electric and Gas Company estimated they would have to spend up to $300 million over five years to comply.
To say they were angry understates their reaction.
The reason: There is no acid rain in South Carolina because the state has no problem with sulfur dioxide.
Winds generally blow anything in South Carolina's air out to sea, not to nearby states.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Sheehan Wins Event, Hall of Fame Spot  Patty Sheehan, shooting a three-under-par 70 in the final round of the Standard Register Ping in Phoenix, won her 30th tournament yesterday and qualified for the Ladies Profressional Golf Association Hall of Fame.
Sheehan, 36, played steadily while Dawn Coe-Jones, the third-round co-leader, faltered.
Sheehan, who earned $105,000, sank a 3-foot putt on No. 18 for the fifth birdie of her round and finished at 17-under 275.
Coe-Jones had a 75 and tied for second with Kris Teschetter, who shot a 69 and finished at 280.
Annika Sorenstam of Sweden, the 1991 N.C.A.A. champion from the University of Arizona, finished alone in fourth at 281 in her second professional event.
Sheehan, who joined the tour in 1980, won her first tournament in 1981, the Japan Classic, and has won at least one every season since.
Last year, she won at Rochester, in Toledo, Ohio, and the United States Women's Open in Oakmont, Pa. (AP)
Floyd, 22 Under for 3 Rounds, Wins: Raymond Floyd, sinking difficult birdie putts early on the back nine, shot an eight-under-par 64 yesterday to beat George Archer by five strokes and win the $550,000 Gulfstream Aerospace Invitational tournament in Indian Wells, Calif.
Floyd, who started the day tied with Archer for the lead, had rounds of 65 on Friday and Saturday, giving him a 54-hole score of 194 -- 22-under on the Indian Wells Golf Resort course.
He earned $82,500.
Archer slipped to a 69 and a three-day total of 199.
Isao Aoki finished with a 66-200 for third.(AP) N.B.A.
Pistons Complete Coast Sweep  Reggie Lewis's season-high 37 points led Boston, but it took Sherman Douglas' driving layup in the final seconds to give the Celtics their victory in Portland Sunday night.
It completed a West Coast sweep of four games for the Celtics, who now have won five straight road games and six of their last seven.
Douglas's drive to the basket and layup with 9.2 seconds left gave Boston a 106-104 lead after Terry Porter's layup at the other end was blocked by Robert Parish.
Portland had a last shot as Mario Elie drove down the right lane with 3.2 seconds left.
But he slipped and lost the ball out of bounds. (AP) SuperSonics 100, Rockets 89: Gary Payton scored 27 points and Seattle held off a late Houston charge for its sixth straight victory over the Rockets.
It was Houston's second straight loss after Portland snapped its 15-game winning streak Friday night.
Seattle has won 16 of 19.
Hakeem Olajuwon's 32 points and 14 rebounds led Houston. (AP)
Pacers 109, Suns 108: Reggie Miller scored 26 points, including Indiana's last nine of the game, as the visiting Pacers defeated Phoenix to snap their nine-game road losing streak.
Phoenix, 28-4 at home, has lost only to Eastern Conference foes Chicago, Cleveland, New Jersey and Indiana in the new America West Arena.
Charles Barkley scored 38 points for the Suns and Kevin Johnson added 21. (AP)
Hornets 99, Timberwolves 95: Alonzo Mourning had 24 points and 14 rebounds yesterday as Charlotte beat the Timberwolves, 99-95, for their first franchise victory in Minneapolis.
Tyrone Bogues scored 5 points in the final 1 minute 7 seconds to help secure the Hornets' victory.
Larry Johnson had 20 points and 13 rebounds, and Dell Curry scored 21 points for Charlotte. (AP) Pistons 106, Lakers 101: Joe Dumars scored 11 of his 17 points in the fourth quarter as Detroit held off Los Angeles in Inglewood, Cal.
Reserve guards Gerald Glass and Danny Young added 16 and 15 points, respectively, as the Pistons came back from a recent home-court loss to the Lakers. (AP)
HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL  Hempstead Wins Title at Buzzer  Norris Bell's tap-in at the buzzer lifted Hempstead (23-1) to its third state public high school Class A championship yesterday, a 55-54 victory over Mount Vernon in Glen Falls, N.Y.
Bell followed up Larry Ford's missed 3-pointer after Ron Kemp's basket had given Mount Vernon (22-3) its first lead of the game, 54-53, with five seconds remaining.
On the final play, Glenn Grafton hit Ford with a half-court pass, and the sophomore's 21-foot bomb glanced off the rim and into the hands of Bell, another sophomore.
All three of Mount Vernon's three losses this season were decided at the buzzer. (AP) SOCCER  AC Milan Streak Ends at 58 Games  Parma scored a shocking 1-0 victory over AC Milan yesterday, ending the longest undefeated streak in Italian league history at 58 games.
The defeat at home for AC Milan ended the string that began with a 0-0 tie against Parma in May 1991.
Milan's last loss in the Italian league was against Bari, also in May 1991.
AC Milan recently lost in the Italian Cup to AS Roma. (AP)


Sampras Survives the Pain of It All
After an arduous week of tempests performed a hostile takeover of this tropical island and turned the Lipton Championships into more of a tragi-comedy than a competition, there came today a meteorologically academic final that featured, according to its winner, "not very good tennis."
But it was a sun-kissed, uninterrupted 1 hour 24 minutes of tennis, and the players and fans alike were grateful for so humane a conclusion to an epic 10 days of tournament tennis that unfolded like a disaster movie and left no participant undrenched.


Corrections
A report by Bloomberg Business News in the Company News column on Friday about a possible revision in the terms of the acquisition of more than half of the Immunex Corporation by the American Cyanamid Company misstated the rate by which the price paid to Immunex stockholders might be reduced.
The cash payment will be cut by 50 cents for every dollar under $40 that the share price of Immunex falls.


College Falters in Its Mission Amid Charges of Neglect
Drive through the gates of the state college here, and the woods and hills of the old Ambrose F. Clark estate recall a New England prep school.
It seems an ideal home for a college with a special mission: to be the flagship of racial diversity for the SUNY system.
But this is a troubled campus, where the buildings are deteriorating, the president is embattled and the college's commitment to minority students is being questioned.


Duke Coach Is Choked Up, but Not Sad
Once the end was inevitable, Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski stood in front of his bench and clapped.
"I was thanking my players," he said.


Witnesses Report Seeing Suspects on Eve of Blast
Witnesses have told Federal investigators that two of the suspects in the World Trade Center bombing were together the night before the blast, according to Federal officials.
The witnesses say they saw Mohammed A. Salameh and Mahmud Abouhalima at a New York City-area gas station and that Mr.
Salameh was driving a van, according to a report in Newsweek's March 29 issue.


Fights Loom as U.S. Nears Debt Limit
An old show is about to play Washington again -- the debt ceiling fandango.
It hasn't been seen, mercifully, since the fall of 1990, when the Government bumped up against its limit on borrowing seven times from August through November.
Since then, the Government and Congress have enjoyed the longest respite from such scenes since World War II.
But they will have at least two encounters this year over whether to raise the debt limit.


Albany Officials Battle Over Cutting Home Care
Over the last two decades, New York State has created the nation's largest, most comprehensive program to keep ailing elderly and disabled people in their homes by paying attendants to help them with their basic daily activities, from eating to dressing to going to the bathroom.
Now the future of the state's personal care program -- seen by some as a model for caring for an aging population but by others as another example of the state's penchant for exorbitant generosity for social services -- is becoming the subject of one of the most intense skirmishes in this year's budget battle.


Lisa Weinstein, Mark S. Menell
Lisa Beth Weinstein, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gilbert E. Weinstein of Woodmere, L.I., was married yesterday to Mark Steven Menell, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard B. Menell of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Menell, 27, was until recently an account executive at Jack Abroms &amp; Associates in New York, the United States licensee for B.U.M.
Equipment.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is the chief of nuclear medicine at the Peninsula Hospital Center in Far Rockaway, Queens.
Her mother, Carol Weinstein, is a teacher at the Franklin Early Childhood Center in Hewlett, L.I.


To the Barricades With Mr. Yeltsin
In a grim stab at arresting Russia's slide into chaos, President Boris Yeltsin is appealing to the people to shore up his flagging authority.
By backing him, President Clinton has put the United States firmly behind efforts to build a new Russia that rests on the consent of the governed.
That is the right role for this country.
America has no interest in taking sides in Russia's internal struggle over the proper relationship of the president and the Parliament.
Nor can it prescribe the exact economic path for Russia to take.
But it has an enormous stake in Russia's peaceful transition to democracy and prosperity.


Bridge
Two players scored their second major success within two months at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals here night Saturday night.
Bobby Levin of Aventura, Fla., and Gaylor Kasle of Palm Springs, Calif., who won the prestigious Sunday Times-Macallan Pairs in London last month, captured the Open Pairs, the opening event of the tournament here.
Levin has won many titles, including the World Teams in 1981 when he was 23, but it was Kasle's most significant national result.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: East; Massacre At the Cincinnati Corral
When asked for his thoughts on this afternoon's National Collegiate Athletic Association second-round tournament game between his New Mexico State team and the University of Cincinnati, Coach Neil McCarthy had a one-sound response.
"Daaah."


Kampala Journal; Cast Out Once, Asians Return: Uganda Is Home
When he fled Uganda with his family in 1972, Safdar Walji, like many other Asians, was allowed only one suitcase and $100.
He left behind the family coffee and tea plantation, two factories and more than 6,000 head of cattle.
Ugandan Asians, once the backbone of commerce and trade here, were forced out of the country and their properties were confiscated in 1972 by Idi Amin Dada, who was then President.
Now they are streaming back.


But the Calendar Says It's Spring


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY
Ameron Inc
BellSouth Corp
Standard Prods Co TUESDAY
Bell Atlantic Corp
Centerior Energy Corp
Great Atl &amp; Pac Tea WEDNESDAY
Brooklyn Union Gas
Clarco Inc
Commercial Intertech
Federal Mogul Corp THURSDAY
Boston Edison Co
Grow Group Inc
Charles Schwab Corp
Transatlantic Hldgs Inc
Wyle Labs FRIDAY
Cen Hudson Gas &amp; Elec
Knight-Ridder Inc
Southwestern Bell Corp


HARD-LINERS PLAN A COURT CHALLENGE TO YELTSIN'S MOVE
A shaken Russian Parliament resolved today to take President Boris N. Yeltsin to the Constitutional Court, but the angry legislators stopped short of directly moving against the President or trying to block the emergency powers he claimed against them on Saturday.
Mr.
Yeltsin did not attend the session.
The evening television news program said that his mother had died at 84 and that he had gone home to Yekaterinburg.


State Without Acid Rain Is Dealt Another Problem
When Congress established strict rules in 1990 to control acid rain by ordering coal-burning power plants to reduce emissions of sulfur dioxide, the managers of the South Carolina Electric and Gas Company estimated they would have to spend up to $300 million over five years to comply.
To say they were angry understates their reaction.
The reason: There is no acid rain in South Carolina because the state has no problem with sulfur dioxide.
Winds generally blow anything in South Carolina's air out to sea, not to nearby states.


Ann Seligman, Michael Starr
Ann Claire Seligman, the daughter of Naomi O. Seligman of New York and Paul Seligman of Florham Park, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Omar Starr, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert D. Starr of Natchez, Miss.
Justice A. Frederick Meyerson of State Supreme Court of Brooklyn officiated at the home of the bride's mother.
Ms.
Seligman, 32, is keeping her name.
She is studying for an M.B.A. at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
She graduated from Cornell University.


Israel Tightens Security as Violence Grows Worse
With death tolls rising and many Israelis worried that violence is spinning out of control, the Government decided today to expand the national police force and to tighten security checks on Palestinians leaving the occupied territories for work in Israel.
But Cabinet members acknowledge that these measures alone will not end the spurt of attacks that have resulted in the killing of 10 Israelis this month at the hands of Arabs, one of the highest monthly death counts for Israelis since the start of the Palestinian uprising in December 1987.


People
*
Steve Connelly was named executive creative director at Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson, Boston, succeeding Christine Chamberlin, executive vice president and executive creative director, who left the agency to set up her own shop, the Northridge Group. *
Terry Taylor was named senior vice president and creative director, and Robin Sherman was named senior vice president and director of creative services at Earle Palmer Brown Advertising, Bethesda, Md.
The appointments follow the promotion of John Doig, formerly creative director at the Bethesda office, to the new position of creative director at Earle Palmer Brown Advertising.


Now That Home Port's Dead, Let's Put That Land to Good Use
To the Editor:
A list of proposed base closings that accompanies "2 California Bases Spared From List of Military Cuts" (front page, March 12) includes the Staten Island home port.
But your article makes no comment on the local case.
Now that Guy Molinari, Staten Island Borough President, and Representative Susan Molinari, his daughter, no longer have a friend in the White House, even former supporters of the base apparently see its closing as inevitable.


Dance in Review
'Circles of Lust' Liat Dror and Nir Ben-Gal Company The Kitchen


Clairol's Nice 'n Easy Going to Thompson
Ending widespread speculation, the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company said last week that it would shift the last of its Clairol consumer product brands, the Nice 'n Easy hair color line, from DDB Needham New York.
The account, with billings estimated at $6 million to $7 million, will be moved to J. Walter Thompson New York, which handles other Clairol products like Ultimate Blonde, Ultress and Loving Care; Thompson New York won Loving Care from DDB Needham in December.


Review/Dance; A French Ballet Classic, Rendered With the Spirit of Its Origins
It isn't often nowadays that a ballet production can be described as enchanting.
But that is certainly the word for the version of "La Fille Mal Gardee" that the Ballet du Rhin, a French company from Mulhouse in Alsace, brought to Washington for a too-brief visit on Friday and Saturday.
There could not be a better work to epitomize the essence of French taste in the continuing France Danse festival at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts here.
This engaging attempt to hark back to the original 18th-century "Fille" by Jean Dauberval suggests what a rowdy audience might have seen in Bordeaux on July 1, 1789.


Arthur Roth, 67, Dies; Novelist and Columnist
Arthur Roth, a novelist, columnist and writer of adventure fiction for children, died on March 5 at his home in Amagansett, L.I.
He was 67.
His wife, Ruth Buchalter Roth, said the cause was liver cancer.


Review/Music; A Cast That Competes With Zeffirelli
Even when the casts are uninteresting, the Metropolitan Opera's three-year-old production of "La Traviata" has the Franco Zeffirelli decor and stage machinery to keep the casual operagoer entertained.
This House-and-Garden-meets-Thomas-Edison contraption leads a life of its own, narcissistic and almost nonstop in its efficiency.
Indeed, as backdrops and props swoop, plunge, rise and revolve, a fatal tale of respiratory illness (to which Verdi attaches his tirelessly beautiful score) resembles increasingly the subsidiary and largely unread magazine copy with which editors surround their photo layouts.
Yet Thursday's revival at the Met offered a cast of players likely to give Mr.
Zeffirelli some competition.
True, Franco Farina's barely serviceable tenor tended to disappear behind the unbiquitous drapery; but if Alfredo was a wan presence, his Violetta on Thursday, Tiziana Fabbricini, is liable to kick up some controversy.
Then there was Placido Domingo in the pit giving a report on his (considerable) progress as a conductor.


AIDS Numbers Increase Under New Federal Rules
The number of new AIDS cases reported in New York City rose 58 percent in the first two months of 1993 compared with the same period last year, reflecting the new, expanded Federal definition of the disease.
The higher numbers were expected under a change that Federal officials say will nearly double the new AIDS cases reported this year.
Nationwide, new cases rose 63 percent in January and February compared with the same period last year.


Mayoral Race Is On (Well, Sort Of); It's Unofficial, but Dinkins Is Squaring Off With Four Rivals
The Democratic mayoral primary is six months away, with the general election two months after that.
None of the major candidates for mayor has formally announced his candidacy, and the radio and television airwaves have yet to be littered with self-aggrandizing commercials.
But make no mistake about it: the New York City mayoral race has begun, though in a quiet way.


Base-Closing Panel Plans To Widen Pentagon's List
The Presidential commission deciding the fate of scores of military bases nationwide will consider closing or shrinking several more installations than the Pentagon has recommended, including two in California spared by the Defense Secretary, commission members say.
The two installations that were taken off the list of final recommendations by Defense Secretary Les Aspin, McClellan Air Force Base and the Monterey Presidio, are at the top of the list of bases the commission will analyze in the next several months, said Jim Courter, the panel's chairman.


Bitter Debate on Outlawing Abortion-Clinic Blockades
They normally face off at the entrances to nondescript clinics, amid noisy argument, locked arms, chanting, singing and often arrests.
Today, advocates of abortion rights and opponents of abortion sat quietly in a carpeted legislative hearing room, waiting for their turns to speak on a bill that would make it a specific crime in Connecticut to block access to a medical center offering abortions or counseling on the procedure.


Review/Theater; Psychological Warfare Claims Two
Obsessional behavior is at the root of "The Arrangement," an unsettling, erratic new play by Susan Kim.
As Jordan Lage finds himself increasingly unable to differentiate between the real and the delusory, he is like a Michael Douglas movie character: outwardly normal, inwardly aberrant and soon over the edge.
What begins as a private fantasy turns into a nightmare.
Fixated on a woman he sees in a window in a building across the way, he telephones her and makes suggestive and then threatening remarks.
While pursuing this nonexistent relationship, he falls in with another woman (Claudia Silver), who quickly becomes his compliant victim.
Her apparent masochism is a match for his sadism.
The voyeur eventually turns violent, as Mr.
Lage puts aside his high-powered telescope and picks up a knife.


Seeking New Ties and Clout, Korean Grocers Join Voices
The Korean-American Grocers Association of New York had a surprising guest give the invocation at its annual awards meeting last month: the Rev.
Al Sharpton.
The grocers, for whom memories of a black-led boycott in Brooklyn are still fresh, have also sponsored spots on black radio stations honoring heroes like Thurgood Marshall.
The Korean Produce Association ran a scholarship program for minority students in conjunction with The Amsterdam News.


Let This Home Port Die
Every community affected by the Clinton Administration's plan for military base closings is in an uproar, and New York is no exception.
The Staten Island home port means jobs and economic activity in a recession-strapped city.
But its champions no longer have a convincing argument.
The Navy's elaborate and costly system of dispersing the fleet to every Congressional district with a port never had a strong military rationale and was always a classic example of "port barrel" politics.
But the Government claimed that the country needed a network of naval bases for national security and established 21 of them.


CHRONICLE
GARRICK UTLEY might have achieved a a 30-year career (so far) at NBC News without a Fulbright Travel Grant, but who knows?
As a young graduate of Carleton College in Northfield, Minn., he did get a grant and in 1962 went off to study at the Free University in Berlin.
Wednesday evening, he will be one of the hundreds of Fulbright men and women who will gather at the third annual Metro International Fulbright Awards dinner to pay tribute to Senator J. W. FULBRIGHT, the man who began it all.
The 87-year-old former Democratic Senator, who represented Arkansas for 30 years, introduced the 1946 legislation that established the international educational exchange program.
There are now more than 200,000 Fulbright alumni, some 90,000 from the United States and 120,000 from abroad.


Review/Jazz; A Classicist at Play Adds a Note of Restraint
The first tune of the set, Sonny Rollins's blues "Sonnymoon for Two," quickly became a shell game of accents.
The band, led by the bassist Chris McBride, and featuring the pianist Carlos McKinney and the drummer Clarence Penn, was at Bradley's on Monday night to enjoy itself, and Mr.
McBride, syncopating lines so they took flight, was answered by Mr.
McKinney's irregular, sharp taps.
Mr.
Penn, using brushes, might hesitate a minute, like a plane hitting an air pocket, suspending time for a second, then rush back in.
It was musical wit, improvisational play at its best.
There wasn't much arranging to the show; the band, caught up in the storm, hadn't had a chance to rehearse, but that didn't seem to make much difference.
Mr.
McBride, at 20, is a naturally gifted musician, and each of his phrases has the sort of elegance that makes listening easy.
At that age, musicians usually play with abandon, barely in control.
Mr.
McBride is strangely mature, an advocate of a new type of classicism in which each note has its place and the musician is in a secondary position to the music itself.


Conservative Vote Overwhelms Mitterrand and French Socialists
The governing Socialists suffered a crushing defeat today in the first round of parliamentary elections, with partial results pointing to an overwhelming conservative majority in the National Assembly.
The Socialists' defeat had been widely expected because of rising unemployment and embarrassing corruption scandals involving prominent Socialists.
The results, though, appear to be an even greater setback than expected.


Emily's List Showed What Democracy Can Do; To Change America
To the Editor:
The nasty tone of your March 10 editorial attack on Emily's List, was unnecessary.
Even more so was the hypocrisy of criticizing the choice by Ellen Malcolm, the group's president, of Patton, Boggs &amp; Blow, the American Newspaper Publishers Association's lobbying firm, as counsel.


Accounts
*
Chart House Restaurants, San Diego, to Evans Group, Portland, Ore., and Seattle, to handle its account, previously handled in part by Lambesis Communication, San Diego.
Billings were estimated at $6 million. *
Computervision Corp., Bedford, Mass., to Mullen Advertising Inc., Wenham, Mass., to consolidate its corporate communications account, previously divided among a number of local agencies.
Billings were not disclosed.
The assignment will initially involve public relations and may later include other integrated communications programs.


Clinton as Statesman
Tumultuous world events are forcing President Clinton to be more involved with foreign policy, and the President is now indeed ready to get involved.
But aides still describe his management style as one of setting broad guidelines and paying spasmodic attention to different issues.
Article, page A3.


INSIDE
7 Leave Cult's Compound
One man and six women left the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Tex., raising hopes that the standoff could be drawing to a close.
Page A12.
Bombing Brings Scrutiny
In his old town in Egypt, few know Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman.
That's far from the attention he has received here since the Towers blast.
Page B4.
Drivers' Licenses to Go?
New York State's Department of Motor Vehicles plans to make the agency much more user-friendly.
Page B1.


Jerome I. Meyers, 64; Backed Debtors' Rights
Jerome I. Meyers, a lawyer who specialized in personal bankruptcy cases, died March 15 at his home in Norwich, Vt.
He was 64.
He died after a heart attack, his family said.


Nets Laugh All the Way to the Basket
It was just one of those nights for the Nets.
They would never admit this, but when the Dallas Mavericks come to town, it's time to relax and put your feet up.
At the very least, have a good laugh.
And New Jersey did.
As proved in the 106-84 drubbing by the Nets, the Mavericks are 11 players away from a championship.
If they got a dollar for every blown layup against New Jersey, they could personally erase the national deficit.
So if you're the Nets, how do you get fired up for a team like this?
You don't, you just play your game, build a big lead and along the way have a little fun.


Islamic Group Backers Seek to Leave Egypt
Several prominent supporters of the Islamic Group, a militant fundamentalist organization that has taken responsibility for a series of violent attacks on tourists and Egyptian officials, along with relatives of the cleric, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, have either left or tried to leave Egypt in recent days, Egyptian security officials said.
The departure of militant leaders and the attempted departure by the family members comes as the Government moves to reopen a trial against Mr.
Abdel Rahman for his involvement in a 1989 attack on police.
It also comes amid increased security by Egyptian officials to prevent disturbances by militant groups that might coincide with the end of the Muslim holy month of Ramadan on Wednesday.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
None  Tuesday
None  Wednesday
Durable Goods Feb.  Thursday
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday
G.D.P. 4th Qtr.


Just Follow the Leader to Louisville. But Where's the Leader?
On the day after the 29-to-1 long shot Bull Inthe Heather won the Florida Derby, the confusion grew even heavier on the trail to the Kentucky Derby today.
There was still no clear leader in the 3-year-old class, and most of the candidates still had no fixed agenda for getting to Louisville.
The situation grew even more complicated when the Gotham Mile, one of New York's traditional steppingstones to the Kentucky Derby, was postponed for six days because the main track at Aqueduct was still being cleared of ice from the recent siege of severe weather in New York.
The main track will not open next Friday, as planned, but will open instead the following Wednesday, March 31.
And the Gotham will not be run next Saturday, as planned, but will be put off for six days until Friday, April 2.


Market Place; New Alzheimer's drug could be a 'savior' for Warner-Lambert.
THE Warner-Lambert Company got the lift it was hoping for last week when a Food and Drug Administration advisory panel recommended approval of tacrine, a treatment for Alzheimer's disease, which poisons the twilight years of several million elderly Americans.
The F.D.A. is expected to give fast-track approval to tacrine, which Warner-Lambert calls Cognex, later this spring.
That would be none too soon to make up for slipping sales of the company's premier product, Lopid, a cholesterol-lowering drug, which generates $552 million a year.
Lopid lost its patent protection in January.
The company's Warner Chilcott generic drug division is already selling a lower-priced version to attract health maintenance organizations and other cost-conscious buyers.


Players in Battle for New York Post Squabble on TV
Click.
Abraham Hirschfeld sneering on Channel 2.
Click.
Pete Hamill interrupting on Channel 4.
Click.
Steven Hoffenberg shouting on Channel 7.
Click.
Wilbert A. Tatum attacking on Channel 2.
Click.
Abraham Hirschfeld sneering on Channel 7.
The players in the long-running battle for ownership of The New York Post seemed to take control of the brunchtime airwaves yesterday, squabbling their way through three local television news programs that often collapsed into a cacophony of you're-a-liar! (no-I'm-not!) invective.


Muscovites Answer Yeltsin, And Their Verdict Is Mixed
As demonstrators gathered by the Russian Parliament building today on the banks of the Moscow River, President Boris N. Yeltsin got his first set of early returns from the Russian people, who will be asked in a month to break the country's political stalemate.
By midafternoon, two opposing crowds had formed, facing off across barricades reinforced by rows of parked jeeps and buses.
One was rallying under a forest of red Soviet flags, symbol of the Communist-nationalist opposition to Mr.
Yeltsin's Government; the other, across the street, was waving the white, red and blue of the Russian tricolor, which has become Mr.
Yeltsin's emblem.


RJR Leader in I.B.M. Spotlight
So many well-known computer executives have pulled out of the running for the top job at I.B.M. that the most prominent person still in the race is from outside the industry altogether: Louis V. Gerstner Jr., chairman of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation.
Mr.
Gerstner is the man who was brought in to overhaul RJR Nabisco after it was taken over in the largest leveraged buyout in history.
But whether the 51-year-old Mr.
Gerstner wants to take on Corporate America's biggest challenge today is uncertain.
He is one of several people the search team of the International Business Machines Corporation's board has considered and talked to, according to a person close to the search.
Each time another executive publicly says no, Mr.
Gerstner stands out all the more by simply declining to comment.
Latest Withdrawal
George Fisher, chairman of Motorola Inc., said last week that he was not interested in becoming I.B.M.'s next chief executive.
In doing so, he joined a lengthening list of executives, including John Sculley, the chairman of Apple Computer Inc., and John A. Young, the former president of the Hewlett-Packard Company, who have said they do not want the hot seat at I.B.M.


Review/Pop; Song Cycle Unites Musical Opposites
When Elvis Costello made his recording debut 16 years ago, no one could have predicted that one day he would record, with a classical string quartet, an album of original songs conceived as letters written by assorted eccentric characters.
But two months ago Mr.
Costello released "The Juliet Letters," a collaboration with the Brodsky Quartet, a respected English ensemble whose many recordings include the Shostakovich String Quartets.
And on Thursday evening, Mr.
Costello and the group concluded a 10-country concert tour with a sold-out appearance at Town Hall.
The music of "The Juliet Letters" could not be described as "crossover" in the manner of Barbra Streisand's "Classical Barbra" or Kiri Te Kanawa's recent album of Michel Legrand songs.
Its 20 compositions are collaborations by Mr.
Costello and the quartet in which they explore a juxtaposition of musical genres that many assume to be antithetical.
One of the goals seems to be the expansion of expressive possibilities by creative friction.
And Thursday's concert, in which Mr.
Costello and the quartet exhibited an impressive coordination and musical precision, was an exhilarating success.


For Toronto, the Change May Not Be for the Better
Making changes, one baseball theory goes, is good for a championship team because it keeps the remaining players from becoming complacent.
"It depends on the changes," Jack Morris, who has been around long enough to know all of the theories, said today.
"I don't think it helped the Tigers much in the mid-80's. They made a lot of changes and it didn't help that club at all. They got progressively worse until 1990."


Man and 6 Women Leave Texas Cult's Compound
Two women walked out of the Branch Davidian compound about 1:30 this morning.
Nine hours later, another two came out.
Then this afternoon, a man and two women left.
But nearly 100 people are still believed to be inside.
Three weeks after deadly gunfire erupted between members of the religious sect and Federal agents serving a warrant on the cult's leader, the emergence of the seven cult members today raised hopes that the standoff could be drawing to a close, but the authorities cautioned that they had no way of knowing whether a large-scale surrender was at hand.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; Post's Struggle Illuminates Power of Bankruptcy Courts
In the bankruptcy court hearing on the day that Abraham Hirschfeld first beat out Steven Hoffenberg for the right to sit in the publisher's chair at The New York Post, there was an exchange between a lawyer and the judge that taught two lessons.
It showed the power that courts have over troubled businesses that make the trip to the debtors' court.


Circling the Globe, and Then the Bases
It used to be the last outpost for former major league baseball players on the way to retirement, never to be confused with a horn of plenty.
But major league teams are starting to look anew at expatriates who have found rejuvenation, not retirement, in Japan.
That fresh look produced Cecil Fielder, and a host of home runs have rained on American League pitchers ever since.
Then a reclamation project by the name of Bill Gullickson returned and became a 20-game winner, no mean feat for a pitcher toiling of late for the Detroit Tigers.


Corrections
A front-page article on Saturday about the East Coast storm's disruption of automated teller machines described the Electronic Data Systems Corporation's emergency plan incorrectly.
The company, which processes bank machine transactions from a computer center in Clifton, N.J., contracts with another company, Comdisco Inc., for backup computer service.
But that agreement did not require that the nearest data recovery site, in North Bergen, N.J., be made available for backup service.
And Electronic Data Systems says that even if the North Bergen center had been available, the computer network would not have been restored to service in one day.


Executive Brief: THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT; Reno's in Office; Is She in Charge?
Janet Reno has hung a portrait of Robert F. Kennedy on the wall above her office fireplace, a hint perhaps of the kind of Attorney General she wants to be.
But beneath the symbolism lies the question of whether she has enough control to chart her own course.
Who's really in charge at the Justice Department?
Ms.
Reno insists she can veto anyone chosen by the Clinton Administration, but she has accepted a slate of White House candidates for senior jobs, some of whom were picked weeks before Ms.
Reno was even considered for her job.


Shakespeare Festival's Boss: Idealistic, Romantic and Busy
It was about a month ago, George C. Wolfe recalled, that he was asked by the executive committee of the New York Shakespeare Festival's board if he'd be interested in taking over the reins of the institution from JoAnne Akalaitis.
He was.
Then they asked him what he'd do with it.
"I told them what I'm passionate about," he said in an interview.
"I said you can't create an oasis for writers but you can create a home for them. You can say to someone, 'I like your play; I'm going to produce it.' And then when the play is falling apart in previews, you can say, 'I'm going to produce your next play.' In New York, everyone wants a new virgin they can put on display, but careers happen over time, by feeding and nurturing. That's where you get brilliant work."


Crenshaw Hits a Homer In the Bay Hill Gloamin'
Rolling his putts with a virtuoso's touch, Ben Crenshaw overcame a shaky start and later encroaching darkness to win the Nestle Invitational today.
After play was delayed earlier in the day for an hour because of wet conditions, Crenshaw finished in darkness on the difficult 72d hole of the Bay Hill Club.
But with a well-earned three-stroke cushion, he had the luxury of an easy bogey to win by two strokes.


Emily's List Showed What Democracy Can Do
To the Editor:
"Emily's Loophole" (editorial, March 10) is another of what seems an almost daily diatribe for greater governmental control of political campaign financing.
You chastise Emily's List, which magnified the voices of 63,000 people who contributed an average of less than $100 each to support women Congressional candidates last year, for seeking an exemption from new restrictions that pending legislation would impose on political campaign committees.


Sea-Dumping Ban: Good Politics, But Not Necessarily Good Policy
For millions of people from Montauk to Maryland, the broiling summer of 1988 will be hard to forget.
It was the hottest year ever recorded.
Repulsive trash slicks covered the Eastern shoreline.
And borne upon a tide of public outrage, garbage emerged as a potent political issue.
In New York and New Jersey, where most of the waste appeared, health officials closed beaches by the score depriving sweltering people of relief.
Pictures of used syringes, dead dolphins and human excrement scattered across the sand became a staple of the news.


Tough Talk on Open Skies
In his philosophy, President Clinton is a free trader with an asterisk.
The asterisk means that while he endorses open international markets, he has also campaigned as someone not afraid to use confrontation and reprisal.
Sometimes he seems to veer toward reflexive protectionism, as with the threat to placate Detroit by putting punitive tariffs on Japanese mini-vans.
But there is one area where Mr.
Clinton's tough-cop act could produce huge dividends without damaging free-trade principles: international airline travel.
U.S. policy calls for so-called open-skies treaties that give carriers unfettered access to foreign airports.
But Europe stubbornly rejects open skies out of fear that U.S. behemoths like American and United will drive its bloated carriers back down onto the tarmac.
So travel remains governed by restrictive bilateral treaties that prevent airlines from going head to head to capture customers with lower ticket prices.


Patents
TWO biotechnology companies are racing to be the first to develop proteins that promise to heal broken bones rapidly and perform other orthopedic magic.
The quest to capture the market may result in a major patent fight.
The rivals, Genetics Institute Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., and Creative Biomolecules Inc. of Hopkinton, Mass., are conducting initial clinical trials for bone grafts that contain minute amounts of "bone morphogenetic proteins." Both companies have demonstrated that some of these cause new bone to grow.


2 Centuries Of Fleet St. For Sale?
There are few things that the British press enjoys speculating on more than the British press.
Lately, a good bit of the speculation has revolved around the future of the 201-year-old Observer, Britain's oldest Sunday newspaper.
According to popular wisdom, The Observer is down on its luck and on the auction block.
Neil Blackley, a media analyst for James Capel &amp; Company, a stock brokerage firm, said The Observer was "most definitely for sale."


Review/Music; Christa Ludwig's Way of Reaching an Audience
Certain singers have fashioned long-running careers out of farewell concerts, but Christa Ludwig looks as if she means it.
The German mezzo-soprano sings her last performance at the Metropolitan Opera on April 3.
Next season she will say goodbye to Paris, London and Vienna.
On Saturday night she came to Carnegie Hall with James Levine as the pianist for one final appearance before a New York recital audience.
For a singer who has been coming to this country for 33 years and was well established in Europe before that, Miss Ludwig sounded like someone who could go on quite a while longer if she wanted to.
Evidently the rigors of touring now outweigh the benefits; more ambitious plans for this season were curtailed and in some cases canceled.
Miss Ludwig has evidently had enough.


Apple Offers New System For Desktops
In a shift that would have been unthinkable a decade ago, Apple Computer Inc. will introduce on Monday a line of multi-user computers designed to make the company's desktop systems more appetizing for corporate buyers.
The new computer family, which features three "server" computers to store and retrieve data for networks of desktop machines, is a sharp contrast to the "one worker, one computer" credo on which Apple has stood since it was founded in the mid-1970's.


Spots for New York Telephone try to build an audience for a three-way family melodrama.
ON the off chance that a truism needs a little buttressing, a New York Telephone advertisement that tells a story, of all things, has proved a big hit with viewers.
The spot, created by Chapman Direct in Manhattan, features three brothers using a three-way calling service as part of one brother's attempt to resolve a standoff between the other two.
The dialogue-heavy spot has helped make three-way calling the most requested feature from a promotion running since January.
The promotion also pitches call-waiting, call-forwarding and speed-calling.


Circle in Square Cancels 2 by Moliere
The financially troubled Circle in the Square Theater has canceled the long-delayed first production of its season, a pair of Moliere comedies, "The Imaginary Cuckold" and "School for Husbands." Instead, the theater will take over "Wilder, Wilder, Wilder: Three by Thornton," a trio of one-act plays by Thornton Wilder that was originally staged by an Off Off Broadway group, the Willow Cabin Theater Company.
Previews of the three plays -- "The Long Christmas Dinner," "The Happy Journey to Trenton and Camden" and "Pullman Car Hiawatha" now running at the McGinn/Cazale Theater in Manhattan -- will begin at the Circle in the Square April 9, with the opening scheduled for April 21.


The Price Of Tobacco: The Basics
Ever since the Depression, the Government has lent tobacco farmers a hand by bolstering the prices paid to them on the market.
But the farmers like to point out that unlike the growers of other crops whose prices are supported by the Government, they receive help that entails no net cost to the taxpayers -- that is, no "subsidies" in the usual sense.
The tobacco growers' boast, although accurate today, has been strictly true only in the last 11 of the 60 years since the Federal price-support program for tobacco was adopted.
And even during this latter period, the Government has had to step in to bail the growers out once, in 1986.
The cost was $1.1 billion.


Review/Music; A New Opera Plays With Absurdism
The varied sensibilities brought to bear in Marshall Coid's new opera, "The Bundle Man," could have filled a sack as large as the one trundled about by the title character in Tom O'Horgan's production at the Theater for the New City.
Ilsa Gilbert's libretto is intended, the program says, as "a loving parody of the Theater of the Absurd genre," and Mr.
O'Horgan and the set designer, Perry Arthur Kroeger, supplied an appropriately 60's-ish look.
But the absurdism, which is toothless and indulgent to begin with, is further undercut by plodding, pious exhortations seemingly left behind by some recent election campaign, occasionally in feeble rhyme.


Budapest Executive Joins Lord Dentsu
Andy Bielanski, executive vice president and managing director for Central and Eastern Europe at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in Budapest, has been named executive vice president and general manager at Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners in New York.
Mr.
Bielanski, 41, succeeds Robert D. High, who continues as an executive vice president but moves to the position of senior account director.


Hockey Hopscotch: The Devils Jump to 3d
If the Devils are to edge anyone for a playoff spot in the Patrick Division, they will have to get the kind of goaltending and come up with the kind of defense that they did tonight against the Flyers.
Inspired by Chris Terreri's brilliant performance in net, including 20 saves in the last period, the Devils withstood a fierce attack by the Flyers and preserved a 3-2 triumph at the Spectrum.


Dance in Review
Merce Cunningham Dance Company City Center


Absentee Ballot Rules
To the Editor:
Your March 7 Political Notes on my voting in the Feb. 22 special election for the New York City Council shows unawareness of Election Law procedure for absentee ballots.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Anheuser-Busch will buy 18 percent of Mexico's largest brewer.
Both companies are preparing for freer trade under the North American Free Trade Agreement.  [ Page D1. ]
Tenneco restated 1992 results to show a $1.3 billion loss partly because of a $920 million restructuring of its troubled J. I. Case farm and construction equipment division.  [ D1. ]


Newest Chip From Intel Will Be Hard to Copy
The Intel Corporation today formally announced the first shipments to computer makers of its newest generation of chip, the Pentium, which roughly doubles the speed of the family of microprocessors that are the leading standard for desktop computing.
But what Intel did not announce may prove just as significant for the personal computer industry: The company has made it more difficult for its competitors to copy the new chips, compared with earlier Intel lines that spawned a lucrative market for imitators like Advanced Micro Devices and Cyrix.


Berlin Journal; Unequal Heroes: Some Will Stand as Others Fall
Marx and Engels may stay, but Ernst Thalmann must go.
That is part of the verdict pronounced by a Berlin panel charged with deciding the fate of monuments left behind by the Communist state of East Germany when it collapsed in 1989 and 1990.


COMPANY NEWS
CAROLINA FIRST CORP., Greenville, S.C., purchased 12 bank branches from Republic National Bank.
MERCEDES-BENZ OF NORTH AMERICA INC., Montville, N.J., will layioff 54 people RAYTHEON CO., Lexington, Mass., consolidated the operations of its United Engineers and Constructors International and Badger subsidiaries to form a new company called Raytheon Engineers and Constructors Inc.


Knicks in Position to Make Smith an Offer
After winning a hearing with the National Basketball Association that empowers them to negotiate immediately with Charles Smith, the Knicks are preparing a lucrative, multiyear contract extension for the 6-foot-10-inch forward, who could become an unrestricted free agent by July 1.
The offer, according to someone in the Knicks' organization, is likely to be in the vicinity of five or six years, about $3.5 million a season.
If the Knicks sign Smith before July 1, they would eliminate the risk of losing him, the way they lost Xavier McDaniel last September to the Boston Celtics.


In a Protest, Post's Editor Moves His Desk to a Diner
Pete Hamill, the embattled editor of The New York Post, moved his desk to a diner next door to the newspaper's South Street offices yesterday after four top news and editorial employees who were laid off by Abraham Hirschfeld last week tried to return to work but were barred by security guards.
Amid the sizzle of hamburgers and puffs of steam from the coffee urns, Mr.
Hamill set up shop in a pink-and-white corner booth at the South Street Diner, conferring by cellular phone with reporters and editors in the newsroom and pecking at a laptop computer between cigarettes and greasy french fries.


Treasury Issues Advance Slightly
The prices of Treasury securities bounced around yesterday and ended slightly higher as concerns about inflation seemed to keep traders and investors in check.
The intensifying struggle in Russia between President Boris N. Yeltsin and Parliament did not have a major impact on the American bond market.
But traders noted that the tension was a cause of declines in both bond and stock markets in Europe.


Observer; Some Like It Hot
"Unforgiven," for which Clint Eastwood is apparently destined to be honored in the Academy Awards excesses next week, is the coldest movie I've seen since "Eskimo." The next coldest was "Pale Rider," a 1985 Eastwood oater about an avenging gunman raised from the grave by a little girl's prayers, unless I misunderstood the symbolism.
The dominant color in both Eastwood movies was ice blue.
While the sun occasionally came out in both, it was the gray, dead sun of a North Atlantic January.


Court Rejects Asset Plan For Insurer
A California court yesterday rejected as "unlawful" a state regulator's plan for parceling out the assets of the First Executive Life Insurance Company, the failed insurance conglomerate that sank into insolvency in 1991.
The state appellate court's ruling, which overturned a trial court decision approving the plan last July, may still be appealed to the California Supreme Court.
But if it stands, it will force regulators to devise a new plan for compensating the various claimants in the case, which include pension funds, policyholders, owners of various annuities and municipal bond investors, all of whom face potential losses because First Executive can no longer meet its obligations.
New Litigation Possible
Yesterday's decision may also prompt new litigation by policyholders and creditors aimed at rescinding one key element of the rejected plan: the sale of the failed insurer's huge portfolio of junk bonds in December 1991.


Books of The Times; Immigrant Families, at Home and Yet Alienated
Poet and Dancer
By Ruth Prawer Jhabvala
199 pages. Doubleday. $19.95.
Both the themes and the characters of "Poet and Dancer," Ruth Prawer Jhabvala's 11th novel, uncannily echo those of "In Search of Love and Beauty," a novel she published exactly 10 years ago.
Both novels concern the fragmentation of family life experienced by immigrants in New York.
Both novels feature a similar cast of people, including gurulike charlatans who seduce wealthy women with their promises of salvation; older matrons who end up leading lonely, desperate lives, and the offspring of these people, who drift aimlessly through life in search of love and connection.
This time the reader is introduced to Anna and Siegfried Manarr, wealthy German immigrants who have made a home for themselves in Manhattan.
Assiduously devoted to each other, Anna and Siegfried spend their free time going to concerts and art exhibits.
Having come from families who have prospered in business for generations, they dream of having children with artistic talent.
Instead, their son, Hugo, becomes a sort of new-age guru who dreams of "fashioning a new humanity." He marries a flighty woman named Alice, one of those familiar Jhabvala characters who travel the third world looking for meaning, and they have a pretty, high-strung daughter named Lara.
Hugo's sister, Helena, meanwhile marries a wealthy businessman named Peter, and raises a shy, introspective daughter called Angel.
Angel and her cousin Lara meet briefly as young girls, and both vow to pursue artistic careers: Lara will become a dancer; Angel, a poet.
Years pass in which the girls do not see each other.
Angel grows up to be a shy, serious girl, unhealthily dependent on her mother.
Lara grows up to be a world-class neurotic and flirt.
Beautiful, vivacious and emotionally needy, Lara collects admirers and hangers-on the way a lepidopterist collects butterflies.
One of her chief admirers is Angel, who quickly transfers on to her all her needs to be needed.
Her other big admirer is Angel's father, Peter, who soon sets her up in a hotel room as his mistress.
Intercut with the incestuous tale of Lara, Angel and Peter are other stories of love and loneliness in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Jhabvala shows Helena compensating for her daughter's absence by befriending a superstitious widow from India named Mrs.
Arora, who has lost her eldest son in a bloody fight in prison.
Peter's mother, Mrs.
Koenig, meanwhile, tries to compensate for
her
son's absence by befriending Rose, her new maid.
Each of these friendships is supposed to make up for more conventional family ties, but as in so much of Mrs.
Jhabvala's fiction, love breeds disappointment and regret, not solace and safety.
When Peter grows sick of paying hotel bills for Lara, he comes up with another plan: he decides to install her in an apartment with his daughter, Angel.
Despite the protestations of her mother, Angel jumps at the idea, and she and Lara soon become inseparable pals.
It's hardly a friendship of equals.
In fact, the two women quickly come to resemble one of those infernal pairings found in so many of Anita Brookner's novels: Lara is the imperious, bossy, selfish one, constantly making importunate demands on Angel's time and attention; Angel is the meek, passive one, always eager to please.
Their hermetic relationship seems meant to protect the two women from the realities of the outside world, and it leads, predictably enough, to a dangerous mutual dependency.
Angel abandons her poetry-writing; Lara abandons her dance.
Lara actively tries to turn Angel against her old friends, and she begins demanding that Angel spend all her time at home.
As Lara's behavior grows more and more erratic -- she starts stealing things from stores, and baiting Peter's wife -- Angel begins giving her large doses of tranquilizers.
Confusion and hostility soon take over their daily routines and gradually infect the rest of the Manarr clan as well.
Mrs.
Jhabvala writes with such fluency and poise that "Poet and Dancer" flies by with almost no effort from the reader.
Her subsidiary characters, as usual, are delineated with deft, ironic strokes, and together they leave the reader with the pleasant sense of being immersed in a convincing fictional world.
We are made to see the ways in which emotional needs and scars are handed down from father to son, mother to daughter, and we are made to appreciate the difficulty of erasing these patterns.
Still, the reader finishes "Poet and Dancer" vaguely dissatified and filled with a lingering sense of deja vu.
The story of Angel and Lara feels mechanistic and predictable in the end: as young girls and later as women, they are almost completely defined by a single personality trait or two, traits that practically condemn them to their unhappy fates.
Halfway through the book, we know where these characters are headed, and sure enough, we are given no surprises -- or further emotional revelations -- by the novel's end.
Mrs.
Jhabvala has written similar stories before, and done so with considerably more complexity and insight.


A Federal Fight on School Waste
Aware that school systems across the nation lose millions each year to fraud and waste, Representative Major Owens of New York, a Democrat, wants to create a new Federal agency that could help school districts combat mismanagement and corruption.
New York City's experience makes a powerful case for the need.
The size of the city's school system -- nearly a million students, more than 1,000 school buildings and a $7.5 billion budget -- virtually invites waste and corruption.
School custodians, for example, are required to clean classrooms only every other day and cafeterias only once a week.
They have also been allowed to keep school equipment, like jeeps and snow blowers, for their personal use.
And New York City's schools have been deprived of resources because of lax practices in purchasing textbooks and contracting for bus transportation.


Perelman Group to Increase Marvel Stake
MacAndrews &amp; Forbes Holdings Inc., which already owns 60 percent of Marvel Entertainment Group Inc., said yesterday that it would offer $25 a share for an additional 20 percent stake in the comic book company.
The tender offer by MacAndrews &amp; Forbes, which is controlled by the financier Ronald O. Perelman, represented a 28 percent premium over Friday's closing price of Marvel's stock.
Yesterday, Marvel's shares jumped $4.25, closing at $23.75 on the New York Stock Exchange on very heavy volume of 1.7 million shares.


Harbaugh Stays With Bears
The Chicago Bears kept Jim Harbaugh, their free-agent quarterback, when he agreed yesterday to a four-year contract worth $13 million.
He will receive $5 million this year in salary and signing bonuses.
Last year, his salary was $1.35 million.
Harbaugh, 28, was the Bears' first-round draft choice in 1987, out of Michigan.
Last year, he came under frequent criticism from Mike Ditka, then the head coach.
Harbaugh had been meeting for weeks with the Bears' new coaching staff, and he said yesterday he was excited about playing for Dave Wannstedt, the new head coach, and Ron Turner, the new offensive coordinator and quarterback coach.


Giants Trying To Cover Receivers
For pro football teams, the nice part about the new free-agency system is that they can pick up good players.
The bad part, as the Giants are learning, is that they can lose good players.
On Thursday, the Giants suffered one loss when Mark Ingram, a long-time starting wide receiver, defected to the Miami Dolphins.
Today, they suffered another loss when Gary Clark of the Washington Redskins, a potential replacement for Ingram, agreed to a three-year, $6 million contract with another division rival, the Phoenix Cardinals.


Dan Rodgers, 73, A Revlon President And Drug Executive
Dan Rodgers, a drug industry executive who was also a former president of Revlon Inc., died on Friday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 73 and lived for the last two years in Palm Beach, Fla.
His daughter Elly Yates said that Mr.
Rodgers, who previously lived in Pomona in Rockland County, N.Y., died of heart failure and kidney cancer.


And Now a Moment For Ones Left Behind
We forget the broken hearts much too soon.
We want to race through the three days we are issued by the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament to catch our breaths and regain, if only temporarily, a balanced diet.
We want to go on to the next round, evaluate the next matchups, anticipate the next surprise.


Regina K. Fox, 87; Ran Family Charity
Regina Kiely Fox, a New York sportswoman and philanthropist, died on Sunday at her home in North Salem, N.Y.
She was 87.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13 STRONG U.S. BACKING FOR YELTSIN
Endorsing President Yeltsin's call for a referendum, Secretary of State Christopher appealed to the American people to support increased financial aid to Russia.
A1


Houston Coach Gets Nevada Post
PAT FOSTER, the University of Houston coach, was named to the Nevada coaching post yesterday, three weeks after the Reno school fired Coach LEN STEVENS.


Plant Territoriality
The naturally occurring series of changes in which plants compete for territorial dominance is significantly controlled by diseases that develop in the soil, according to a recent study.
These soil-borne diseases are specifically designed to attack and destroy the existing plant tenants of the soil, thus allowing other unaffected plants to invade the area freely.


Months After Order on Gay Ban, Military Is Still Resisting Clinton
Two months after President Clinton ordered the Pentagon to prepare an executive order lifting the ban on homosexuals in the military, little work has been done, senior Congressional and Defense Department officials say.
In fact, these officials say, some steps have been taken to undermine the order.
The Navy is showing lawmakers a commander's sworn statement describing the disruption caused by a gay sailor's presence at a California naval base.
And an Army panel studying the effect of lifting the ban is warning that doing so could hurt recruiting so badly that the military might have to return to the draft.


Trade Center Worker Is Buried in Brooklyn


For No. 83-A-6607, Added Years for .35 Ounces; 20 Years After Law Mandating Prison Terms, Few of Targeted Kingpins Fill Cells
Inside the prisoners' law library, hope is the thing with whereases.
But not for the paralegal clerk, Lawrence V. Cipollone Jr., inmate number 83-A-6607, who is moving into his second decade of incarceration humbled by what he can now analyze as the truly ironclad penal sentences of the Rockefeller drug laws.
"I mean, Amy Fisher will be out in four years and 10 months for shooting that woman in the head, and Robert Chambers got five years for the Central Park strangling," said Mr.
Cipollone, fervid for proportional justice as he serves 15 years to life here in the Downstate Correctional Facility for having once sold 2.34 ounces of cocaine to an undercover narcotics detective.
Seeking Sentencing Discretion
At the 20th anniversary of the Rockefeller laws, sponsored by Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller, Mr.
Cipollone exemplifies the remarkable growth of the prison population because of tougher mandatory sentences that, critics and advocates for prison change contend, have proved ineffective at crimping the drug scourge but highly effective at packing the prisons with relatively low-ranking, nonviolent inmates.


Q &amp; A
Northeasters
Q.
Why was the big East Coast storm of December 1992 called a northeaster when it came up from the south?


Perot's TV Ratings Decline From Marks He Got in November
Citizen Perot doesn't draw quite so many viewers as Candidate Perot did in his prime.
Ross Perot's first television program since the November election, shown Sunday at 8 P.M. on NBC, received a 7.9 rating in 28 major media markets, down from his average 9.1 rating for his broadcasts during the Presidential campaign.
In those 28 cities, 12 percent of people watching television turned to Mr.
Perot's program.
Nationwide, each rating point equals 931,000 households, but since the preliminary results represent only 28 cities there was no way to count the total households watching the program.


Assembly Passes Bill to Outlaw Blockades of Abortion Clinics
In an effort to thwart blockades of abortion clinics by abortion opponents in New York State, the Assembly passed a bill today that would make it a specific crime to block access to any hospital or medical center.
A similar measure has been introduced in the State Senate, but officials there said its prospects remained unclear.


Corrections
A map in Science Times last Tuesday depicting the ancient Silk Road gave an incorrect date for graves containing silk found in Baden-Wurttemberg, Germany.
They were from the seventh century B.C.


I.B.M. to Close Its Midtown Gallery
I.B.M. has announced plans to close its Gallery of Science and Art, an 11,000-square-foot exhibition space on the lower level of its skyscraper at Madison Avenue and 56th Street, as a cost-cutting measure.
The gallery, which over the last 10 years has become one of New York's most prominent showcases for major traveling exhibitions, is to close as soon as the schedule of exhibitions to which I.B.M. is committed runs its course, "either at the end of 1993 or the beginning of 1994," said Jim Ruderman, a spokesman for I.B.M.


CHRONICLE
More on movies and awards: the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, in cooperation with the Mayor's Office of Film, Theater and Broadcasting, will give a luncheon today at noon at the Russian Tea Room.
The festivities will honor the New York-based nominees for the 65th Academy Awards.
"Fully half of the East Coast-based Academy members have been nominated for or have won Oscars," said ARTHUR MANSON, the chairman of the New York Screening Committee, who cited the luncheon as an example of the East Coast membership's expansion of its activities beyond weekly screenings and periodic retrospectives.


DeWitt C. Baldwin; Missionary in Burma And Pacifist Was 94
DeWitt Clair Baldwin, a former Methodist missionary, educator and advocate of world peace, died on March 16 at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 94 and lived in Rockville, Md.
His son, Dr.
DeWitt C. Baldwin Jr. of Chicago, said the cause of death was cardiac arrest.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: West; Webber's Way: Wired and In Your Face
The Michigan uniform, post-practice, is baggy denim shorts and a baseball cap tugged sideways.
Last weekend here, center Juwan Howard's hat said, "Minnesota Vikings," guard Jalen Rose's hat said, "Fab V," and forward Chris Webber's hat said absolutely nothing.
For Webber, that was a switch.


Supercollider Is Science Out on a Limb
To the Editor:
In "The Answer to (Almost) Everything" (Op-Ed, March 8), Steven Weinberg makes an eloquent if misleading case for the superconducting supercollider.
The delusion that particle physics is looking for the "final theory" is a carefully nurtured one, and it isn't frequently challenged because all scientists are trained to believe, almost religiously, in the hierarchical structure of science.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices to Decide on Need for Federal Notice in Seizing Property
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the Government can seize property that has been used in drug crimes without giving the owner advance notice and a chance to contest the action at a hearing.
The case is an appeal by the Justice Department that grew from its effort to seize a house in Hawaii owned by a man who pleaded guilty to a state narcotics charge.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Sent Jeff McNeely, outfielder, and Derek Livernois, pitcher, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Optioned Jeff Schwarz, pitcher, and Esteban Beltre and Chris Cron, infielders, to Nashville of the American Association; Johnny Ruffin, pitcher, and Brandon Wilson, infielder, to Birmingham of the Southern League, and Robert Ellis, pitcher, to Sarasota of the Florida State League.
Sent Scott Ruffcorn and Chris Howard, pitchers; Clemente Alvarez, catcher; Drew Denson, infielder, and Brad Komminsk, outfielder, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.


Ayer in Discussions With Investor Group
Ayer Inc. in New York said yesterday that it was expecting an infusion of capital from an investor group that includes members of senior management and Richard Humphreys, former president and chief executive of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Worldwide.
The agency made the disclosure in a staff memo from Jerry J. Siano, chairman and chief executive, after reports in Advertising Age and Adweek this week that Mr.
Humphreys was involved in efforts to acquire a stake in Ayer.
"Neither Mr. Humphreys nor the partnership will own Ayer outright," Mr.
Siano said in the memo.
He added that Mr.
Humphreys "will have no role in the day-to-day operations of this agency; rather, he will be working with me as part of the partnership to help identify potential areas of growth for Ayer."


Review/Fashion; Continuity? No, Sizzle, Then Fizzle, Then Fuzz
The fall and winter fashion showings began modestly in London, picked up steam in Milan, sizzled during the first few days of the French shows and then fizzled out by the end of last week.
Everything went limp.
Visitors to the shows were stunned by too much -- or too little -- fashion.
Divergent trends seemed to cancel each other out.
For three weeks, myriad pretty dresses were paraded by myriad ravishing models.
At the end, even the most professional fashion watchers could not state definitively that hemlines would descend almost to the floor next fall or that legs would be back on view.
For a while in the beginning, it seemed that really long skirts were generally accepted by designers with aspirations to style leadership.
By the end of the showing season, the situation was fuzzy.


7 of 9 California Youths Are Freed In a Case of Having Sex for Points
The authorities today released seven of the nine high school students arrested Friday in the suburb of Lakewood and accused of molesting or raping girls as young as 10 in a gang competition to score "points" for sexual conquests.
A spokeswoman for the Los Angeles District Attorney's office said one of the two boys still in detention would be arraigned Tuesday in juvenile court on a charge of lewd conduct with a minor under the age of 14.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
2.88
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.94
2.95
4.08
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.06
4.27
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.60
5.63
7.33
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.80
6.81
8.03
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.75
8.99
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.97
5.95
6.79
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Hillary Clinton's Father in Critical Condition


State to Build Smokers Their Own Room


Schwab Brokerage Plans Special Project
Charles Schwab &amp; Company of San Francisco said yesterday that it had awarded a special creative project for its Financial Advisors Service division to Goldberg Moser O'Neill in San Francisco, after an informal review.
Tom Taggart, a spokesman for Schwab, said the review included two other San Francisco shops, Citron Haligman Bedecarre and Mandelbaum Mooney Ashley.
Billings were not disclosed.


TOP RUSSIAN JURIST URGES COMPROMISE
With the showdown between Russia's executive and legislative branches now in his arena, the head of Russia's highest constitutional tribunal made an 11th-hour appeal Monday to President Boris N. Yeltsin and the Legislature to find a peaceable resolution to their menacing duel.
There was no indication, however, that the President was backing down from his declaration on Saturday assuming broad powers and calling for a national vote of confidence on April 25.


Brain Yields Clues to Its Visual Maps
AMID the vast variety of human faces, many very similar in appearance, how can an individual instantly recognize those few that are familiar, even ones not seen for many years?
The answer may lie in a newly discovered alignment of brain cells that is believed to form the basis of visual memory.
The cells, located in the brain's last and most sophisticated stop for processing visual information, were shown to be stacked in arrays of columns.
By studying the firings of individual nerve cells in this region, the researchers found that each cell in a given column responded to very similar but slightly different images, and each neighboring column of cells responded to another closely related sequence of images.


Breakup of Pop Music Audience Leaves Top 40 Radio Tuned Out
If you scan the top 10 singles on Billboard Magazine's Hot 100 Singles chart this week, three of the songs you will find are "A Whole New World," the theme song from "Aladdin," "Nuthin' but a 'G' Thang," the rap song by Dr.
Dre, and Bon Jovi's rock hit "Bed of Roses." The chances of hearing all three songs on the same radio station, however, are growing slimmer every day.
The reason is the rapid decline of Top 40, the hit-radio format that for more than three decades was the music industry's most important medium for promoting pop records.
Almost overnight, Top 40 has become a dinosaur, a victim of upheavals in radio and pop music that have deeply shaken the symbiotic relationship between the music industry and the medium that it has traditionally counted on to sell its wares.


Phoenix Ends Meetings On Double High Note
The Phoenix Cardinals scored on two fronts today at the National Football League annual owners' meeting when Super Bowl XXX in 1996 was awarded to Phoenix and when big-play receiver Gary Clark left the Washington Redskins for the Cardinals, signing a three-year deal reportedly worth $6 million.
The Super Bowl coup ended a three-year ordeal for the city and for Arizona, which becomes the eighth state to host the league's big show.
The game will actually be played at Sun Devil Stadium in Tempe, Ariz., where the Cardinals play their home games.


A Transplant Program Looks to Black Donors
Before he came down with a life-threatening illness last November, Jarees Mitchner was attending Arizona State University on a football scholarship.
Now he is in St.
Mary's Hospital in Waterbury, awaiting his only chance for a cure, a donor whose bone marrow matches his own.
Finding a compatible donor is never easy, but for non-white people it is considerably more difficult.
Of the 1,606 transplants arranged through the National Marrow Donor Program, only 28 involved black recipients.
Only 3.6 percent of the people registered as donors in the Connecticut Marrow Donor Program are black.


Better Law for Tribal Gambling
In the five years since Congress set rules for gambling on Indian reservations, the boom in new games has been matched by a boom in lawsuits.
Tension between sovereign tribes and sovereign states makes it clear the law needs fixing.
The Indians' right to operate gambling establishments was confirmed by the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act in 1988.
There are now more than 100 sites, run by 61 tribes in 18 states.
Their spread has been an economic boon to long-suffering tribes with few other resources, but unwelcome to people who don't want full-blown gambling halls in their states.


French Socialists Brace for Worst in Runoff Vote
Nursing its wounds after its worst performance at the polls in a quarter century, France's Socialist Party today urged all voters who did not support the right in Sunday's first round of parliamentary elections to vote against the right in next weekend's runoff.
Yet, for all the Socialists' warnings of the perils to democracy if a "monolithic" conservative majority controls the National Assembly, the final results of Sunday's vote confirmed that the party that has ruled France for 10 of the past 12 years is in shambles.


With Seconds to Go, Engine Failure Halts Shuttle
The space shuttle Columbia, spewing clouds of white smoke, its main engines thundering, suddenly and eerily went silent today just three seconds before it was to blast into orbit with seven astronauts for a nine-day science mission.
The shutdown at the seaside launching pad here left the crew safe but disappointed.
The last astronaut left the ship about 50 minutes after engine failure cut the launching short.


U.S. Power, Less Than Super
Lose Yeltsin, lose the peace dividend.
From Richard Nixon on down, commentators treat the prospect of higher defense spending as the clinching argument for increasing Western aid to Russia.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher made the same case yesterday in his speech before the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations.
Yet the pay-me-now-or-pay-me-later choice they and others pose is less hard-boiled analysis than wishful thinking, and it reflects a failure to imagine the immense problems that will flow from the failure of Russian democracy.
Increasing the defense budget bought security during the cold war.
It will buy much less if things now go wrong in Russia.
The real cost we face is not the loss of the peace dividend, but the loss of American pre-eminence.


Bosnia Peace Effort Suffers Setback
International efforts to end the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina appeared in disarray today after Russia delayed a NATO plan to shoot down warplanes flying there and the mediators warned that they might wrap up their peace talks this week unless they make more progress.
After agreeing in principle on Friday to adopt a resolution enforcing its ban on flights over Bosnia today, the Security Council was forced to postpone the vote after Russia indicated that it was not ready.
Under the proposed resolution, NATO would be given the task of patrolling Bosnian airspace and shooting down any aircraft violating the ban.


Sports of The Times; If Cinderella Meets the Underdog
CALIFORNIA assumed the Cinderella role last week by disposing of L.S.U. and deposing Duke; Western Kentucky established itself as the tournament underdog by eliminating heavily favored Seton Hall.
While the odds against either team going further are rising by the second, the notion of Golden Bears meeting Hilltoppers in a national championship game is heartwarming.


On My Mind; The Third Russian Revolution
Win or lose, Boris Yeltsin is giving the Russian people the greatest gift that is in him -- to keep the second Russian Revolution alive and block the third.
But to win, it is conceivable he will need a show of support from Russia's armed forces.
If so, it should be his right to command.
The West should remind them it will be their duty to obey.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Roy F. Schwitters; Building a Behemoth Against Great Odds
IN scale, it resembles a military invasion.
From horizon to horizon, the rolling Texas farmland of Ellis County is dotted with earth-moving machinery, huge cranes, clusters of condemned farmhouses awaiting demolition, new, slab-sided laboratory buildings and mountains of freshly excavated rock from the tunneling operations going on deep underground.
As scientists, technicians and workers rush from one task to the next, there is a sense that a desperate campaign is under way to beat the clock and win against tough odds.


Search Panel Fails to Agree On New Chief for N.A.A.C.P.
A search committee charged with finding a successor to Benjamin L. Hooks, the executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, has been unable to reach a consensus on a candidate, organization officials said today.
Instead, the committee passed four names to the association's 64-member board, which will wrestle with how to reach a decision.


Leslie Fay Replacing Officer in Fraud Inquiry
The Leslie Fay Companies said yesterday that it would replace its chief financial officer, Paul F. Polishan, pending the outcome of an investigation into an accounting fraud that masked a $13.7 million loss last year.
The company said John S. Dubel, a partner at the accounting firm of Arthur Andersen &amp; Company with experience in repairing ailing businesses, would be its chief financial officer as of April 1.
Mr.
Dubel has been working with Leslie Fay since late February, helping in negotiations with the banks and preparing a turnaround plan for the troubled dressmaker.


State Board Revokes A Grant of Parole
The New York State Parole Board has revoked a grant of parole to a man serving time for manslaughter in the Howard Beach racial attack in Queens because the grant was made two years before the prisoner was eligible for release.
The prisoner, Jason Ladone, 22 years old, was sentenced in February 1988 to 5 to 15 years for his part in the 1986 attack, in which a band of young whites chased a black man, Michael Griffith, onto a highway where Mr.
Griffith was struck and killed by a car.


Chess
Not even an Anatoly Karpov can repeatedly recover from an early loss.
The former world champion did win the Hoogoven International tournament on Jan. 31 in Wijk-aan-Zee, the Netherlands, after a second-round debacle against the American grandmaster Larry Christiansen, but when he again lost in the second round of the Linares International Tournament in Spain, this time to the Dutch grandmaster Jan Timman, he could not get higher in the final standings than a second place tie with the Indian grandmaster Viswanathan Anand.
The going was harder in Linares because Karpov was competing against his archrival, Gary Kasparov, the world champion and the man who deposed him in 1985.
Kasparov won first prize in the event on March 14.
Yet Karpov put up a good fight, as one may observe in his dynamic defeat of his Russian colleague, Valery Salov.
Karpov's weapon was the mating attack.


Port Agency To Observe Fire Codes
Officials of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said for the first time yesterday that they intended to abide by local fire code regulations in New York City and elsewhere, even though the agency is not legally required to do so.
The new policy, rejecting regulatory exemptions that have annoyed fire departments for years, comes amid powerful new political pressures on the Port Authority since the Feb. 26 bombing of the World Trade Center.


Michael Miller, 46, Amateur Historian Of Theatrical Lore
Michael R. Miller, a theater historian and New York City health official, died on Saturday at the Roosevelt division of St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 46 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said his sister, Carol Lynn Hellman.


METRO DIGEST
KAHANE SUSPECT INNOCENT, WIFE SAYS She said she has lived on donations in a place she won't disclose because of death threats to her children.
But the wife of the man tried in the killing of Rabbi Meir Kahane broke her silence and vowed to defend her husband and the men charged in the World Trade Center bombing.
B2.
NEW YORK CITY  EDITOR MOVES DESK TO A DINER Pete Hamill, the embattled editor of The New York Post, moved his desk to a diner next door to the newspaper's South Street offices yesterday after four top news and editorial employees who were laid off by Abraham Hirschfeld last week tried to return to work but were barred by security guards.
B3.


Anheuser In Mexican Beer Deal
America's biggest brewing company, the Anheuser-Busch Companies, said yesterday that it would pay $477 million for an 18 percent stake in Mexico's largest brewer, which makes Corona and other brands.
The arrangement, expected to be made final by the early summer, represents another step in the globalization of the brewing industry.
With foreign markets growing faster than the American market, Anheuser-Busch recently entered a joint venture in Japan, and the Miller Brewing Company bought stakes in Mexican and Canadian brewers.


Nets Flub Their One Shot at Winning
After the Nets were beaten by the Washington Bullets in the final seconds tonight, the New Jersey locker room contained more frustration and anger than at any other time this season.
The players and coaches were frustrated because they knew there's no way they should have lost to the Bullets.
They were angry because, well, Chris Morris took an ill-advised shot he soon won't forget because his teammates probably won't let him.
Morris in no way should be singled out for New Jersey's 97-92 loss to Washington before 6,903 at the Capital Centre.
The Nets were a step behind the fired-up Bullets all night.
They could do very little offensively and were swallowed whole by the Bullets on defense.


Bloomingdale's Goes Outside to TBWA
TBWA Advertising Inc. in New York said yesterday that it had been awarded the Bloomingdale's account, which had been in-house after the department store chain ended its 10-year relationship late last year with Grey Advertising Inc. in New York.
The announcement followed reports in Advertising Age and Adweek this week that TBWA had gained the account, whose billings are estimated at $3 million to $10 million.


Boat Accident Kills Indians' Top Reliever
Steve Olin, the Cleveland Indians' No. 1 relief pitcher, was killed and two teammates, Bob Ojeda and Tim Crews, were seriously injured tonight when their fishing boat struck a dock on a lake about 25 miles west of Orlando.
Susan Mock, a dispatcher in the Lake County sheriff's office, said initial reports were that all three had suffered head injuries when the boat struck the dock and literally went under it.
Mock said the dock stretches about 250 feet onto Little Lake Nellie.
The accident occurred after dark, shortly before 7:30 P.M.


Yeltsin's Weakness: Failure to Convert Early Popularity Into a Political Base
President Boris N. Yeltsin has rolled the dice one more time in the name of democracy, and he and his Vice President and former ally, Aleksandr V. Rutskoi, are the only nationally elected leaders Russia has had.
But while in office, Mr.
Yeltsin has gone about building democracy in a haphazard way.
He has done little to organize a democratic constituency for himself or for his Government.


Language of Early Americans Is Deciphered
THERE once was a warrior by the name of Harvest Mountain Lord.
He lived in a hot, humid land by the bend in a river that flowed into another river that ran to the sea.
Many were the battles he fought and the blood rituals he endured, for this warrior was ruler of the people by the bend in the river.
The exploits of this warrior-king who lived more than 1,800 years ago -- perhaps another culture's King Arthur or Napoleon -- were recorded in hieroglyphics carved on a stone monument, or stela, found in 1986 in the Mexican state of Veracruz.
On the face of the stela are a full-figure portrait of a richly attired man and a lengthy text telling of his rise to kingship through several years of warfare and elaborate accession rites presided over by a shaman.


Supercollider Is Science Out on a Limb; The Appeal of Mystery
To the Editor:
Steven Weinberg (Op-Ed, March 8), in looking beyond the "political and fiscal sparring" over the superconducting supercollider, conveys the essence of science.
As an undergraduate student of physics, I find myself constantly trying to justify to the layperson the necessity of my field.


Nude Photographs Are Focus Of Woody Allen's Testimony
The nude photographs of Soon-Yi Farrow Previn that led to the bitter falling out between Woody Allen and Mia Farrow and their resulting custody battle were the focus of Mr.
Allen's testimony yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
Mr.
Allen, testifying as the half-dozen snapshots were entered into evidence, said the photographs of 22-year-old Ms.
Previn, his current lover and the adopted daughter of Ms.
Farrow, his former lover, were intended to be erotic.
He defended them as a matter between consenting adults.
He resisted suggestions by Ms.
Farrow's lawyer, Eleanor B. Alter, that the photographs were pornographic.


RESULTS PLUS
N.I.T.
B.C.
Embarrasses Rice  Bill Curley's inside play and Gerrod Abram's 3-pointers led hot-shooting Boston College to a 101-68 second-round victory in the National Invitation Tournament last night, ending Rice's best post-season run in 40 years.
The victory, in Boston, set up an all-Big East quarterfinal matchup Wednesday night between Boston College and Providence. (AP) Minnesota 86, Oklahoma 72: At Minneapolis, Voshon Lenard scored 17 points and Minnesota advanced to the quarterfinals by beating Oklahoma. (AP)


CHRONICLE
By the time you read this, EMMA THOMPSON has probably moved a couple of knickknacks about a bit to make room for her Bafta (and, quite possibly, an Oscar).
The British Academy of Film and Television Arts award, presented to the actress on Sunday night in London for her performance in the film "Howards End," bodes well for her to win the best actress award at the Academy Awards ceremony next Monday night in Los Angeles.
"Howards End" also won a Bafta for best film.
Other winners: Robert Downey Jr. ("Chaplin"), Miranda Richardson ("Damage") and Gene Hackman ("Unforgiven").
Kenneth Branagh, the writer, actor and director who is Miss Thompson's husband, was honored for his contribution to film making.


Polykarp Kusch, Nobel Laureate In Physics in 1955, Is Dead at 82
Dr.
Polykarp Kusch, winner of a Nobel Prize in physics for his contributions to knowledge of the atom, died Saturday at his home in Dallas.
He was 82.
He had suffered a series of strokes and had been ill for several months, his family said.


First the Whitewash, Then the Thrills


Corrections
An answer in the Q&amp;A column of Science Times on Feb. 16, about constellations seen from the Southern Hemisphere, referred incorrectly to a description of the Southern Cross by Dr.
Allan J. Friedman of the New York Hall of Science in Queens.
It is at least partly visible for part of the year below 30 degrees north latitude.
This correction was delayed because a reader's letter and an exchange of correspondence with Dr.
Friedman were misplaced.


Report Says Man Killed by Police Was Shot in the Back
New York City's chief medical examiner said yesterday that a man who was shot and killed by the police outside a 24-hour diner in Manhattan early Saturday morning was shot in the back three times, a finding that contradicted the initial Police Department account that he had been shot in the chest and stomach.
The case of the killing of Bekim Ahmeti, a 20-year-old unemployed doorman from Staten Island, will be presented to a grand jury, as is standard in fatal shootings by police officers.
It is also being investigated by a department firearms review board and the Internal Affairs Bureau, also standard procedure.


Howe Off to a Fast Start in Relief
It is still only spring training, still two weeks from the start of the season, but when Steve Howe walks from the bullpen to the pitcher's mound here and begins throwing, it sometimes seems like the middle of summer.
Howe doesn't need spring, he needs a catcher and a batter and some teammates with gloves.
On the first day he arrived and started pitching, he looked ready for April.


INSIDE
New Pilot Rule Proposed
Citing deadly crashes in Denver and New York, the Government proposed a rule to prevent pairing inexperienced pilots and co-pilots.
Page A14.
Senate Test for Democrats
A Senate vote on taxing Social Security benefits will test Democrats' willingness to cast unpopular votes to support President Clinton.
Page A20.
Old Language Deciphered
Scholars have decoded an early American language known as epi-Olmec.
Science Times, page C1.
The Splintering of Top 40
Pop music's most important promotion medium is falling victim to fragmented radio audiences.
Page C13.


Many Say Lab-Animal Tests Fail to Measure Human Risk
Dozens of caged rats and mice spend their days here in a laboratory chewing on Purina rodent chow laced with as much boric acid as they can tolerate without risk of death from poisoning.
These rodents and more than 1,000 others are being used to study seven common environmental and household chemicals to see if any cause reproductive problems.
The rats and mice are allowed to breed at will.
Then scientists here at R.O.W.
Sciences, a research laboratory that works under Federal contract, examine several generations of offspring for abnormalities or defects.


Cadence Shares Plunge 36% On Expectations of a Loss
Shares in Cadence Design Systems Inc., a software producer, plummeted 36 percent today after the company said that it expected first-quarter revenue would be substantially below market expectations and that it would probably report a loss for the period.
Cadence shares lost $6 each, closing at $10.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Blue Line, Deadline: Rangers Do Little
For the Rangers today, it was no big deal.
Their president and general manager, Neil Smith, was not able to make a decent trade involving goaltender Mike Richter before the National Hockey League trading deadline passed at 3 P.M. today.
He did not manage to acquire a defenseman to help replace the injured Brian Leetch, who is pretty much irreplaceable anyway.
All Smith did manage was to trade two seldom-used players -- Mark Hardy and Randy Gilhen -- in deals that can easily be termed less than signficant.


U.S. and Russian Subs in Collision In Arctic Ocean Near Murmansk
In the latest round of a cat-and-mouse game that has outlived the cold war, an American attack submarine collided on Saturday with a Russian missile-carrying sub in the Arctic Ocean, the Pentagon said today.
The collision occurred as the Grayling was shadowing a Russian Delta-class sub, which is normally equipped with 16 ocean-spanning nuclear-tipped missiles.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Alameda County, Calif., is offering through Grigsby, Branford &amp; Co. $170 million of tax-exempt refunding certificates of participation repriced to yield a maximum of 5.713 percent for an issue due in 2015.
Yields on certificiates in serial form range from 2.30 percent in 1993 to 5.35 percent in 2004, with other long maturities due in 2009 and 2014 priced to yield 5.60 percent and 5.80 percent, respectively.
The issue is insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corporation and is rated triple-A by Moody's and Standard &amp; Poor's.
*
Birmingham, Ala., has tentatively priced for sale to the public $29.2 million of tax-exempt refunding general-obligation bonds with a maximum yield of 5.873 percent for a bond due in 2019 through Central Bank of the South.
Yields on serial bonds range from 3.90 percent in 1996 to 5.65 percent in 2008, with another long maturity due in 2013 priced to yield 5.828 percent.
The issue is rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service and Aa by S.&amp; P.


Revoke Bail, Prosecutor Says to Court
A prosecution campaign for the immediate jailing of three former Glen Ridge football players convicted of sexual assault last week is to go before New Jersey's Supreme Court on Tuesday.
The court's seven justices have been asked to revoke the modest bail for the three and send them to the Essex County jail on the grounds that they are a danger to their community and might flee before their sentencing, scheduled for April 23.


NBC Admits Bad Judgment in Truck Report
A misleading "Dateline NBC" report about General Motors pickup trucks resulted from bad judgment and a compelling desire to illustrate a fire after a crash, but was not the result of "an intention to present false information," according to an investigation made public yesterday by NBC.
The disputed report, broadcast in November, involved accusations that G.M. pickup trucks with gasoline tanks outside the frame were unsafe.
The report included film of what was labeled an "unscientific crash demonstration" that purported to show a pickup bursting into flames as a result of a crash.


By Design; In Baubles, Less Is More
Accessories have always been the quick way to get with a new look.
This season, though, the way to go is to eliminate.
Try practicing accessory austerity.
The one essential is a sturdy pair of shoes.
But then pare down, instead of piling on earrings, necklaces, bracelets, chains, a belt.
Just one -- well, maybe two -- important accents will make the case.


For Mayor of Detroit, This Race Is Different
For nearly two decades, the Detroit mayoral race has taken exactly the same course: Coleman A. Young runs, and Coleman A. Young wins.
But Mr.
Young is now 74, and the city that made him its first black mayor in 1974 has suffered a sharp decline in population and economic health, and has become one of the most violent and drug-ridden cities in America.


Don't Let Trade Center Blast Ignite Witch Hunt
To the Editor:
The arrest of Mohammed A. Salameh in connection with the World Trade Center bombing (front page, March 5) has unleashed a torrent of disingenuous discussion in the public realm.
An act as reprehensible as the bombing rightly bears the mark of crisis; but moments of crisis demand caution and a sense of justice, not hysteria and flagrant witch hunting.


Trade Pact Is Facing New Hurdles
The North American Free Trade Agreement, which already faces a number of political obstacles, now faces two more -- plans by Ross Perot to speak out against Congressional approval, and the emergence of deep misgivings about it in the House of Representative's huge freshman class -- members of Congress said today.
Mr.
Perot is scheduled to testify before a House panel on Wednesday about the plan to lower trade barriers among Canada, Mexico and the United States, and he is expected to repeat some of the strong criticisms of the pact he made during the fall Presidential campaign.


Citibank Ties C.D. Rate To Stocks' Performance
Hoping to win back the money of customers discouraged by low interest rates, Citibank plans to introduce today a certificate of deposit for retirement accounts that is linked to the stock market.
The five-year C.D. guarantees depositors that their principal investment will be returned even if the stock market falls over five years.
If the market goes up, the account will pay interest that is just shy of the return of the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index of stocks.
The minimum deposit for the C.D. will be $10,000.


Don't Let Trade Center Blast Ignite Witch Hunt; We Must Act Now
To the Editor:
Following the arrest of a suspect in the bombing of the World Trade Center (front page, March 5), one hopes that public awareness will increase regarding the danger posed by militant Islamic fundamentalism.


Lilly Executive Named Chief of St. Jude Medical
Ronald A. Matricaria, an expert at transforming struggling medical-device companies into cash cows, is expected to lead a shopping spree at St.
Jude Medical Inc. when he becomes president and chief executive of the heart valve maker on April 12.
Mr.
Matricaria, 50, who rose in six years to become president of the North American drug divison at Eli Lilly &amp; Company, will succeed Lawrence A. Lehmkuhl, a financial expert who took St.
Jude Medical from $26 million in sales in 1985 to $240 million last year.
Mr.
Lehmkuhl, 55, becomes chairman, replacing William G. Hendrickson, 74, who was named chairman emeritus.


Two in Cuomo Administration Appear Likely to Gain High Posts
After looking for candidates from outside New York State, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today it was probable that he would pick two men who already work for him, to fill critical openings in his administration.
Michael J. Dowling, now the Governor's top health and human services aide, is expected to be named commissioner of the Social Services Department, and John C. Egan, now the executive director of the Dormitory Authority, is expected to be named commissioner of the Transportation Department.


Phantoms of Physics Made Visible
MAXWELL'S DEMON, a figment of the imagination of the 19th-century physicist James Clerk Maxwell, could reduce entropy, or disorder, with little or no expenditure of energy.
Although nothing like the demon exists in the real world, you can play with it in one of the eight Physics Demonstration Programs published by Physics Academic Software.
Intended for classroom instruction or independent study at the high school and undergraduate levels, these computer animations also deal with manifestations of things entitled longitudinal waves, waves on a string, two sine waves, a chain reaction, a moving charge, a radiating dipole and a thin lens.
The programs were written by Robert H. Good of the department of physics at California State University at Hayward.


U.S. Stocks Shrug Off Turmoil in Russia
Investors at first shivered but then shrugged over Russia's turmoil yesterday, as stocks recovered from steep opening losses to close only moderately behind.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 24 points within minutes of the opening and soon lost further ground as the bond market also declined.
But the Dow came back to close at 3,463.48, off 8.10 points.
Big Board decliners outnumbered gainers by about 12 to 7 on moderate volume of 233.2 million shares.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Saturday about a series of musicales honoring Sergei Rachmaninoff on the 50th anniversary of his death referred to a pianist incorrectly.
She is Constance Keene.


CHRISTOPHER BACKS YELTSIN VOTE PLAN; SEEKS MORE U.S. AID
Secretary of State Warren Christopher today endorsed President Boris N. Yeltsin's call for a national referendum, and coupled it with an appeal to the American people to support increased financial aid to Russia.
In the Administration's fullest statement on Russia since Mr.
Yeltsin claimed emergency powers on Saturday, Mr.
Christopher described the Russian political crisis as the "greatest strategic challenge of our time." He gave strong backing to the embattled Russian leader, signaling that the United States would support him as long as he acted peacefully and guaranteed civil liberties.


Corrections
A film review on Saturday about "The Blue Eyes of Yonta," in the series New Directors/New Films, gave the screening schedule incompletely.
In addition to showings on April 24 and 25 at the Brooklyn Museum, the film will be seen on April 17 and 18 at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, in Manhattan.


Dorothy Silverstone, A Philanthropist, 89


Peace Efforts in Disarray
Russia resisted a NATO plan to shoot down warplanes flying in Bosnia, and mediators warned that they might end their peace talks.
Page A8.


Samuelson Enters Boston Marathon
JOAN BENOIT SAMUELSON, the 1984 Olympic gold medalist and former world-record holder, will seek her third Boston Marathon victory April 19.
Samuelson will face a strong field that includes the 1992 Olympic champion, VALENTINA EGOROVA, and the defending champion, OLGA MARKOVA, both of Russia.
The race will mark the first time that two female Olympic marathon gold medalists will compete against each other.


Medical Tests Recommended for Patterson
The New York State Athletic Commission said yesterday it would recommend a battery of tests for TRACY HARRIS PATTERSON before he is allowed to fight again in New York.
Patterson took so many punches to the head in his March 13 bout in Poughkeepsie against JESSE BENAVIDES that the ringside physician, Dr.
DAVID SCHWAB, recommended the tests.
Patterson, who won a 12-round unanimous decision against Benavides to retain his World Boxing Council super bantamweight title, needed five stitches to close a cut near his left eye.
Patterson, of Highland, N.Y., the adoptive son of the former heavyweight champion FLOYD PATTERSON, said he wasn't hurt in the bout, which he admitted was a "brawl," but indicated he would take the tests. (AP)


More Calendar Hopscotch
New York racing, which has had its stakes calendar disrupted and six dates canceled by severe weather this year, took one more turn yesterday: The Gotham Mile for 3-year-old colts, which already had been postponed from this Saturday to the following Friday, April 2, has been moved one more time.
The race will be run at Aqueduct one day later, on Saturday, April 3, as part of a Kentucky Derby preview that will include the simulcast of the Santa Anita Derby plus 10 live races.
As a result, the Gotham now will be run two weeks before the Wood Memorial, the major prep in New York for the Kentucky Derby.
The change will restore the traditional two-week spacing between the Gotham and the Wood, which had been widened to three weeks this year before the weather began to disrupt the schedule.


Hearing-Loss Study Hints at Reviving Cells
SCIENTISTS have shown that sensory hair cells in the inner ear of mammals, which are important in hearing and balance, can regenerate after being damaged.
Excessive noise and certain drugs kill these cells and cause deafness and balance disorders in millions of people.
It has long been thought that the loss was irreversible in humans and other mammals.


Fading Breed: Fishing's Not So Easy
ALL Bob Gabrielson has ever wanted to do is earn a living fishing the Hudson, the murky big-hearted river along which he was born.
He has been out on the river when the winds were churning up waves seven feet tall and ice was congealing his eyebrows.
He has fished the river with thousand-foot nets and with a single crab pot baited with chicken wings.
In two more weeks he will slip his skiff into the muddy waters near the Tappan Zee Bridge for another season of netting shad as they rush upriver to spawn.


Figured Out the Derby With Six Weeks to Go? Make Sure You Tell the Trainers
Don't ask the trainers why all those horses are beating one another on the road to the Kentucky Derby.
Less than six weeks from the 119th Run for the Roses, they're just as confounded as you.
Shug McGaughey watched his star colt Living Vicariously run ninth in the Florida Derby on Saturday and then said with wonder: "I have no idea what to do with him now."


Senate Republican Plans to Force Vote on Social Security Tax Rise
A test vote in the Senate this week on President Clinton's proposal to raise taxes on the Social Security benefits of the most affluent retirees will offer the clearest insight to date on whether Democratic lawmakers are willing to cast politically unpopular votes to support the President's program.
Social Security is one of the most venerated aspects of Democratic dogma.
By forcing a vote on the matter, a vote that will have no binding effect, Republicans hope to embarrass and divide the Democrats.


All Communities Must Have H.I.V. Programs
To the Editor:
There is nothing "startling and controversial" about targeting human immunodeficiency virus prevention in communities with high rates of H.I.V. transmission (front page, March 7).
What is startling is to suggest that AIDS, which that virus causes, "can be all but stamped out even without a vaccine or wonder drug." Allowing the illness and deaths of more than a million and a half people in the United States infected with H.I.V. is not the way a civilized society ends an epidemic.


Review/Television; Euthanasia as It Seems To Those Taking Part
Debates about euthanasia, like those about abortion, tend to be dominated by holier-than-thou hollerers and more-compassionate-than-thou polemicists.
So all credit to "Choosing Death" for avoiding the recriminatory mode as it explores the consequences of medicine's ability to sustain a sort of existence that does not always seem to its beneficiaries a synonym for living.
Most of tonight's two-hour joint edition of "Health Quarterly" and "Frontline" consists of remarkably intimate conversations with patients, family members and doctors in the Netherlands, the only country where euthanasia is officially condoned, if not exactly legal.
The tone is sympathetic toward those who have chosen death and those who have helped them get there, but the spirit is more one of reflection than advocacy.


Three lip-synching women in wigs get more than 60 seconds of fame.
YOU read it here first: The success of Diet Pepsi's Uh-Huh Girls can be traced to the uh-huh name itself.
The phrase is cross-generational, used by everyone from youngsters to George Bush, who sanctioned the term in his 1988 debate with Michael Dukakis.
The saying is particularly appealing to the yet-unnamed generation of people born during the 1960's and 1970's.
Like them, it defies strict definitions.
Then again, the group's success may be the result of hypnotic lip-synching.


Less Is Brewing in Witching Hours
The triple-witching hour, which in days past often sent stocks spinning 40 points or more in the final hour of trading, no longer casts such a possessing spell.
Only once in the last 12 triple-witching days -- when three sets of options and futures contracts simultaneously expire each quarter -- has the Dow Jones industrial average moved as much as 1 percent.
Last Friday, for example, the Dow gained less than 6 points.


Arab Stabs 6 in Jewish Schoolyard, Stirring Reprisals
A knife-wielding Arab man from an East Jerusalem slum burst into a high-school yard in a nearby Jewish neighborhood today, stabbing and wounding five students and their principal before being overpowered and badly beaten by an angry crowd.
Bands of Israelis, most of them teen-age boys, took to the streets after the attack, shouting "Death to Arabs!" and hurling stones at Arab-owned cars and smashing their windows.
One Arab man who happened to be walking through the Jewish neighborhood, Talpiot, was set upon and beaten, and another was hit in the face by a stone.


Write a Fair Habeas Corpus Law
Washington gridlocked over crime legislation last year, handing the new Administration and the new Congress a chance to pass a better bill.
A prime battleground will again be habeas corpus, a Latin term that translates into hot legal and political controversy.
The issue offers Attorney General Janet Reno a stern early challenge.
Habeas corpus -- "You should have the body" -- is the venerated writ, or court order, that for centuries has required kings and jailkeepers to produce prisoners and answer challenges to the legality of their detention.
State prisoners commonly ask Federal courts for the writ as they pursue claims that their convictions are unconstitutional.


Review/Music; Kraus and Anderson In Concert of Opera Arias
Voice fans in New York were spread thin on Saturday evening.
While the 65-year-old mezzo-soprano Christa Ludwig gave her New York farewell recital at Carnegie Hall, the tenor Alfredo Kraus and the soprano June Anderson performed arias and duets at Avery Fisher Hall.
It was a glittery affair, with vocal pyrotechnics galore, especially from Ms.
Anderson, and intermittent interpretive artistry, especially from Mr.
Kraus.
Mr.
Kraus is also 65, six months older than Ms.
Ludwig in fact, but he shows no eagerness to retire.
In another joint appearance with Ms.
Anderson, at Lincoln Center Off Stage on Wednesday evening, Mr.
Kraus spoke as though he intended to go on performing forever.
The singers discussed their professional relationship, which began 10 years ago with a performance of Donizetti's "Lucia di Lammermoor" in Florence and includes an EMI recording of assorted arias and duets, from 1987.


Gay Synagogue Seeks to March in Salute to Israel
Members of a gay and lesbian synagogue want to march in the annual Salute to Israel parade in New York City in May, but some Jewish groups have raised objections to inclusion of the synagogue.
So far all discussions have been behind the scenes, as the parties involved try to avoid the sort of wrenching public debate that arose in recent years when a gay group tried to join the St.
Patrick's Day Parade.


Bridge
There was one remarkable upset in the preliminary round of the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals here on Sunday.
The third-seeded team -- Russ Ekeblad of Providence, R.I., Ron Sukoneck of Annandale, Va., Michael Becker of Teaneck, N.J., Ron Rubin of Manhattan, Peter Weichsel of Encenitas, Calif., and Bobby Levin of Aventura, Calif. -- won the Spingold Knockout Teams in Toronto last July.
Here they needed to win one match out of two, but lost by 3 imps to a Missouri foursome, James Milne, Wally Franck, Tim Hays and William Borengasser, and then by just one imp to Paul Orlett, Brad Furnish, Donna Stack and Gary Roberts, all from the Kansas City area.


F.D.A. Head Seeks Controls On Fish From Nets to Stores
The Commissioner of Food and Drugs said today that the only way to insure that fish is safe to eat is by inspecting it from the moment it is caught until the time it leaves the food store.
Unlike meat and poultry inspection, which is continuous, fish inspection is sporadic.


Market Place; Surging brokerage stocks reflect Tokyo's new market mood.
COMING from any other major financial market, it would have seemed like a joke, but last week's report was big news in Japan: Securities dealers here have decided, in consultation with the Finance Ministry, to double the number of companies permitted to sell shares to the public.
Starting in April, two a week will be able to go public, from one a week now.
The report was a measure of a new mood of optimism here on the stock market, which has shown new life after having fallen more than 50 percent since the end of 1989.
The Government has taken measures to help the market, including pouring some of its own trust money into shares.


Camera Ban In Courtroom For Child Case
After a plea last week by Katie Beers to "keep her private life private," a Family Court judge today barred cameras from the courtroom while her mother, Marilyn Beers, tries to regain custody of her.
But the judge said reporters could continue to cover the proceedings, except when Katie appears in court or during other sensitive testimony about Katie, 10, who gained national attention when she was kidnapped in December and held captive in an underground bunker for 16 days.


The Health Agenda: 6 Weeks and Counting -- A status report.; Clinton Health-Care Planners Are Facing Delicate Decisions
In a marathon series of meetings over the weekend, Administration officials started to whittle down the options and to draft recommendations for President Clinton's ambitious plan to reinvent the American health-care system.
The President and his health team already know their general approach to curbing runaway medical costs and extending coverage to all Americans: a vast change in the way medical care is organized and delivered.
Most patients and doctors would join groups like health maintenance organizations, accepting limits on their choices in return for lower costs.


No Headline
Helping the Russian people to build a free society and a market economy -- this is the greatest strategic challenge of our time. -- WARREN CHRISTOPHER, Secretary of State.  [ A12:6. ]


Corrections
A report in the Book Notes column on Wednesday about the cancellation of a book signing referred incorrectly to a Florida newspaper, and because of an editing error a correction in this space yesterday misstated the paper's role.
The paper was The Fort Lauderdale Sun-Sentinel; it wrote about the scheduled signing and described parts of the book, but did not raise doubts about the book.


Executive Changes
CHYRON CORP., Melville, L.I., announced the resignation of Alfred O. P. Leubert as president and chief operating officer.
A search for his replacement is under way.
DIME SAVINGS BANK OF NEW YORK, New York, named Anthony R. Martinez senior vice president and chief appraisal services manager.


Corrections
The Votes in Congress chart on Sunday provided an incorrect key for House votes.
A white square indicated yea votes; a black square indicates nay votes.


Forget About the Sloppy Fairway, No Walking Is Required on These Drives


Make Room for a New Crop of Books
THIS is National Clean Out Your Bookshelves Week.
Well, if it isn't, it ought to be.
For all the talk about computers' eliminating the need for paper, the truth is that computers have created a mammoth market for computer books.
It is a symbiotic relationship: publishers, desktop and otherwise, are using computers to generate computer books at a frenzied pace.


Franco and Kent Pass Their First Tests
It was a typical spring training box score, full of numbers without much import and names without a place in the major leagues for the regular season.
The Mets, though, were all but looking to frame it, stage a ceremony and hang it in the clubhouse as an organizational icon.
It had nothing to do with the final score.
It had to do with the reality that one of the pitching lines read: Franco, 1 IP, 0 hits, 0 runs, 1 walk, 1 strikeout.


Trenton Pushes Commuter Tax Like New York's
In a revival of the border war between New York and New Jersey, the Senate unanimously voted today to impose a new commuter tax on thousands of New Yorkers and other out-of-state workers whose jobs are in New Jersey.
If approved by the Assembly and signed into law by Gov.
Jim Florio, both of which are likely, the legislation would allow New Jersey to tax the New Jersey income of out-of-state workers at a rate based on their total family income, the same method that New York has used the last five years to compute taxes on commuters.


Don't Let Trade Center Blast Ignite Witch Hunt; Self-Made Refugees
To the Editor:
"Bomb Suspect's Path to Piety and Elusive Dreams" (front page, March 8) portrays Mohammed A. Salameh, arrested in connection with the World Trade Center bombing, as having a "childhood, like those of many Palestinians of his generation" which "was rudely interrupted by war."


Review/Opera; 'Pelleas,' In Seattle, Is Back In Fashion
Claude Debussy, believing he would never find a receptive audience for "Pelleas et Melisande," once jokingly proposed that the opera be given a production in Japan: a place as far removed as possible from the manners and mannerisms of the European tradition.
Using the French composer's perspective, the city of Seattle is more than halfway there, and a new production of this 1902 work by the Seattle Opera does indeed go halfway toward Debussy's goal of having the opera stand apart from usual expectations.
Gone from the stage are any hints of the preciously symbolic and mythic world of Maurice Maeterlinck's play.
There is no forest, no castle, no well, no courtyard, no tower.
Instead, each set consits of an abstract sculpture by Dale Chihuly, the reknowned artist in glass: tubes and protuberances, rippling plastic, enormous curved disks speckled with red and green and blue.
These objects, sometimes twice the height of the singers, are all meant to look like the glass Mr.
Chihuly used to construct the original models; they were also all meant to add to the Symbolist quality of this work, amplifying its mixture of Art Nouveau imagery and unexplainable allusion.


U.S. Proposal Would Regulate Pairing of Pilots
The Federal Aviation Administration today proposed a regulation that would prevent the pairing of a pilot and co-pilot if each has less than 75 hours of operating time in the type of airplane being flown.
The proposed regulation was prompted in part by crashes in Denver in 1987 and in New York in 1989 in which a total of 30 people were killed.
In each incident, and inexperienced flight crew was blamed for the crash.


James F. Hatcher Jr.; Producer, 71
James F. Hatcher Jr., whose career as a director and producer at the University of Alabama at Birmingham spanned four decades, died on Friday at the university hospital.
He was 71 and lived in Birmingham.
The cause was a heart attack, said a spokeswoman for the university.


Prudential Partnerships Are Target of Hostile Bid
Raising memories of the 1980's, a series of hostile tender offers was begun yesterday for 31 different entities.
But unlike in the past, the bids were designed to buy investments almost nobody wants.
The tender offers were filed for a series of soured energy limited partnerships sponsored in the late 1980's by Prudential-Bache Securities, now known as Prudential Securities.
The bidder, George B. Kaiser, is the owner of the Kaiser-Francis Oil Company, an independent oil and gas producer based in Tulsa, Okla.


CHRONICLE
SALLIE BINGHAM, the newspaper heiress and feminist (though not necessarily in that order), has given $750,000 to finance the position of women's studies archivist at Duke University.
Why Duke?
"For one thing it has a woman president," she said, referring to Nannerl L. Keohane.
Ms.
Bingham sounded perky indeed for someone recently parted with three-quarters of a million dollars.


A Mini-Hong Kong, From Scratch
Stepping through grass, mud and clods of dirt, Ding Shilong ran his hands across a new wire fence and beamed at the thought of what a mini-Hong Kong might look like on this huge chunk of barren land.
After nearly five years of internal wrangling, the central Government has finally allowed foreign developers to begin construction of an 11.6-square-mile port and manufacturing center here, in the southern island province of Hainan.
The project, which is expected to cost $1.3 billion for the initial stages, is one of the boldest economic experiments the Chinese authorities have begun.


Tenneco Revises Its Results To Show a $1.3 Billion Loss
After previously reporting a 1992 profit, Tenneco Inc. said today that it had restated last year's results to show a $1.3 billion loss partly because of a $920 million restructuring of its troubled J. I. Case farm- and construction-equipment division.
The announcement caught analysts by surprise, but they generally viewed it favorably since the restructuring could help stem losses at Case, which had a $228 million operating loss last year and a $618 million loss in 1991.


Patterns
A Barneys Binge
"I woke up singing James Brown's 'I Feel Good,' " Gene Pressman, a co-president of Barneys New York, announced at lunch Thursday.
"I was howling, jumping around and howling."
No wonder.
During last week's showings of fall and winter ready-to-wear, Mr.
Pressman was the king of Paris -- a retailer with money to spend and an itch to gamble -- as he prepared to fill up the racks of the company's Madison Avenue store, scheduled to open Sept. 8.
The Barneys' binge ranged from exclusive Givenchy pieces inspired by Audrey Hepburn to the raggedy-hip Xuly-Bet.
Also on order: the Dutch company Orson and Bodil, Belgium's Martin Margiela, Ann Demeulemeester and Dries van Noten, Italy's Costume National and England's Flyte Ostell.


Did India and Pakistan Face Atomic War? Claim is Debated
A magazine article published this week said India and Pakistan were on the brink of nuclear war in 1990, but the official who was the White House national security adviser at the time today described that characterization as exaggerated.
"We were worried about a delicate situation, but I wouldn't go any further than that," Brent Scowcroft said in a telephone interview.
While the article, in The New Yorker, included anonymous assertions that Pakistan loaded nuclear weapons aboard American-made F-16's at the height of the crisis, Mr.
Scowcroft said, "There was no indication that it ever got that far."


Serbs Intensify Sarajevo Attack; U.N. Fears a Final All-Out Push
Serbian gunners continued a ferocious artillery attack on Sarajevo today, creating an atmosphere of alarm reminiscent of the worst days of fighting last spring and summer.
On Sunday, and with only slightly less intensity today, artillery, mortar and tank shells exploded every few minutes from shortly after dawn until past dusk.
It was the fifth consecutive day of heavy bombardment by Serbian guns arrayed on the mountainsides overlooking the city.


South Korea Aims to Spur Its Economy
The South Korean Government announced a package of interest-rate cuts and other measures today aimed at stimulating growth over the next 100 days in the nation's faltering economy.
South Korea has been faced with a slowdown in the last year as a result of declining exports linked to the global recession.
The nation's economic growth plunged to about 2 percent in the fourth quarter of 1992 from nearly 10 percent in previous years.


An Independent Tribunal: A First in Russian History
The Constitutional Court, established in July 1991, is the first independent judiciary in Russian history.
Previously, all courts had been part of executive structures.
President Boris N. Yeltsin developed the idea of a Constitutional Court in early 1991, when he was head of the Russian Parliament under the Soviet Union.
In a draft of a new constitution for the Russian Republic, Mr.
Yeltsin envisioned a court that would be a true third branch of government to maintain a democratic constitutional system in which rule of law would replace arbitrary decision making.


Kahane Suspect Innocent, Wife Says
She said she has lived on donations in a place she won't disclose because of death threats to her children.
But swathed in a gray veil so that only her eyes showed, the wife of the man tried in the killing of Rabbi Meir Kahane, broke her silence yesterday and vowed to defend her husband and the men charged in the World Trade Center bombing.
"With the last breath in my body I will fight against all the injustices that I see happening against my husband and the Muslim brothers," said Khadijah Nosair, 36.
She spoke in an interview arranged by William Kunstler, a defense lawyer for her husband, El Sayyid A. Nosair.


MEXICO'S CAPITAL WANTS HOME RULE
In an unofficial plebiscite seen as a test of this country's desire for democratic political change, Mexico City residents voted overwhelmingly for the right to elect their local government, results today showed.
Nearly 85 percent of those who took part in the highly improvised election on Sunday called for an end to the longstanding system in which the Mexican President names the powerful Mayor of the Federal District.
Nearly complete results also showed strong support for the creation of a local legislature and for giving statehood to the Federal District.


A Wise Bet on Russia's Hopes
Critics who are jumping all over President Clinton for betting America's chips on Boris Yeltsin have not answered the key questions: What is Mr.
Clinton's alternative?
And how could temporizing help Russian reform?
Mr.
Yeltsin could fail.
But Mr.
Clinton and other Western leaders do not have time for rumination.
Their only responsible option is to back Mr.
Yeltsin and back him now.


Review/Film Festival; A Boy's Lesson in Disillusionment
As he remembers himself years later, the narrator of Goran Markovic's full-bodied, initially charming farcical memoir, "Tito and Me," is a rather impossible little boy named Zoran (Dimitrie Vojnov), who is 10 and fat.
He's not just "rounded" as his grandmother says, but overweight in the big-bellied, multi-chinned way of children who consume too many sweets and, in Zoran's case, plaster.
The boy has a compulsion to eat plaster.
The walls of the family apartment in Belgrade in 1954 look pitted, as if damaged by small-arms fire during an insurrection.
Zoran sneaks around the rooms and, when unobserved, peels back the wallpaper to stuff himself with a building material he finds as satisfying as meringues.
It could be a sign of some kind of emotional as well as nutritional need.
His ill-tempered uncle says it's a symptom of Zoran's degeneracy, pure and simple.


Highest Judge In El Salvador Is Under Fire
When Jos Rene Garca, who served legal notices for the Supreme Court, came forward last year with allegations of official corruption, he was kidnapped by soldiers and then thrown in jail on what he said were trumped-up drug charges.
After being released, Mr.
Garcia told lawyers and human rights workers that while he was in prison his jailers had brought him a picture of his daughter.
They told him, he said, that his family would be hurt if he persisted in his disclosures and that this chilling message came directly from his Supreme Court employers.


Welfare Recipients Need Education and Jobs, Not Bank Cards
To the Editor:
I read with increasing dismay "Welfare Recipients Are Joining the Age of Plastic" (news article, March 14).
Underlying the article is the notion that streamlining the administration of welfare payments with bank cards is effective reform because, among other things, it "lessens" the stigma of using food stamps.


Review/Film Festival; The Cynical Underside Of Physical Disability
Yilmaz Arslan's semi-documentary film "Passages" sets out with a vengeance to undermine Hollywood's reassuring portrayals of physically disabled people as heroic conquerers of despair and immobility.
Set in a German rehabilitation center that despite its spiffy, ultra-modern appearance is filmed to resemble an eerie, cavernous shadowland, the film portrays the volatile interactions of a group of teen-agers who have serious disabilities.
Because much of the film looks as if it was shot from a motorized wheelchair, the center has the scary oppressive feel of a large, well-kept prison as experienced by a child.
As the camera swoops down the halls and lurches around corners, the film often evokes a feeling of life about to careen out of control.


Military Might
Military stocks are no darlings of the Clinton era, but some began to regain a little charm yesterday.
Apparently looking for ways to play Russia's crisis, investors alighted on stocks like E-Systems Inc.
The Dallas company makes military electronics used in intelligence-gathering, including equipment for satellites.


4 Into 3: Call It Patrick Division
Three National Hockey League teams have shared the metropolitan New York market for a decade, but only once, in 1990, have all three qualified for the playoffs in the same spring.
This year could be the second time.
With the passing of yesterday's trading deadline, the rosters are set for the stretch drive, which ends on April 16.
Although nothing is yet mathematically certain, it is likely that Pittsburgh will clinch the right to defend its Stanley Cup championship by finishing first in the Patrick Division and that Philadelphia will finish sixth and out of the playoffs.


There's Nothing Like A Seconds Opinion
There is nothing like mass confusion to make a great basketball game attain a level of great amusement.
Few televised moments have been as chaotic as the last 9.6 seconds -- five minutes in real time -- of Sunday's Michigan-U.C.L.A. game, when a missed jumper by the Wolverines' Jalen Rose started a new shot clock, allowing Jimmy King to hit the winning basket with 1.5 ticks left in overtime.
Was Michigan guilty of a shot-clock violation?


Teen-Ager Charged in Slaying at Rider College
A 17-year-old high school student was charged with homicide on Sunday in a shooting at Rider College that left one man dead.
The shooting occurred in the parking lot next to the Student Center about 2:30 A.M.
Sunday, at the end of a party in the center that was sponsored by the Phi Beta Sigma fraternity.


Boxer Is Listed in Critical Condition
SERGIE ARTEMIEV, hospitalized after losing a lightweight title bout Sunday night to CARL GRIFFITH in Atlantic City, remained in critical condition yesterday with a blood clot on the surface of his brain.
Artemiev was in the trauma intensive care unit at Atlantic City Medical Center-City Division, where he underwent surgery Sunday night to drain the clot, said Artemiev's trainer, THOMAS GALLAGHER.


Colombian Physician Challenges Malaria on the Home Front
WORKING in laboratories housed in Victorian-era hospital buildings here, a Colombian physician may have unexpectedly jumped to the front of a world race for a vaccine against one of the planet's deadliest diseases: malaria.
In an article in the current issue of The Lancet, a medical journal published in Britain, Dr.
Manuel Elkin Patarroyo and others reported that a field trial involving 1,548 volunteers found a general protection rate of 38.8 percent against the most common and deadly form of malaria, Plasmodium falciparum, which causes about 95 percent of malaria deaths worldwide.
In children ages 1 to 4 years, who are the most vulnerable to infection and death, protection rose to 77 percent.
The rate for adults over 45 years old was 67 percent.
Immunity was found to last from one to three years.


Padres Send Dozier to Minors
Outfielder D. J. DOZIER, acquired by the Padres from the Mets in the TONY FERNANDEZ trade, was one of four players sent down to San Diego's Class AAA affiliate in Las Vegas, Nev.
Dozier, pitcher WALLY WHITEHURST and minor league catcher RAUL CASANOVA were acquired for Fernandez, an All-Star shortstop, on Oct. 26.
Whitehurst has yet to pitch in a game because of soreness in his right elbow, which was surgically repaired three weeks before the trade. (AP)


Witness for 4 Officers Tells of a Change of Mind
The Federal trial of four police officers charged with violating Rodney G. King's civil rights took an unexpected turn today when an expert witness for the defense testified that he had earlier been a prospective Government witness but had changed his mind about Mr.
King's beating and no longer considered it excessive.
The witness, Edward Nowicki, a specialist in use of force who trains police departments in baton techniques like those used against Mr.
King, said his change of mind occurred last October when prosecutors preparing him for Government testimony gave him the opportunity to get a closer look at the amateur videotape of the beating.
His reaction to the tape then, he said, was not at all what the prosecutors had been looking for.


Telephone Bonds From Puerto Rico
In yesterday's largest tax-exempt sale, the Puerto Rico Telephone Authority priced $740 million of revenue bonds through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
The financing included revenue bonds tentatively priced with a maximum yield of 5.787 percent for a bond due in 2022, with another due in 2013 priced to yield 5.734 percent.
Serial bonds were initially priced to yield from 2.40 percent for an issue due in 1994 to 4.40 percent in 1998, 5.20 percent in 2003 and 5.60 percent in 2008.


Rangers Hold Their Destiny
Before the trading deadline passed on Monday, General Manager Neil Smith of the Rangers could think of nothing grander than landing a top-notch defenseman to replace Brian Leetch, the league's best.
"I would have loved to steal a great defenseman from someone," Smith said today at the Rangers' practice, three days after losing Leetch for eight weeks to a freakish accident.
"But it just didn't happen."


Oung Mean, 66, Dies; High Cambodia Monk
The Venerable Oung Mean, who was Cambodia's third highest ranking Buddhist monk and became a religious and cultural leader of expatriates in America, died on March 16 at a hospital in Olney, Md.
He was 66.
The cause was a heart attack, said associates at the Cambodian Buddhist Society in Silver Spring, Md., where he lived.


Barney Faces Charges
The Detroit Lions defensive back LEM BARNEY, a member of the Pro Football Hall of Fame, was charged in Detroit yesterday with cocaine and marijuana possession.
He was released on $10,000 bond. (AP)


F.C.C. Easing Is Hinted On Syndicating Reruns
Officials of the Federal Communications Commission suggested yesterday that they were considering a substantial relaxation of rules that prevent the television networks from having a financial interest in the rerun rights of prime-time programs.
Speaking at a meeting in New York sponsored by the investment firm Wertheim Schroder Inc. and the trade publication Variety, the F.C.C.'s chairman, James Quello, strongly reiterated his opposition to rules that prohibit the networks from having a financial interest in their programming and from selling reruns in the television syndication market.


Boats, and Death, in Florida
Florida, blessed with sun, water and vacationers, is also cursed by nearly 100 boating deaths a year, more than any other state.
As many alert citizens have recognized, Florida needs to train and perhaps even license its boat operators.
That's true in other states as well.
The need was tragically underscored Monday when two players from the Cleveland Indians baseball team were killed in a boating accident not far from Orlando.
Their boat was probably traveling at high speed, in the dark, when it struck a pier, gravely injuring a third Indians player.


Two Circuses Going Nose to Nose
And now, ladies and gentlemen, and children of all ages, prepare for the newest competitive entertainment spectacle in Manhattan: the war of the circuses.
Actually, it's more of a battle between David and Goliath.
Goliath, of course, is the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus, which modestly proclaims itself the Greatest Show on Earth.
It opens on Thursday in Madison Square Garden (circus capacity: 16,000), with dozens of animals and 150 performers in three rings, including one star clown, David Larible.


A Son's Anguished Letter Rivets Woody Allen Hearing
Woody Allen listened quietly from the witness stand yesterday as Mia Farrow's lawyer read an angry and passionate letter from the couple's son, Moses, in which the teen-ager said he no longer considered Mr.
Allen his father and hoped that he would kill himself.
"You have done a horrible, unforgivable, needy, ugly, stupid thing," Moses A. Farrow, now 15, wrote, referring to the affair between Mr.
Allen and Soon-Yi Farrow Previn, the boy's older sister.
"I hope you get so humiliated you commit suicide."


Teen-Age Accidents and Suicide
ACCIDENTS and injuries sustained by teen-agers and young adults are harbingers of suicide far more often than is realized, according to a new study by Seattle researchers, who urge that more attention be paid to these not always subtle warnings.
David C. Grossman of the Harborview Injury Prevention and Research Center and colleagues found that the incidence of suicide was 12 times higher among adolescents and young adults who had previously been hospitalized because of an injury.
The finding evolved from a study of hospital and other records of 700 Washington State residents aged 16 to 35 who had committed suicide and nearly 3,500 others of similar age, sex and residential area who had not.
Their findings are published in the current issue of Epidemiology.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the judicial system in El Salvador misidentified a Salvadoran who came forward last year with allegations of official corruption.
He is Jose Rene Garcia.


Public &amp; Private; The Wrong Wing
Someone looking out for the sorry state of my soul sent me "The Spirit of Jezebel," a religious tract originating with a pastor in Texas that takes a kind of seamless-garment approach to the problems of the United States.
It's all women's fault.
Equal opportunity, the wearing of slacks, women in the military and on the bench, feminism, even bobbed hair -- all have contributed to the disintegration of American society.
And the solution is clear: "Women were never made to be in the work force outside the home, but to marry, bear children, and guide the house.  The young women are not exhorted to become professional business women, to be some man's boss or submit themselves to another head, but are under the father's authority until marriage, when the husband becomes her only head and authority and her provider."


Opening a Van Door the Hands-Free Way
The General Motors Corporation, seeking a pick-me-up for slumping sales of its mini-vans, is introducing the industry's first remote-control side-passenger door.
Available next month as a $295 option, the system allows a driver walking toward the van -- with arms full of packages, say -- to depress a "remote" button on the key chain.
The door slides open automatically.


Yet another automobile account, this time Audi of America, is headed for an agency review.
JUST when the automotive account review merry-go-round was showing signs of slowing, Audi of America Inc. has sent it spinning again.
The company said yesterday that it would place in review its account, with estimated billings of $23 million.
The disclosure followed by a day the publication of a report in Adweek that a review was under way.


AVON SAYS PAYOUT TO FORMER OFFICIAL WILL HURT PROFITS
Avon Products Inc. said yesterday that it would not meet first-quarter earnings objectives because it had been ordered by a California court to pay a former official more than $20 million.
The award, reached in arbitration, goes to Jeffrey H. Tamkin, who was chief executive and a minority shareholder of Retirement Inns of America, a health-care subsidiary sold by Avon in 1988 and 1989.
Avon said the dispute had arisen out of the divestiture, but declined to elaborate.
Mr.
Tamkin, who now runs a Los Angeles development company, did not return phone calls.


Teaching Children to Say No to TV
To the Editor:
I was pleased to read "TV Chastity Belt" by Albert Shanker, president of the American Federation of Teachers (advertisement, The Week in Review, March 7), which discusses my TV Allowance invention -- "a gadget that rations children's television time and shuts off the set when a kid has used up his allotment." However, some comment and correction are needed.


Johnson &amp; Johnson Official Named President at Celgene
Thomas H. Odiorne, a senior executive at Johnson &amp; Johnson, was appointed yesterday as president and chief operating officer of the Celgene Corporation, a start-up biotechnology company that is developing processes to cleanse hazardous waste and make drugs safer.
Mr.
Odiorne, 52, president of Johnson &amp; Johnson's ICOM business development group, said he would move up as Celgene's chief executive next winter, succeeding John L. Ufheil, 59, when Mr.
Ufheil retires at the end of his contract.


YELTSIN AND RIVALS ARE IN A STANDOFF IN POWER STRUGGLE
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and his parliamentary opponents were deadlocked today after the Constitutional Court said that Mr.
Yeltsin's assumption of "special powers" had violated the Constitution.
The expected judgment, by a young court with untested powers, did little to still Russia's political war of nerves.
There seemed no early end to the continuing power struggle between Mr.
Yeltsin and the Parliament.
The President has called for a plebiscite on April 25 to decide whether the country should be ruled primarily by the executive branch or by the legislature, while the conservatives and Communists who dominate the Parliament have talked of impeaching Mr.
Yeltsin since his speech on Saturday.


The Circus Is Just One of His Acts
Consider, for a moment, the kaleidoscopic and far-flung interests of Kenneth Feld, owner of the world's largest live entertainment company.
A replica of the space shuttle that Mr.
Feld owns and leases to the Kennedy Space Center is visited by 5,000 to 7,000 people a day and is now on its way to South Korea for an exposition.
Ice skaters employed in his five Walt Disney World on Ice shows are twirling in arenas from Milwaukee to East Asia.


U.N. Says It Will Fly Muslims Out of Enclave
United Nations officials announced tonight that they would go ahead with the evacuation of hundreds of wounded Muslims by helicopter from an enclave in eastern Bosnia that has been pounded by Serbian nationalist forces for months.
A spokesman said that the United Nations had decided to go ahead with the evacuation from the area around Srebrenica without the final approval of Bosnian Serb leaders and that the helicopters would not stop in the Serbian-held town of Zvornik for inspections on their way in and out, as had been previously discussed.


Bank Money Market and C.D. Yields Fall
Yields offered by banks on money market accounts and certificates of deposit for the week beginning today are down from the previous week, with the New York market leading the decline.
According to The Bank Rate Monitor, an interest rate publication in North Palm Beach, Fla., the average New York money market yield, three-month and six-month certificates of deposit were all down two basis points, to 2.56 percent, 2.67 percent and 2.88 percent, respectively.


PAMELA HARRIMAN CHOSEN FOR PARIS
President Clinton today nominated Pamela Harriman, an accomplished political operator with long-established networks of rich and powerful friends on both sides of the Atlantic, to be Ambassador to France.
Mrs.
Harriman, the 73-year-old widow of Gov.
Averell Harriman of New York, is the doyenne of Democratic politics and a leading fund-raiser and donor.
It was to Mrs.
Harriman's elegant Georgetown house, with its Van Goghs and Picassos, that the Clintons journeyed for their first gala dinner after arriving in the capital.


Serb's Adamant Stand Brings Bosnia Talks to a Halt
The long foundering Bosnian peace negotiations suffered a serious setback tonight when the leader of the Bosnian Serbs again refused to accept the peace plan drawn up by international mediators.
Radovan Karadzic told a news conference tonight that he had "got permission" from the mediators to leave New York but he had decided not to leave after reading reports saying he had walked out of the talks.
He said he planned another meeting with Cyrus R. Vance, representing the United Nations, and Lord Owen of the European Community, followed by another news conference.


Bail Upheld In Abuse Case In Glen Ridge
New Jersey's Supreme Court let stand today the bail of the three former Glen Ridge football players convicted of sexual assault last week, allowing them to remain free until their sentencing on April 23.
After a private meeting in chambers, the justices of the state's highest court refused to review the Essex County Prosecutor's request to revoke bail for Christopher Archer, 20, and Kevin and Kyle Scherzer, 22-year-old twins.


Thailand Bears Guilt for Khmer Rouge
To the Editor:
Your March 7 report that arms are now flowing from Cambodia to Thailand shows part of the chilling story of Bangkok's collaboration with Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge since 1978.
Last Dec. 17, the Far Eastern Economic Review published excerpts from a classified United Nations report that asserted Thailand's military forces were operating in the Khmer Rouge zones of Cambodia in violation of the 1991 Paris Peace Agreement.


Lessons of South Carolina: What Secretary May Try for U.S. Schools
When Richard W. Riley -- then Governor, now President Clinton's Secretary of Education -- first looked hard at South Carolina's schools in 1983, he saw an educational backwater.
The state trailed nearly all others in test scores and money for schools.
Rural towns like this one did not even have working microscopes in science classrooms.
It was the start of his second term.
Within a year, mounting a campaign that offered toll-free education phone lines and educational town meetings, Mr.
Riley pushed through changes hailed at the time as the nation's most wide-ranging education effort.
By spending more money on public schools, imposing higher standards and holding the schools responsible for results, the law helped South Carolina post some of the biggest test score increases in the country, even if the state's scores still lag behind many others.


A Lot of Bumping Is Going on Among Met Pitchers
Paul Gibson is too much of a veteran not to be able to decipher the meaning of the clubhouse traffic.
Eric Hillman, who throws with his left hand and has thrown seven straight scoreless innings, was blocked into his locker by reporters.
Gibson didn't need to hear the words to be able to anticipate the questions or the quotes.
Hillman was hot, the manager's endorsement of him as the bullpen's left-hander was warming up, and so Gibson's future with the Mets, perilous from the outset of camp, appeared in greater danger.
His recent slight slip in stature, the 33-year-old left-hander understands, could set in motion a greater fall, right out of baseball.


Abortion Foes Reject Fanaticism and Violence; Shooting in Missouri
To the Editor:
"The Death of Dr. Gunn," (editorial, March 12) talks of the antiabortion army: "Now, for the first time, one of that army has used a gun." Incorrect.
To quote your March 12 front-page article on fears of more violence at abortion clinics: "In Springfield, Mo., in December 1991, two people were critically injured when a man pulled out a sawed-off shotgun, demanded to see the person performing abortions and shot the building owner and the receptionist, who remains paralyzed. No one has been arrested in the shooting" (some editions).


Book Notes
Serial Killer's Diary
The simple black notebook gave no outward hint of the explosive and chilling story that was scrawled between its covers.
Just a notebook easily missed, as it had been for the more than 100 years since it was written.
But when Robert Smith, the head of Smith Gryphon in London, was shown the recently discovered journal, the sinister story revealed inside turned Jeffrey Dahmer and Gary Gilmore into afterthoughts and overshadowed any novelistic or cinematic attempt to portray a serial killer.


White Not Taking, or Wearing, Jets Green Yet
Kyle Rote Jr., one of the agents representing Eagles defensive end Reggie White, spent a good part of Monday and yesterday fielding calls about the highly sought unrestricted free agent.
No, Rote said, a report by a Miami television station that White had agreed to terms with the New York Jets was not accurate.
The report cited a confidential National Football League source, but was quickly denied by the Jets' general manager, Dick Steinberg; Jim Sexton, White's other agent, and Rote.
White may yet sign with the Jets, Rote said, but White has not agreed to terms with the Jets or any other team.


Clinton Would Consider Segregating Gay Troops; Remarks Are Contrast With Earlier Stand on the Military
Facing resistance from the military over his pledge to allow homosexuals to serve in the armed forces, President Clinton said for the first time today that he would consider proposals to segregate troops by sexual orientation.
Mr.
Clinton's comments at a White House news conference contrasted sharply with his public statements during the Presidential campaign and in the first days after he was elected.
Mr.
Clinton said then without qualification that he would end discrimination against homosexuals in the military.


French Culture Under Socialism: Egotism or a Sense of History?
Jack Lang, the French Minister of Culture and the best-known Socialist politician after President Francois Mitterrand, knew even before the voters went to the polls on Sunday that he would have to give up the post that made him famous.
Ever since 1991, the 10th anniversary of his ascension to cultural power, Mr.
Lang and his ministry's busy publicity people have been in what might be called a defensively self-celebratory mood.
More recently, as his enemies swelled in numbers, a counterattack has seemed all the more imperative.
And on balance, the judgment of posterity is likely to be favorable indeed on the French Socialists' achievements in the field of culture.


Bargain Bounce
Giddings &amp; Lewis has given back some gains, as bond conversions diluted its stock and investors took profits.
Although the machinery industry can be violently cyclical, "their operating performance has been anything but," said Steven Gluckstein of Arnhold &amp; S. Bleichroder Inc.
Yesterday, he said, buyers spotted a bargain.


Eliza to Run In Santa Anita
Allen E. Paulson said today in Los Angeles that he would run his star filly Eliza against colts in the Santa Anita Derby April 3, but he did not commit her to the Kentucky Derby one month later.
He also said that his star colt Corby, widely considered the favorite for the Kentucky Derby, would be shipped to Kentucky to run in the $500,000 Blue Grass Stakes April 10.


CHRONICLE
One of the nation's most eligible bachelors is getting married.
WILLIAM H. GATES, a co-founder of the computer software giant Microsoft Corporation, is planning to marry MELINDA FRENCH, a Microsoft product manager.
Mr.
Gates, 37, who is frequently portrayed as the nation's highest-profile computer hacker and one of the world's wealthiest entrepreneurs, has been dating Ms.
French, 28, for four and a half years.
They have not set a date or chosen a location for the wedding, a Microsoft spokeswoman said.
She also said whether or not they would sign a prenuptial agreement was a "private matter."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
General Motors confirmed the resignation of six purchasing executives who were colleagues of Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the purchasing chief who resigned to become No. 2 at Volkswagen.
G.M. said the six probably went to VW.  [ Page D1. ]
McDonnell Douglas's chairman reversed his position and agreed to testify at a House subcommittee hearing on the military contractor's troubled C-17 cargo plane program.  [ D1. ]


Pilgrim Sues Morningstar
Pilgrim Group Inc., a mutual fund company based here, has filed a libel suit against Morningstar Mutual Funds, accusing the Chicago-based research newsletter of deliberately oublishing false information.
The lawsuit, which seeks $2 million and unspecified punitive damages, centers on a Morningstar article that criticized a Pilgrim advertisement that ran in The Wall Street Journal on Jan. 28 and Feb. 3.


Music Notes; Sony's President Takes the Podium
It's a little like one of those elephant jokes: where does the president of an electronics and recording company with $29 billion in annual revenues conduct a concert of symphonic music?
Anywhere he wants.
Well, almost.
Norio Ogha, the president of Sony Corporation and an avid amateur conductor, will be on the podium at Avery Fisher Hall on May 12 at 7:30 P.M., conducting Beethoven's Seventh and Schubert's "Unfinished" symphonies and Strauss's "Fledermaus" Overture in a benefit concert for the Lincoln Center Consolidated Corporate Fund.
His orchestra is to be billed as Members of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra, a freelance ensemble drawn largely from the pool of Met players.
But leading a freelance band was not how Sony had hoped Mr.
Ogha would make his New York conducting debut.
In September, Michael P. Schulhof, the vice chairman of Sony U.S.A., approached the New York Philharmonic about putting his boss on the orchestra's podium, but he made little headway.
"I cannot comment on that," the Philharmonic's managing director, Deborah Borda, said at the time.
"But as a matter of policy, we do not hire the orchestra out, and if there had been any discussions, that's what we would have said." A Newcomer?
Not Really
Actually, although Mr.
Ogha's passion for conducting may at a glance look like dilettantism supported by corporate muscle, he comes to this avocation with a solid musical background.
He took both a bachelor's and a master's degree in music from the Tokyo University of Fine Arts in 1954 and then studied voice (he is a baritone) in Munich with Gerhard Husch, the legendary German lieder singer.
He earned another music degree in Berlin before returning to Japan and starting a career as a recitalist and opera singer.
"But even then," Mr.
Ogha said the other day at Sony's Manhattan headquarters, "I wanted to be a conductor as well. I studied conducting, score-reading, composition, harmony and counterpoint. I also studied the flute and, starting when I was very young, the piano."
In the early 1960's, Mr.
Ogha worked for Sony during the day and sang at night, but he gave up his double life after he fell asleep and nearly missed his cue in a performance of "Le Nozze di Figaro."
But his work at Sony kept him in touch with the classical music world.
From 1968 until he became Sony's president in 1982, he ran CBS/Sony, the Japanese arm of CBS Records, and in 1987 he oversaw Sony's acquisition of CBS Records.
In the late 1970's, when Sony and Philips collaborated on the development of the compact disk, it was Mr.
Ogha's idea that the disk be able to accommodate Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, at about 74 minutes.
Mr.
Ogha began conducting in public in 1990, when he was 60, and has conducted benefit concerts in Tokyo and Germany for the Poland Relief Fund and a handful of arts organizations and festivals.
He said he studies his scores every morning from 2:30 to 5.
"That way," he said, "it's on my time, not Sony's time." 'A Great Feel for the Music'
Nathan Leventhal, the president of Lincoln Center, saw a video of one of Mr.
Ogha's concerts at a demonstration of Sony's high-definition television system in Tokyo in August.
"He was conducting the Schubert 'Unfinished,' " Mr.
Leventhal recalled.
"It was a very musical performance, very graceful. He obviously had a great feel for the music. So when Mickey Schulhof proposed his conducting a benefit for Lincoln Center, I agreed to it."
Still, one senses slight hesitation at Lincoln Center about the idea of a well-connected, enthusiastic amateur conducting on the institution's behalf.
Several officials noted pointedly that the concert is a private, philanthropic event, not a Lincoln Center presentation.
The proceeds are to be divided among all the Lincoln Center constituents, and David Rivel, Lincoln Center's vice president for marketing, said previous events have typically raised $200,000.
This one will apparently do better than that.
Mr.
Schulhof said that one of Sony's competitors, Warner Music, has agreed to contribute $100,000 and Sony would donate even more.
Sony has also undertaken the task of selling tickets, at $50 to $100.
Information: (800) 526-7669.
As for Mr.
Ogha, it seems that in purely musical matters he is not entirely a company man.
Asked which recording of the Beethoven Seventh is his favorite, he thought for a moment and said that it was Carlos Kleiber's, with the Vienna Philharmonic.
On Deutsche Grammophon.
Spoleto Skirmish
The Spoleto Festival U.S.A., the arts festival in Charleston, S.C., that seems constitutionally unable to get through a season peaceably, has already logged its first roster-altering dispute of 1993.
John Kennedy, the festival's orchestra manager for several years and since 1990 the director of its 20th Century Perspectives series of contemporary music concerts, has resigned because of musical and philosophical differences with Steven Mercurio, the festival's music director.
The disagreement began when Mr.
Mercurio, a conductor and composer, suggested that he and Mr.
Kennedy share the direction of the three-concert series, which was the only significant exploration of contemporary music offered at last year's festival.
Mr.
Kennedy said in a telephone interview that although he objected to relinquishing control of the series, he nevertheless discussed some ideas with Mr.
Mercurio.
But when Mr.
Mercurio suggested that works by several neo-Romantic and early 20th-century composers be included in the programs, Mr.
Kennedy resolved to leave.
"It would be impossible for me to forge casual collaborations of 20th- century music with you," he wrote to Mr.
Mercurio, "because I consider programming itself to be an act of critical importance. Among the composers you mentioned, I do not feel Maurice Ravel, Igor Stravinsky or George Gershwin needs introduction or advocacy to audiences in the context of my series."
Mr.
Kennedy added that he did not care for the work of several other composers Mr.
Mercurio suggested.
Mr.
Mercurio, reached by telephone in Washington, where he was conducting "Turandot" at the Washington Opera, said that as a composer he thought he should have a hand in the festival's contemporary component.
But he insisted that he offered Mr.
Kennedy concessions, among them allowing him a hand in the new-music programming at the parent festival in Spoleto, Italy.
"He wanted to do a Cage retrospective," Mr.
Mercurio said, "and I was willing to give him that concert. It's not as if I was trying to wrest this away from him."
Mr.
Kennedy said he did not think he had deliberately been pushed out of the festival, and both he and Mr.
Mercurio said the festival's founder and artistic director, Gian Carlo Menotti, had no part in the fight.
Hemidemisemiquavers
*The Boston Symphony Orchestra has awarded its $5,000 Mark M. Horblit Award for a distinguished work by an American composer to John Corigliano for his Symphony No. 1.
The orchestra has given the award only 19 times since it was established in 1947.
The last winner was Ned Rorem in 1991.
*Anders Martinson, a 19-year-old pianist who is a freshman at Yale, has won the Gilmore Young Artist Award, a prize that includes a $15,000 career development scholarship and the use of a Baldwin piano for two years.
The Gilmore prizes are not connected with a competition, but are given to pianists after a panel of jurors has heard their work over the course of a year.
*Reveka E. Mavrovitis, a mezzo-soprano at the New York City Opera, and Jeff Balsmeyer, a director whose film "The Room" was recently shown by the Film Society of Lincoln Center, have been awarded Martin E. Segal Awards by Lincoln Center.
The prize is $4,000 each.


Classical Music in Review
'Cavalleria Rusticana' And 'Pagliacci' Metropolitan Opera
Placido Domingo occupies an increasingly lonely place in the opera world: the mature artist who thrills by his mere presence, and who at the same time dedicates himself to his roles as if his career was still young.
Mr.
Domingo's first appearance at the Met this season, in "Pagliacci" on Wednesday night, was not among his best; said to be suffering from a cold, he sang Canio cautiously at first.
But "Vesti la giubba" rang out splendidly, and the role was acted with tangible energy.
A sad old man from the outset, this clown let his poignance turn to violence in a clear, dark descent.


Soft-Drink Industry Is Fighting Back Over New Taxes
Not even their biggest boosters pretend that a Pepsi, a Dr Pepper or a Cherry Coke delivers the nutritional kick of, say, broccoli juice.
But soft drinks do contain phosphorous, sodium, a little calcium and other vital minerals, and 80 percent of them still have sugar, a carbohydrate a healthy body needs, in moderation.
But in Ohio, whether a soft drink is a genuine life-giving, tissue-and-cell-building food is a matter of caustic debate.
The state has a deficit-clogged budget, and the government has put a special tax on soft drinks to help balance it.


Substitutes Appease the Cream Gods
THIS pasta, vegetable and "cream" melange has something of the kitchen sink about it.
You can substitute whatever vegetables appeal to you, or you happen to have on hand.
Most vegetables pair nicely with one another.
And, of course, when you add cream to most dishes, it improves the flavor, and gives it a nice feel in your mouth -- the feel that comes from all fat-based foods.


Transcript of Clinton's First News Conference at White House
Following is a transcript of the question-and-answer portion of President Clinton's first official news conference, held in the East Room of the White House today, as recorded by The New York Times:
Q.
Mr.
President, would you be willing to hold the summit meeting in Moscow if it would be best for President Yeltsin's political health?
Have you spoken to President Yeltsin?
And don't you think that if you did go through Moscow it would engage the U.S. too closely in the power struggle in the capital?


Executive Changes
ALOETTE COSMETICS INC., West Chester, Pa., named John H. Teaford president and chief operating officer.
BENSON EYECARE CORP., New York, named Jack V. Gunion president and chief executive of its Benson Optical unit.
Dolph Seidensticker was named chief executive of the newly created management services organization, Benson MSO.


Daniel Arje, 69, Dies; Fashion Display Artist
Daniel Arje, a director of fashion and furnishings displays in New York for 40 years, died on Thursday at Beth Israel Hospital.
He was 69 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from renal cancer, his family said.


Murdoch Explores Buying Post Again
Rupert Murdoch, who made The New York Post the nation's most flamboyant daily before selling it five years ago, has called Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and at least two United States Senators to learn whether he would have the political support to buy back the teetering newspaper.


6 Resign Their Posts At G.M.
The General Motors Corporation today confirmed the resignation of three top purchasing executives and three mid-level buyers, all colleagues of Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, who resigned last week to become the No. 2 executive at Volkswagen A.G.
The six G.M. employees, who resigned Monday, "presumably went to Volkswagen, but we don't know for sure," said Antonette Simonetti, a spokeswoman.
All six are Europeans and like Mr.
Lopez, they had worked for G.M. in Europe.


ACER IS TAKING ON INTEL WITH NEW COMPUTER CHIPS
Responding to the Intel Corporation's introduction of the Pentium processor for desktop computers on Monday, Acer America said yesterday that it would begin selling a chip set that would lay the foundation for a low-cost personal computer based on the competing MIPS microprocessor.
Acer Inc., the Taiwan parent of the American company, said the new chips, the MIPS R4000 and R4400, would form the backbone of a desktop machine running Microsoft's NT operating system that would be up to five times faster than computers using Intel's 486 chip, the precursor to the Pentium.
Intel said the Pentium is almost twice as fast as its 486 chip.


INSIDE
What Price Cleanup?
When Columbus, Ohio, fought a $2 million cleanup of a parking lot project, it set off a national revolt on environmental policy.
Page A16.
Harriman Named Envoy
Pamela Harriman, 73, a longtime Democratic insider, has been chosen as Ambassador to France.
Page A7.
Indians Mourn 2 Pitchers
"The team's taking it hard," a Cleveland player said after two teammates died in a boating accident.
Page B9.
New School Battleground
Issues that led to the downfall of the New York City schools chief are now the crux of board elections.
Page B1.


6 Resign Their Posts At G.M.
The General Motors Corporation today confirmed the resignation of three top purchasing executives and three mid-level buyers, all colleagues of Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, who resigned last week to become the No. 2 executive at Volkswagen A.G.
The six G.M. employees, who resigned Monday, "presumably went to Volkswagen, but we don't know for sure," said Antonette Simonetti, a spokeswoman.
All six are Europeans and like Mr.
Lopez, they had worked for G.M. in Europe.


Corrections
A map on Monday showing state excise tax rates for cigarettes misstated the rate in Massachusetts.
It is 51 cents a pack.


Ex-Prosecutor Joins Manhattan Law Firm
The former United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York, Otto G. Obermaier, has been named a partner in the law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges.
Mr.
Obermaier, 56, was the chief Federal prosecutor in Manhattan from October 1989 until last month.
Before that, he was in private practice and also served as chief trial counsel for the New York regional office of the Securities and Exchange Commission.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Mar. 19
Mar. 12
Mar. 20
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
6.7
6.9
6.9
Distillate production, daily
3.0
2.8
2.7
Gasoline stocks
232.9
237.4
222.6
Distillate stocks
101.5
103.9
101.9
Crude imports, daily
5.4
7.6
5.7
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.6
1.2
Crude stocks
330.9
343.0
344.2
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
86.7
84.3
84.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Albany Moves Slowly on Transit
When the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's 10-year transit plan expired more than a year ago, the New York State Legislature punted on extending it.
Instead of approving a new five-year capital plan, Albany approved a stopgap measure that maintained the $1.25 transit fare for just a year and gave short shrift to the capital needs of subways, buses and commuter lines.
Now
that
plan is about to expire, and legislative leaders have yet to agree on how to pay for a new one.
To their credit, both Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin, Democrat of Queens, and Norman Levy of Long Island, a Republican and chairman of the Senate's Transportation Committee, say they want to keep the fare at $1.25 until 1995.
So does Gov.
Mario Cuomo.
All three also favor a long-term capital plan for subways, buses, commuter lines, roads and bridges.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
Saturday afternoon.
I am wandering around Bloomingdale's.
In the Donna Karan section I spot a shopper considering blazers.
In addition to the one she is trying on, others are draped around her as if she were a human hanger.
With the gracefulness of a runway model she twirls around the mirrors; with the vocal chords of a Loehmann's shopper she beckons the saleswomen: "Which one matches my pants? Do these go together?"


Japan Gets New Demands on Chip Imports
The United States pressed on Tuesday for continued improvement in sales of foreign-made computer chips in Japan, even though Tokyo had already met the main goal of a semiconductor trade agreement.
At a meeting in Hawaii, United States Government officials told the Japanese that it would be a "reasonable expectation" for foreign chip makers to average 20 percent of the Japanese market for all of 1993, according to one American official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.


METRO DIGEST
FOURTH ARREST IN TRADE CENTER BOMBING A fourth suspect in the World Trade Center bombing has been arrested, law-enforcement officials in Washington said.
The suspect, Mahmud Abouhalima, was arrested in Egypt and is to be flown to New York to face a Federal court hearing based on a sealed indictment, the officials said.
It was not clear who arrested Mr.
Abouhalima.
Because of restrictions on operations of American authorities abroad, police actions are often undertaken by local authorities at the behest of American law-enforcement agencies.
A1.
IN NURSING HOMES, FEWER RESTRAINTS There has been a quiet revolution in nursing-home care, as restraints, once seemingly ubiquitous, become a rarely used tool.
As recently as three years ago, 40 percent of nursing-home patients nationwide were held down in some way, either physically or chemically.
Now those restraints are used on only 19 percent.
But the changes did not come voluntarily, and they were not easy.
A1.


Matthew Schoenwald, Union Executive, 77
Matthew Schoenwald, a retired vice president of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union in New York, died on Monday at Hollywood Medical Center in Florida.
He was 77 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said his son, Dr. Michael Schoenwald of Hollywood.


Hearst Picks Betsy Carter For Bazaar
Betsy Carter, a former editorial director of Esquire and the creator of New York Woman magazine, has been named to the new post of executive editor of Harper's Bazaar, the fashion monthly published by Hearst Magazines.
Her appointment, effective next Monday, was announced Monday by Elizabeth Tilberis, editor in chief of Harper's Bazaar.
Ms.
Carter will oversee the magazine's features department and she will "be involved in the editorial content" of the magazine, according to the company.


British Member Leaves Davidians' Compound
A 33-year-old British man, Livingston Fagen, walked out of the Branch Davidian compound this morning, the 10th adult to part with the sect's leader, David Koresh, in the last five days.
But with 95 people still inside the armed camp, negotiators again expressed frustration at their inability to end the 25-day standoff.


Management Shift For Foote, Cone
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications in Chicago said this week that Jack Balousek, president and chief operating officer in charge of North American operations, had asked to concentrate on FCB/West, the company's California offices, overseeing the operations from San Francisco.
Bruce Mason, chairman and chief executive, has assumed supervision of the other domestic offices, and top executives in those offices are now reporting directly to him.


Clinton Achieves Diversity Among Rich Advisers
Some of President Clinton's senior advisers earned hundreds of thousands of dollars as executives and lawyers involved in businesses from Wall Street to Main Street before joining his Administration, according to financial disclosure reports made public today by the White House.
Robert E. Rubin, the President's chief economic adviser who was co-chairman of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, was the highest paid of the advisers.
He reported that he received $26.5 million last year from the brokerage partnership, as well as millions from investments in real estate, oil and gas and other partnerships.


Court Says Albany Plan Must Pay for Abortions
In an opinion that could help establish a right to abortion under the New York Constitution, an appeals court ruled today that a state program to provide prenatal care for the working poor is unconstitutional because it does not pay for abortions.
In the process, the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan also stated explicitly that the right to abortion is protected by the State Constitution.
It is the first time that an appeals court in New York has done so, according to lawyers for the New York Civil Liberties Union.


Publishing Accord
American Express Travel Related Services Company Inc. and Time Inc., a unit of Time Warner, announced yesterday that they had reached a final agreement under which Time Inc. would immediately assume management responsibility for most of the American Express Publishing Corporation's operations, including its core life-style magazines Travel &amp; Leisure and Food &amp; Wine.


Food Notes
For Better Chicken Soup
That chicken soup you might be making to ease the symptoms of winter's final flu or the broth destined for the Passover seder in less than two weeks deserves to be luminously clear and golden.
And unlike mercy, quality chicken soup
is
strained -- through the finest stainless steel mesh, or better still, through a linen or cotton cloth.


Review/Television; Portrait Of Griffith In His Life And Art
In "D. W. Griffith: Father of Film," Lillian Gish points out how the great movie director "understood the psychic strength of the lens" and Charles Chaplin is recalled saying that "he was the teacher of us all." True, of course, but David Wark Griffith (1875-1948) does not easily slip into cozy categorizations.
There was much in his life and art that's troubled and, even to this day, troubling.
That much is acknowledged, albeit a mite gingerly, in the "American Masters" biography that begins at 8 tonight on WNET.
Three originally separate hours are being run consecutively, and somewhat overwhelmingly.
The producers for Thames Television and Thirteen/WNET are Kevin Brownlow and David Gill, the British team whose previous and widely acclaimed credits include essays on Chaplin, Buster Keaton and Harold Lloyd.
While working more than 10 years ago on "Hollywood," a 13-part documentary series on silent films, they amassed an archive of interviews with major figures from the early years of film history.
This Griffith portrait gets still more mileage out of good deal of that material.
Comments by Miss Gish and Blanche Sweet, for instance, were taped in 1978.


Harlem Troupe Adds Dance
Dance Theater of Harlem has added "A Song for Dead Warriors" to its benefit gala program at 7:30 P.M. tomorrow at the New York State Theater.
The hit ballet replaces "The River," a work by Alvin Ailey, which will receive its company premiere on Friday evening.
Both programs will be completed by "Songs of Mahler" and "The Firebird." Tickets for the benefit, which also features Jessye Norman, are $20 to $75.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
To charge tickets, call (212) 307-4100.


Classical Music in Review
Masters of India and Pakistan Alice Tully Hall
As part of its ambitious program of presenting non-Western classical and folk music to New York audiences, the World Music Institute presented Masters of India and Pakistan on Saturday evening, a program that looked at both the northern (Hindustani) and southern (Carnatic) styles of composition and performing.
There are differences in structure, syntax and coloration, but there are also similarities.
Players in both styles base their pieces on a large repertory of ragas, and their mastery is measured by the inventiveness and scope of their improvisations around those themes.


60-Minute Gourmet
TO my taste, sweet, fresh lump crab meat is one of the greatest delicacies from the sea.
In truth, I find that it is more interesting texturally and has a more distinctive oceanic flavor than lobster.
And, of course, it can be prepared in so many compelling ways.
When I was the chef of Le Pavillon restaurant in New York City, in the 1940's and 50's, we always featured lump crab meat on the lunch menu in one or more guises.
Among the many famous patrons at Le Pavillon in those days was the Duchess of Windsor, who often came in for lunch.
One of her favorite dishes was crab meat au gratin.
It was an expensive entree, for we used the best lump crab meat, heavy cream, egg yolks and sherry.
The Duchess relished it.


CHRONICLE
No, Channel 13, the New York flagship station of the Public Broadcasting Service, doesn't always meet its three-times-a-year fund-raising goal.
But, yes, miracles can happen.
Just ask BILL BAKER, the president of Channel 13.
It was Sunday night and Channel 13 was dangerously close to failing to reach the goal in its latest fund-raiser (viewers hate them but realize they are necessary).
The station re-broadcast an all-time audience favorite twice in a row: the concert starring the tenors Jose Carreras, Placido Domingo and Luciano Pavarotti.
The repeat programs brought in a flurry of phone pledges, though not quite enough to send the station over the top.


DETENTION UPHELD ON ALIEN CHILDREN
The Supreme Court today upheld the policy of the Immigration and Naturalization Service to hold alien children facing deportation hearings in detention centers if they lack a close relative or legal guardian in the United States.
The 7-to-2 decision overturned a ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, which had held that the policy violated the children's constitutional right to due process.


For Indians, a Time for Grieving
By Florida standards, Little Lake Nellie is indeed little, not quite what Floridians call a dollar lake -- the larger, perfectly formed circular pools of fresh water resting in limestone pits all over the sun-baked state.
Little Lake Nellie is not little enough to be called a wet-weather pond, dwarfing the tiny marshes that swell only when the skies empty.
Little Lake Nellie is a small, naturally formed lake, a place that attracts the reclusive and sometimes exclusive crowds from the tonier coastal areas to the midlands, the lake lands of Florida.
A place where someone forced to deal constantly with the roaring crowds might seek refuge.
Which is what Tim Crews, major league pitcher, obviously sought when he purchased a ranch, complete with stables, corrals and horses two months ago.


AT DINNER WITH: Rush Limbaugh; A Shy, Sensitive Guy Trying to Get By in Lib City
IT is not possible to tell, in the dim light of the "21" Club, if Rush Limbaugh is blushing.
But he certainly looks sheepish, a rare state for the radio and television talk-show host who has become a millionaire and conservative hero by zestfully clubbing "feminazis," "environmental wackos," Anita Hill, Jesse Jackson, Hillary Clinton, Teddy Kennedy, Mario Cuomo, homeless advocates, dolphins, spotted owls, trees, "commie libs" and "the arts and croissant crowd."
A friend of his, a bond trader at Lazard Freres who is also dining at the restaurant and who knows that Mr.
Limbaugh is being interviewed by The New York Times, has just ribbed his bachelor pal by remarking loudly in passing: "Well, Rush, that's got to be either a hooker or a reporter."


Found: One Killer Instinct. Score: 9-3
The Devils not only played an inspired game against a weak opponent at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight, but in beating the Tampa Bay Lightning, 9-3, they displayed a quality Coach Herb Brooks has been looking for: "killer instinct."
Two days after an emotional 3-2 triumph over the Flyers in Philadelphia, the Devils played with fire in their eyes from beginning to end against the team with the third-worst record in the National Hockey League.


Air Travelers Can Still Apply for Coupons
Millions of travelers who flew on American, Delta Air Lines, United and a half-dozen other United States airlines from Jan. 1, 1988, through June 30, 1992, still have an opportunity to apply for coupons that can be used for discounts on future air travel.
The deadline for applications is June 1.
The discounts are part of a $458 million settlement of a class-action antitrust case charging the nation's large airlines with price fixing.
The settlement was reached last summer and upheld in a Federal District Court in Atlanta this week despite objections from several corporations.


Airline and Medical Stocks Draw Investors
Investors showed unusual relish for airline and medical stocks yesterday but little appetite for most of the market's other industries.
Most major stock market indexes were little changed, with Big Board losers slightly outnumbering gainers.
The airlines, suffering huge losses, and drug companies, under attack from a Clinton Administration bent on controlling costs, have been among the market's less popular groups in recent months -- the medical stocks especially.


A 7-1 Freshman Who Has It All
For some imponderable reason, Africa turns out centers instead of point guards.
Manute Bol is the tall one.
Hakeem Olajuwon is the omnipotent one.
Dikembe Mutombo is the well-read one.
Yinka Dare, the youngest one, is a combination of all three.
He is 7 feet, 1 inch, has heard on television that milk "does a body good" and drinks it in order to reach 7-3.


Why Single Me Out To Make Sacrifices?
To the Editor:
"The Republicans Strike Back" (editorial, March 11) states, "Sensibly, they propose to cut retirement benefits for Federal employees, civilian and military."


Anthony Bowles, 61, Director of Musicals
Anthony Bowles, a composer and musical director for the theater, died on March 15 at his home in London.
He was 61.
The cause was AIDS, said Beth N. Bomze, a friend.


AN ARAB, TIED UP, IS SHOT TO DEATH
An Israeli settler today shot and killed an Arab man who had been bound hand and foot after a stabbing attack in the occupied West Bank, the Army and settlers said.
The slaying, near Susia, south of Hebron, reflected a surge of rage following Palestinian attacks this month that have killed 10 soldiers and civilians.
The shooting sharpened a public debate about the distinction between self-defense and vigilante action in response to the rising Arab violence.


4th Arrest Made In the Bombing At Trade Center
A suspect in the World Trade Center bombing has been arrested in Egypt, law-enforcement officials in Washington said last night.
He is the fourth man to be arrested in the case, and authorities have described him as a possible ringleader in the bombing.
The suspect, Mahmud Abouhalima, was to be flown to New York later today to face a Federal court hearing based on a sealed indictment, the officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said.


Treasury and Municipal Prices Gain
Prices of Treasury bonds and notes rose yesterday in light but choppy trading, pushing yields back down toward the lows reached at the beginning of the month.
But it is not yet clear whether the bond market will continue its remarkable 1993 rally any time soon, pushing yields through those historic lows.
For the last two weeks, the market has been stuck in a narrow trading range.


Parents of Gays
To the Editor:
As the proud mother of a gay son, I would salute Paul Monette for "The Politics of Silence" (Op-Ed March 7).
Parents go through intensive consciousness-raising when their child comes out.
For all of us have internalized the bigotry and self-limited thinking of society's homophobia.
In time, we learn that our sons and daughters are the same people we have always loved and known.


Bridge
One more high-ranked team was ousted from the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals here Monday night.
Jim Mahaffey of Winter Park, Fla., seeded sixth, lost in the second round by 13 imps.
His teammates were Ron Andersen of Chicago, Bill Root of Boca Raton, Fla., Richard Pavlicek of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Tony Forrester of London.
Their opponents were Steve Zolotow of Las Vegas, Nev., Jim Rosenbloom, Roy Welland and Christal Henner-Welland, all of Manhattan, who recovered from a 24-point deficit at the midpoint of the match.


Crisis Appears to Be Over For Major Banks in Japan
Japan's major banks appear to have weathered the worst of a yearlong financial crisis and seem set for what could be a long, difficult recovery, analysts say, thanks to a combination of Government support, tax breaks and accounting sleight of hand.
Figures reported today in Nihon Keizai Shimbun, a leading economic newspaper often used for official leaks, appear to support that view, suggesting that the rise in problem loans at the nation's 21 largest banks may be leveling off.


How a Tall Ship Gets Tall


Van Breda Kolff Stays
After feeding rumors that he might fly away following the worst season of his 27-year collegiate coaching career, the Flying Dutchmen's flying Dutchman announced yesterday that he would remain at his Hofstra perch for one more season.
After that, who knows?
"I'm not necessarily one to retire," said BUTCH VAN BREDA KOLFF.
Indeed, the 70-year-old coach has shown remarkable staying, and comeback, power in a career stretching over 42 years and covering 11 stints with four college and five pro teams, including two stints at both Lafayette and Hofstra.


How a Rebellion Over Environmental Rules Grew From a Patch of Weeds
This city didn't want to pave paradise for a parking lot.
It just wanted to cover a patch of weeds and mud behind the Short Street garage, where the city maintains its fleet of police cruisers and garbage trucks.
But two years ago, city engineers here in Ohio's capital discovered traces of chemicals in the dirt and learned that the Federal hazardous-waste law might require a $2 million cleanup before the first ounce of pavement could be laid.
Right then, a forgettable little stretch of urban America became the focus of anger and exasperation so profound that it started a national campaign among cities and states.


Wesley Holder, 95, Political Organizer For Black Pioneers
Wesley McD.
Holder, a Democratic politician who helped break racial barriers to elective office as a mentor to Mayor David N. Dinkins and other black officials in New York City, died on Monday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 95.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


Classical Music in Review
Saturday Brass Quintet Weill Recital Hall
The Saturday Brass Quintet is a young and peripatetic group of Americans who teach at the Manhattan School of Music and busily tour the country.
Their program on Friday night followed the brass repertory to its two natural lairs: the early Baroque and the 20th century.
It also added three pieces by Stephen Foster taken from The American Brass Band Journal of 150 years ago.


Czyz, Struck by Car, Cancels Title Defense
The World Boxing Association cruiserweight champion, BOBBY CZYZ, was struck by a car Friday evening in West Orange, N.J., and will not be able to defend his title against top-ranked contender ORLIN NORRIS on April 23 in Memphis.
When reached at his Montgomery Township, N.J., home late yesterday, Czyz said he suffered a mild concussion, a strained lower back, bruised ribs, a bruised hip bone, and tendinitis in his right wrist and shoulder.
He said he spent five hours at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston and was released.


Arrests of Police Officers May Damage Drug Cases
Hundreds of convictions and pending cases against drug dealers may be jeopardized because of the arrests of two New York City police officers and a state police investigator two weeks ago on charges that they sold almost $25,000 worth of heroin, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The case of the officers, all members of the New York State Drug Enforcement Task Force, has prompted the New York City Police Department and the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration to review convictions and arrests involving the task force over the last four years to assess the extent of the potential damage.


Cuomo Called By Murdoch On The Post
Rupert Murdoch, who transformed The New York Post into the nation's most flamboyant daily before selling it five years ago, has called Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and at least two United States Senators in recent days to determine whether he would have the political support to buy back the teetering newspaper.
While the Governor yesterday did little more than acknowledge receiving a call from Mr.
Murdoch, the Senators, Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, and Ernest F. Hollings, Democrat of South Carolina, said they would provide crucial support to Mr.
Murdoch if he was deemed the only viable buyer for the paper.


Merck Lowers Earnings Growth Forecast for 1993
Merck &amp; Company, one of the world's largest drug makers, announced yesterday that earnings growth would fall below expectations in 1993.
It said the slowdown was caused by worldwide pressures on drug prices, growing competition and the strength of the dollar overseas.
The company said it would eliminate 1,000 of its 38,400 jobs through dismissals and attrition.
Merck told analysts that it expected 1993 earnings to rise only 11 to 12 percent instead of the 14 to 16 percent the company had expected.
A year ago, Merck had reported a 17.6 percent profit increase for the first quarter and even that rise was considered disappointing compared with the 19 percent increase in the similar 1991 quarter.
Earnings for 1992 fell 6 percent, to almost $2 billion, after a series of accounting charges.


A Kosher Winery Grows in California
CRAIG WINCHELL developed a taste for good wine while growing up in Louisville, Ky., in the 70's.
He was so attracted to wine that he decided to make it his life's work.
Like many other young wine enthusiasts of his generation, he gravitated to California and to the University of California at Davis.
But unlike most others', Mr.
Winchel's life would greatly affect his work.
He would go on to become one of the very few producers of fine kosher wine in the country.
At Davis, he took a degree in fermentation science, which is what professors call wine making.
In fact, he spent an extra year studying, among other things, viticulture, a k a grape growing.


Classical Music in Review
Vocal Chamber Works of Lukas Foss Kathryn Bache Miller Theater
Lukas Foss has kept a place in the spotlight as a conductor and musical man about town.
But his compositions, which one would think are the main thrusts of his musical life, have tended to fade into the shadows soon after their premieres.
Even "Time Cycle" (1960), a major work in its day, is rarely dusted off.
Heard again in its chamber version on Wednesday evening, the piece recalled a time when composers were more interested in exploring novel sound combinations and finding new expressive languages than many are today.
But although there was a touch of nostalgia in the experience, the stronger impression was that the work still seems fresh.


The Missing Decree: Maneuver or Just an Enigma?
Of all the curious aspects of Russia's latest nerve-racking political crisis, the most curious is its lack of a text.
Consider this: On Saturday night, President Boris N. Yeltsin, warning of a creeping crypto-Communist coup, declared that he had signed a decree imposing something called a "special order for the governing of the country."


Abortion Foes Reject Fanaticism and Violence
To the Editor:
I must respond to Anthony Lewis's "Right to Life" (column, March 12), on the shooting death of Dr.
David Gunn during a protest against abortion at a Pensacola, Fla., clinic.
Those who use violence in the pro-life cause make a mockery of it, and I deplore their actions as much as Mr.
Lewis.


Marrying Squash and Chicken in a Farewell-to-Winter Meal
IN March, I always feel an urge to consume more winter vegetables and fruits, like squash, potatoes and apples.
I want my quota of these vegetables because I know that spring and summer will be here soon, with warm weather's green vegetables, salads and fruits.
Stuffed butternut squash is the first course for this "farewell to winter" menu.
This wonderful vegetable could also be served plain as an accompaniment to the chicken and potato dishes.
Stuffed as it is here, it is even filling enough to serve as a main course.


Robert Crichton, 68, Writer, Dies; His Best Sellers Became Hit Films
Robert Crichton, author of the best sellers "The Great Impostor" and "The Secret of Santa Vittoria," which became popular films, died yesterday at a nursing home in New Rochelle.
He was 68.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Clinton's Plan: A First Glimpse
The new education bill that Secretary Richard W. Riley will send to Congress next week relies on many lessons he learned while working to transform South Carolina's schools when he was governor.
It was drafted with the help of several aides he brought with him from South Carolina.
As outlined by Mr.
Riley in testimony before several Congressional committees, the bill offers the first glimpse at the new Administration's strategy for changing American schools.


Sports of The Times; Bob Ojeda's 'Hometown' Rooting Hard
THIS is a public get-well card for Bob Ojeda.
Please do not take it as trivial for me to think mostly about Bobby O after two of his teammates, Steve Olin and Tim Crews, died in that boating accident Monday evening.
This is from Bob Ojeda's former town.
This is from a former neighbor.
He was with the Cleveland Indians when the boat ran into the pier on Monday.
But here on Long Island, Bob Ojeda will always be a New York Met, will always be part of that antic October of 1986.
He'll always be a local boy, because he lived here during the good times, when we thought those Mets would go on for a long time.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  DETROIT TIGERS -- Sent John DeSilva, pitcher; John Cangelosi, outfielder; and Marty Peavy, catcher; to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
National League  MONTREAL EXPOS -- Signed Jack Clark, first baseman, to a minor-league contract.
Sent Sergio Valdez, pitcher, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
Claimed Ted Wood, outfielder, off waivers from the San Francisco Giants.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Optioned Brad Brink and Steve Parris, pitchers, to Scranton-Wilkes Barre of the International League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  NBA -- Fined Keith Askins, Miami Heat guard-forwrd, $3,500 for a flagrant foul in a game on March 18.
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Waived Alton Lister, center.
PORTLAND TRAIL BLAZERS -- Placed Kevin Duckworth, center, on the injured list.
Activated Reggie Smith, forward, from the injured list.
Continental Basketball Association  LACROSSE CATBIRDS -- Signed Roosevelt Wallace, forward.
ROCKFORD LIGHTNING -- Placed Andre Spencer, forward, on the NBA reserve list.
Football  National Football League  BUFFALO BILLS -- Signed Mickey Washington, cornerback.
DETROIT LIONS -- Signed Rodney Holman, tight end.
GIANTS -- Signed Mark Jackson, wide receiver.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Harry Galbreath, guard.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Agreed to terms with Bill Romanowski, linebacker.
Hockey  National Hockey League  ANAHEIM MIGHTY DUCKS -- Named Jack Ferreira general manager.
BOSTON BRUINS -- Agreed to terms with Don Sweeney, defenseman, on a three-year contract.
SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Recalled Wade Flaherty, goaltender, from Kansas City of the International Hockey League.
Lacrosse Major Indoor Lacrosse League  PHILADELPHIA WINGS -- Announced the retirement of Dave Evans, coach, at the end of this season.
College  HOCKEY EAST -- Announced Massachusetts will join the conference in 1994-95.
KEAN -- Announced the resignation of Mike Gatley, interim men's basketball coach.
SUNY-BUFFALO -- Announced the resignation of Dan Bazzani, men's basketball coach.


Gregory J. Batt; Hockey Player-Coach, 73
Gregory J. Batt, who led Colgate to its only undefeated hockey season as a player-coach in 1943 and later coached the Hamilton College team for 36 seasons until his retirement in 1984, died on Monday at the Masonic Home in Utica, N.Y.
He was 73.
He had been suffering from Alzheimer's disease, Hamilton officials said.


N.F.L. Roster Now 53, 45 on Game Day
National Football League rosters were increased from 47 players to 53 players by league owners at their annual meeting today, with the 6 additional players becoming part of a team's inactive list.
Last season, only 47 players on a team could practice during the week and an hour and 15 minutes before game time, teams were forced to name their 45 players active for the game.
Now 53 can practice during the week, 49 active players must be named by 7 P.M., Eastern time, on Friday and 45 plus an additional quarterback named one hour and 15 minutes before game time.


No Headline
"Boris Yeltsin is the elected President of Russia, and he has shown a great deal of courage in sticking up for democracy and civil liberties and market reforms, and I'm going to support that." -- PRESIDENT CLINTON.  [ A1:5. ]


Nursing Homes Try Life Without Restraints
In a hallway at the Schnurmacher Nursing Home here, a disoriented man sits in a wheelchair.
A piece of cloth ties him to the chair at his waist in such a way that he cannot remove it, keeping him from standing up, falling out, or wandering away.
What is striking about this patient is that he is the only one with a restraint.
Everyone else on the floor -- and nearly everyone else in the building -- is free to sit and stand as he pleases.


Salvadoran Minister Of Defense Attacks U.N. Panel's Report
Ten days after offering his resignation in the face of assertions that he ordered one of the worst atrocities of El Salvador's 12-year civil war, the Defense Minister delivered a blistering attack tonight on the United Nations's oversight of this country's progress toward peace.
In a nationally televised address, and while surrounded by other members of the high command, Gen.
Rene Emilio Ponce called the United Nations investigation into war atrocities and its recommendations for the removal of senior army officers from their posts "unjust, incomplete and illegal."


An Artist's Expression Emerges From a Loss
ON Sept. 13 of last year, a Friday, Madeline Figeroa's doctors cut off her leg above the knee.
She was 17 years old.
She had known since childhood that she might lose the leg, which was infected and ulcerated as a result of spina bifida, with which she was born.
When she was 10 and spoke nothing but Spanish, her family moved from Puerto Rico to the Bronx to seek better treatment for her.


Benjamin S. Clark, 85, Ex-Investment Banker
Benjamin S. Clark, a retired investment banker, died on Thursday at his home in Pound Ridge, N.Y.
He was 85.
The cause was pulmonary fibrosis, his family said.
Mr.
Clark joined the Wall Street firm of White, Weld &amp; Company as a young man and retired as a senior partner in 1973.
The firm has since been sold to Merrill Lynch.


Personal Health
ADMONISHED for decades to cut back on saturated fats to lower their cholesterol, millions of Americans made sensible dietary changes that they thought would protect their hearts.
They switched from butter to margarine, looked for "made with pure vegetable shortening" on packages of baked and fried products, sought fast foods that were not fried in beef fat and many even gave up eating meat.
And after recent reports that walnuts and olive oil may promote cardiovascular health, many have begun chomping on nuts and sprinkling olive oil on foods as if it were a magical elixir.


Honors
*
Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York, has been named national agency of the year for 1992 by Adweek.
Adweek's six regional editions also named regional agencies of the year: East, J. Walter Thompson New York; Midwest, Leo Burnett U.S.A., Chicago; New England, Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot, Boston; Southeast, Fitzgerald &amp; Company, Atlanta; Southwest, GSD&amp;M Advertising, Austin, Tex., and West, Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, San Francisco.


Real Estate; A department store building that once was the heart of downtown Providence gets a new life.
A LANDMARK department store in downtown Providence is to be converted into office space for state workers and a history museum by a coalition of nonprofit groups working with the state.
The Rhode Island Port Authority bought the deteriorated Shepard Building, a six-story structure built in the late 1800's, for nearly $2.3 million late last year, with plans for a $21 million renovation.
The building has 240,000 square feet.


Gains Reported For P.R. Firms
An annual survey of public relations agencies, to be released today, reports that the 50 largest listed firms fared better last year than they did in 1991.
The survey, which will appear in the 1993 O'Dwyer Directory of Public Relations Firms published by Jack O'Dwyer in New York, found that 27 of the top 50 had fee income gains of 9 percent or more in 1992, 14 were nearly even and seven had declines of 4 percent or more.
In 1991, only 20 firms had income gains, 17 were even and 13 suffered declines.


NEWS SUMMARY
National A11-19  CLINTON WAVERS ON GAY PLEDGE  Facing resistance over his pledge to allow homosexuals to serve in the armed forces, President Clinton said for the first time that he would consider proposals to segregate troops by sexual orientation.
A1  RENO CLEARS OUT PROSECUTORS  Attorney General Janet Reno demanded the resignation of all United States Attorneys, leading a top Federal prosecutor to suggest that the order could be tied to his investigation of Representative Dan Rostenkowski, a crucial Clinton ally.
A1


Corrections
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section yesterday, comparing office space leased this year with space leased last year, was mislabeled.
The comparisons were for February, not January.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
2.99
3.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.94
4.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.01
3.05
4.19
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.58
5.60
7.23
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.76
6.80
7.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.70
7.75
8.88
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.97
5.95
6.78
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Shelter Foes Reorganize as Helpers; Forced to Take the Homeless, Queens Neighbors Join Them
More than a year ago, when Barbara Farmer and her daughter stayed at a shelter in Jamaica, Queens, they could scarcely go outside without hearing taunts and racial insults.
"You don't belong here," she recalled several angry residents of the working-class neighborhood shouting at them and other homeless families.
"The people there didn't want us in the neighborhood," said Ms.
Farmer, who is 39 and black.
"But they had no say in the matter."


COMPANY BRIEFS
AGWAY INC., Syracuse, the largest farm supply cooperative in the Northeast, is considering selling its 34 percent interest in Curtice Burns Foods Inc., a Rochester-based food processing company.
HEALTHTRUST INC., Nashville, and the Montgomery County Hospital District of Conroe, Tex., have signed a letter of intent for Healthtrust to purchase the 182-bed Medical Center Hospital in Conroe for about $85 million.


A New Lotus Offering In Information Sharing
The Lotus Development Corporation will announce today a new version of its Notes program that customers and analysts say should give the company a firm hold on the fast-growing market for software that enables computer-linked workers to share information in problem-solving teams.
The new program, Notes Release 3, promises to broaden the market for information-sharing software, and Lotus sees Notes as the engine of its future growth.
The company, based in Cambridge, Mass., grew into a $900 million business mainly on the popularity of its Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet program, but price wars and new rivals have eroded that business.


Market Place; Wall St. seems to like Rochester Telephone's plan to split in two.
THE Rochester Telephone Corporation, a peanut in the elephantine world of telecommunications, is receiving a great deal of attention from Wall Street after proposing a bold plan to end its near-monopoly in local phone service in exchange for freedom from regulation that has hurt profits.
Under a plan filed in February with the New York Public Service Commission, Rochester Tel would split into two entities.
One, a company known for filing purposes as R-Net, would run the phone network in Rochester and provide basic phone services to all comers -- a new Rochester Tel unit and new competitors.
This other company, known for now as R-Com, would buy services from R-Net and resell them to the public with a greater chance of making higher profits.


Ducks Hire Ferreira
JACK FERREIRA, former general manager of the Minnesota North Stars and San Jose Sharks, was named yesterday as general manager of the expansion Mighty Ducks of Anaheim, who will begin National Hockey League play next season.
Ferreira, 48, has been the director of pro scouting for the Montreal Canadians this season. (AP)


Two Indian Pitchers Die, and Questions Emerge
Steve Olin nearly didn't go to the off-day gathering at Tim Crews's house.
He got lost on the way and was going to turn around, but he had promised his 3-year-old daughter she could ride a horse.
Crews didn't really want to fish in the lake that bordered his house.
He preferred the adjacent lake, but the water level was too low for his boat.


Next Time, Prime Time
Leaving his windbreaker in the closet, Bill Clinton wore a crisp suit, striped tie and polished shoes yesterday to the first news conference of his Presidency.
He not only "survived" the encounter, in the words of one TV anchor, but did so without serious damage.
This suggests that he might face the press again someday, assuming he can overcome his advisers' preference for tightly controlled settings far from the dreaded Washington press corps and their habit of asking tougher questions than adoring 9-year-olds do.
Until now, one of the glibbest occupants of the Oval Office since John Kennedy has stiffed the press in favor of one-way radio addresses and the electronic town hall, which has to be a media planner's gift from Heaven.
Both enable him to serve the high democratic ideal of talking directly to the people, including well-rehearsed children, while avoiding questions from the resident press.


Giants Corral Broncos' Jackson
The Giants replaced one free-agent wide receiver with another tonight.
Five days after losing Mark Ingram to the Miami Dolphins, they agreed on a contract with Mark Jackson of the Denver Broncos for $4.7 million over three years.
The agreement was reached after a series of telephone calls during the day between Harry Hulmes, the Giants' assistant general manager, and Lamont Smith of Denver, Jackson's agent.
Smith said the contract would be signed in a day or two, in Denver or here.


A Risky Partnership
When President Clinton called the White House Monday from Little Rock, where he was visiting his critically ill father-in-law, several aides told him they thought he could conduct his first news conference today with only perfunctory reference to the crisis in Russia.
"Make a short statement, then say the situation is too delicate for further comment, that was the advice," one adviser reported today.


Researchers Locate Gene That Triggers Huntington's Illness
After 10 backbreaking years in a research purgatory of false leads, failed experiments and long stretches of mordant despair, an international team of scientists says it has discovered the most coveted treasure in molecular biology, the gene behind Huntington's disease.
Now that they have the gene in hand, researchers say they can begin making headway in understanding the disorder, a neurodegenerative illness that usually strikes a person in the 30's or 40's, insidiously destroys body and sanity alike, and kills within 10 to 20 years.


CHINA OPPOSES U.N. OVER NORTH KOREA
In a major blow to international efforts to force North Korea to give up its nuclear weapons program, China announced today that it opposed the imposition of any sanctions against North Korea.
Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, speaking at his annual news conference, said that his Government not only opposed sanctions but also was against bringing up the matter before the United Nations Security Council.


Delay Seen On Synergen Sepsis Drug
Synergen Inc. said yesterday that its flagship drug Antril -- for the treatment of sepsis, an often-fatal bacterial infection -- was effective only for the sickest patients in its clinical study and that it would begin a new trial limited to such patients.
The disclosure indicates the drug will reach the market later than planned and will have smaller sales potential than anticipated, if it is ultimately approved.
The company, based in Boulder, Colo., disclosed last month that results from its first trial were disappointing but said at the time that it would still seek marketing approval from the Food and Drug Administration with the data.
But Synergen said yesterday that it does not plan to file until completion of the second study.
Synergen shares fell $1.75 yesterday, to $11.375, in Nasdaq trading.
They traded as high as $66 in December.


Jerusalem Journal; In Likud's Future, the Man With a Naughty Past?
"I'm Bibi's lover," the bumper sticker said in Hebrew grammar reserved for women.
The car owner's message, with its deliberate wink and leer, left it to passers-by to imagine whether she was talking about the bedroom or the voting booth.


A.T. &amp; T. Plans to Redeem Debt Totaling $1.75 Billion
A.T.&amp; T., the company whose stock is the most widely held in the country, said yesterday that it planned to buy back $1.75 billion in long-term debt and replace much of it with securities at much lower interest rates.
The repurchase will hurt earnings slightly in the first quarter, which ends next Wednesday.
But the American Telephone and Telegraph Company will also take a $7 billion charge against earnings in that period because of new accounting rules for retiree health benefits.
Thus, the charge from the debt repurchase will be dwarfed by what is likely to be a large paper loss for all of 1993.


Curriculum Issues Fuel Races for School Boards
Sigfredo Gonzalez thought his first-time candidacy for the school board was a long shot, but because he opposes the curriculum that teaches tolerance for gays, he is running strong, aided not only by Hispanic evangelicals in the Bronx's District 12 but also by tactical advice from New York's Catholic Archdiocese.
Carmel (Bunny) Reddington educated her children in Catholic schools, but after battling Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez's multicultural curriculum, she is running for Staten Island's community school board to reassert parents' right to control "what their children should know and not know."


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Michigan  As was true last year, Michigan is the only college with two teams in National Collegiate Athletic Association championship tournaments.
The school's hockey team will have an easier route to the Final Four than the basketball team, because the skaters need to win only one more game.
That opportunity will come on Saturday night at the Joe Louis Arena in Detroit when Michigan meets either Miami of Ohio or Wisconsin in a quarterfinal match.


Islanders Lose Ground In the Playoff Picture
It is a hockey axiom that a team is happy to play .500 on the road, but that doesn't apply to the Islanders, who headed straight to the airport tonight for a charter flight back home after losing, 3-2, to the Red Wings.
The defeat ended a four-game road trip with a 2-2 split and it was costly because the Islanders didn't keep pace in the race for the four playoff places in the Patrick Division.


Abortion Foes Reject Fanaticism and Violence; Domestic Terrorism
To the Editor:
Domestic terrorism is a terrible paradox.
The Department of Justice, through the Federal Bureau of Investigation, has acted with dispatch in seeking the people who bombed the World Trade Center.
Yet this same agency has casually ignored the terrorist organizations that we have come to call the antiabortion movement as they have carried out, in the last dozen years, scores of bombings and vandalizings of women's clinics.


Phone Industry Asks Control of a High-Speed Network
In a rare display of unity, the chief executives of the leading local and long-distance telephone companies today called for President Clinton to let private companies build and manage most of a proposed national high-speed fiber-optic network.
The broad policy statement was an attempt by the telephone industry to prevent the Government from building a network that would cut into its business serving big corporations and individuals.


ATTORNEY GENERAL SEEKS RESIGNATIONS FROM PROSECUTORS
Attorney General Janet Reno today demanded the prompt resignation of all United States Attorneys, leading the Federal prosecutor in the District of Columbia to suggest that the order could be tied to his long-running investigation of Representative Dan Rostenkowski, a crucial ally of President Clinton.
Jay B. Stephens, the United States Attorney for the District of Columbia, who is a Bush Administration holdover, said he had advised the Justice Department that he was within 30 days of making a "critical decision" in the Rostenkowski case when Ms.
Reno directed him and other United States Attorneys to submit their resignations, effective in a matter of days.


Review/Television; Portrait Of Griffith In His Life And Art
In "D. W. Griffith: Father of Film," Lillian Gish points out how the great movie director "understood the psychic strength of the lens" and Charles Chaplin is recalled saying that "he was the teacher of us all." True, of course, but David Wark Griffith (1875-1948) does not easily slip into cozy categorizations.
There was much in his life and art that's troubled and, even to this day, troubling.
That much is acknowledged, albeit a mite gingerly, in the "American Masters" biography that begins at 8 tonight on WNET.
Three originally separate hours are being run consecutively, and somewhat overwhelmingly.
The producers for Thames Television and Thirteen/WNET are Kevin Brownlow and David Gill, the British team whose previous and widely acclaimed credits include essays on Chaplin, Buster Keaton and Harold Lloyd.
While working more than 10 years ago on "Hollywood," a 13-part documentary series on silent films, they amassed an archive of interviews with major figures from the early years of film history.
This Griffith portrait gets still more mileage out of good deal of that material.
Comments by Miss Gish and Blanche Sweet, for instance, were taped in 1978.


Books of The Times; Asia in a Time of Uncomfortable Transition
Dream Messenger By Masahiko Shimada Translated by Philip Gabriel. 293 pages.
Kodansha International. $22.
Black Snow By Liu Heng Translated by Howard Goldblatt. 261 pages.
Atlantic Monthly Press. $20.
Masahiko Shimada, the author of "Dream Messenger," is one of the new generation of Japanese writers who might be called trans-Pacific novelists because their work reflects the latest directions in American and South American fiction, from racy dialogue to magical realism.
Like some popular contemporaries who have been translated -- Haruki Murakami, Ryu Murakami (no relation to Haruki) and Banana Yoshimoto -- Mr.
Shimada creates self-centered characters and dysfunctional families who could feel right at home in American cities.
So much so, in fact, that he sometimes makes an admiring reader of Asian fiction yearn for the more formal, less imitative Japanese literature of the recent past.


Abortion Foes Reject Fanaticism and Violence; Not a Zealot
To the Editor:
Re "The Death of Dr. Gunn" (editorial, March 12): I am not a religious fanatic, I am not a terrorist, I do not picket abortion clinics, and I do not approve of Randall Terry.
I support many of the causes of the feminist movement and I am pro-life.
I object to your depiction of all pro-lifers as violent religious zealots.
I am pro-life because I believe a fetus is a human being and am tired of abortion's being the cure-all for sexual irresponsibility.
MARY ELIZABETH WAAK  Bowie, Md., March 12, 1993


Yamaguchi Goes for Gold, not Gold Medal
Imagine if Patrick Ewing could earn $1 million more per season with the Harlem Globetrotters than he could with the Knicks.
Ewing would no longer have to trade elbows with Shaquille O'Neal, heed Pat Riley's tirades, or chase David Robinson up and down the court at the creaky HemisFair Arena until his knees ached.
Instead, Ewing would merely agree to exist in the curious land of pseudo-sport, that twilight zone where athletics meet showmanship, where dignity meets performance art, and where Kristi Yamaguchi meets her adoring young fans on the professional skating tour.
No bruises.
No championship rings.


Six Players Ejected in Knicks-Suns Wild West Slugfest
A halftime bench-clearing brawl tonight between the Knicks and the Phoenix Suns, the worst fight in the National Basketball Association this season, will undoubtedly lead to heavy fines and suspensions for the numerous players involved.
Four Knicks were ejected -- Greg Anthony, John Starks, Doc Rivers and Anthony Mason -- while two Suns were ejected, Kevin Johnson and Danny Ainge.
More action will follow when the league office reviews the violent scene on tape, as 12 technical fouls were called during the game.


In Reversal, McDonnell Chief Will Testify on C-17
The chairman of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation reversed his position yesterday and agreed to testify at a House subcommittee hearing on the military contractor's troubled C-17 cargo plane program.
John F. McDonnell, chairman and chief executive of the nation's largest military contractor, had refused last week to go before the legislation and national security subcommittee of the House Government Operations Committee, which wants to question the executive about his role in what Pentagon investigators say was, in effect, an illegal Government bailout of the company.


Revised Fiscal Year Is Proposed for Nassau
Having endured one budget crisis after another and faced with a re-election fight in the fall, the Nassau County Executive, Thomas S. Gulotta, today proposed changing the county's fiscal year to improve its financial outlook.
Mr.
Gulotta, a Republican, said the change would make elected officials more accountable to the voters and save taxpayers millions of dollars.
Members of the County Board of Supervisors generally praised the proposal, although some questioned its timing and origin.


A French Chef Holds the Cream, Never the Taste
CREAM of Wheat, dried beets, chicken jus: this is not the stuff of mouth-watering meals, lovingly recalled.
Until they have been in the hands of Michel Richard, one of the most exuberant and creative French chefs in the United States today.
Mr.
Richard spends most of his waking hours running from his French-California restaurant, Citrus, in Los Angeles, to his three less-ambitious French-California restaurants in Santa Barbara, Calif., Washington and Baltimore -- all called Citronelle.
He knows he should take a little time for a diet and exercise regimen, but says he's too busy conjuring up ways to make French food more accessible, more casual and more in keeping with what Americans say they want to eat.


Accounts
*
Timberland Co., Hampton, N.H., to Mullen Advertising Inc., Wenham, Mass., as its global marketing agency, consolidating its advertising and communications programs with billings of $25 million.
Mullen has handled Timberland's American account; Leagas Delaney, London, which had handled Timberland's European account, was dismissed. *
Webster Industries, Tiffin, Ohio, to Aaby &amp; Holstein, Washington, Conn., an agency opened by Jim Aaby, previously an executive vice president and group creative director at Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York.
Aaby &amp; Holstein will handle Webster's products like Good Sense and Renew trash bags, formerly at Backer Spielvogel.


Israeli Winery Staging a Recovery
CARMEL, Israel's giant 111-year-old winery, is staging a comeback after spending $16 million to update the equipment in its cellars.
Whether the cooperative can restore a reputation damaged in the 1980's by poor grapes and indifferent production and regain ground lost to its chief competitor, the boutique Golan Heights Winery, is unclear.


Fighter Is Improved
Lightweight boxer SERGIE ARTEMIEV, who underwent surgery for a blood clot on the brain after losing a weekend title bout, was upgraded from critical to serious condition yesterday.
Artemiev, 23, remained in a chemically induced coma "for his safety, so he doesn't jar his head," said SHERRY SPATZ, spokeswoman for Atlantic City Medical Center.
She said it was not yet known when he might be able to regain consciousness, or whether he had suffered any brain damage.


Court Sharply Restricts Lawsuits Charging Abuse by Foreign Police
The Supreme Court ruled today, in a case with delicate foreign policy implications, that Americans who are mistreated or even tortured by foreign law-enforcement officials while working overseas may generally not sue the foreign government in United States courts.
Overturning a ruling by a Federal appeals court, the Justices dismissed a lawsuit against Saudi Arabia by an American who said he was beaten and tortured by Saudi police during 39 days of unlawful imprisonment in 1984.


Expos Sign Clark
JACK CLARK, a 16-year veteran who has been without a team since the Boston Red Sox released him last month, was signed to a minor league contract by the Montreal Expos yesterday. (AP)


Divided and Burdened, The Army Stays Neutral
Both of Russia's feuding branches of government say they want to avoid involving the army in their dispute, and military leaders say they are happy to oblige.
Humiliated, orphaned and starved for funds by the collapse of the Soviet Union, the military is an uncertain instrument even in the hands of its commanders.
Military experts, Russian analysts and Western diplomats say that if President Boris N. Yeltsin or the Russian Parliament tries to use the army in this essentially political struggle, it is likely to split, raising the prospects of real civil strife and prolonged chaos.


Campus Journal; Learning a Sioux Tongue, and Easing Guilt, Too
"Wasicun" is Lakota for white person, the instructor says as she writes the word on a blackboard.
Her students -- black, white, Asian and Hispanic -- look up from their notebooks to repeat the word in unison, wa-SHEE-chu, feeling it roll in their mouths like a marble.
Then the teacher of the Sioux language course, Eva Cravens, points out that the word is not as neutral as its definition implies.
Wasicun, she says, was formed by combining the words for "fat, greedy person."


Joseph Chomski, 46; Aided Alaska Natives
Joseph Martin Chomski, a Washington lawyer who was a representative of the interests of Alaska natives, died Thursday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 46 and lived in Bethesda, Md.
He died of leukemia, said a law partner, Eric A. Eisen.


Medical Allies Seek Exemption From Trust Law
Doctors, hospitals and drug companies told Congress today that they needed relief from antitrust laws so they could collaborate in delivering health care or negotiating prices.
But the chairwoman of the Federal Trade Commission, Janet D. Steiger, and the American Association of Retired Persons, which represents more than 33 million older people, opposed their pleas.
So did Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, the chairman of the Judiciary subcommittee on antitrust policy who presided over a hearing today on the issue.


The Right Stuff for Russia
The need to clarify U.S. policy toward Russia has been heightened by the political crisis in Moscow.
Our long-term interests there can be promoted by practical aid and people-to-people programs.
Boris Yeltsin's solution to the impasse between a popularly elected President and a Parliament that, under the Constitution, is the supreme organ of the state shows he believes the answer to the problems of emerging democracy is more democracy.
He has cast his fate on the seas of his own waning but still significant popularity.


Judith S. Kaye Becomes New York's Chief Judge


Ex-Minister Faces Trial In 1987 Attack on Wife
Six years after the wife of a prominent Dallas minister was found nearly choked to death in the family's garage and left in a coma from which she has never recovered, a jury is finally about to explore the question that this city has debated with a morbid and seemingly endless fascination ever since: Did the minister try to kill her?
The defendant, Walker L. Railey, who resigned as senior minister at the 6,200-member First United Methodist Church of Dallas in the controversy that followed the attack, will go on trial this week on a charge of attempted murder.
A jury is being selected in San Antonio, where the trial was moved because of the intense publicity here, and opening arguments are expected as early as Wednesday.


Salvador: Getting Away With Murder
Commit atrocities on a large enough scale and you can get away with it, on the argument that full accountability would destabilize the political order.
That's the callous conclusion invited by El Salvador's sweeping amnesty law, promoted by President Alfredo Cristiani and hurriedly passed last weekend by a National Assembly controlled by his pro-military party.
This unseemly rush to protect the guilty affronts the United Nations-sponsored peace process, international human rights law and the memory of El Salvador's victims.


Nets Lose Petrovic to Injury For a Week or Maybe More
With only 16 games left in the regular season and the playoffs looming large, the Nets received some bad and untimely news yesterday: guard Drazen Petrovic, the team announced, will miss at least one week because of a sprained ligament in his left knee.
But team sources said last night that the injury was more serious than the Nets were saying and it was more likely that Petrovic could miss up to a month of action.
The problem, sources said, is that Petrovic has a 35 percent tear in one of the exterior cruciate ligaments.
The injury will probably not need surgery, they said, but will need lots of rehabilitaion and healing time.


12 Charges Against Alabama Governor Dropped
Citing statutes of limitations, a state judge has dismissed 12 charges of theft against Gov.
Guy Hunt of Alabama but set an April trial date on a state ethics charge, the only count remaining.
An aide to the Governor called the ruling a "major victory" and said lawyers were considering whether to appeal the court's decision not to drop the remaining charge.


Albany Considers Fund To Preserve Open Land
Four and a half years ago, New York State's top environmental official telephoned an Adirondack landowner named Gary F. Heurich and floated an offer Mr.
Heurich did not want to refuse: nearly $3 million for most of his property, which takes in the largest undeveloped piece of privately owned shoreline on Lake Champlain.
Needing cash and pleased at the idea of public ownership of the land, Mr.
Heurich said he was eager to sell.
But the deal depended on the passage of a $1.9 billion environmental bond act.
And when the state's voters unexpectedly rejected the measure in 1990, New York State had no money left to buy open space -- Mr.
Heurich's or anyone else's.
Land to Be Auctioned
Mr.
Heurich now intends to put his land up for auction.
"What it boiled down to was that the state was a willing buyer and I was a willing seller and everything was in place except the money," he said.
"My preference has always been to see the property protected, but at this point, anybody's money is green."


8 OF 9 TEEN-AGERS FREED IN SEX CASE
One boy was arraigned today as residents of the suburb of Lakewood took sides in a scandal over a competition among high school boys to score points for sexual conquests.
But despite the highly publicized arrests on Friday, the eight other boys who were taken into custody were freed Monday and today.
Of those, four remained under investigation, the authorities said today.


Woodson Acquitted
A jury in Fort Wayne, Ind., deliberated less than one hour yesterday before finding Pittsburgh Steelers cornerback ROD WOODSON not guilty of misdemeanor charges of battery on a police officer and resisting law enforcement.
Woodson was arrested last May 19 at his mother's Fort Wayne home after a dispute with his brother, JAMIE WOODSON, over disconnecting their dying father from life support systems. (AP)


Critic's Notebook; Plays by Women, for Anyone And Mostly About Violence
With violent protest erupting into murder, abortion has become a most explosive and exploitable political issue.
The pseudonymous Jane Martin has stepped into this crisis and written a play that is compelling in its sense of urgency.
As directed by Jon Jory, "Keely and Du" features superb performances by Julie Boyd and Anne Pitoniak in the title roles as a pregnant rape victim and a nurse who is firmly opposed to abortion.
This is a play that is bound to stir vigorous discussion wherever it is presented.
In that regard, Ms.
Martin has done for abortion what David Mamet did for sexual harassment in "Oleanna." "Keely and Du" was the provocative high point of the 17th annual Humana Festival of New American Plays at the Actors Theater of Louisville.
This weekend marathon of five full-length plays and five one-acts was viewed by several hundred critics, theatergoers and theater professionals from around the world.


Yet another automobile account, this time Audi of America, is headed for an agency review.
JUST when the automotive account review merry-go-round was showing signs of slowing, Audi of America Inc. has sent it spinning again.
The company said yesterday that it would place in review its account, with estimated billings of $23 million.
The disclosure followed by a day the publication of a report in Adweek that a review was under way.


Clinton Would Consider Segregating Gay Troops; For Yeltsin's 'Courage,' President Vows Plan to Support Russia
President Clinton today brushed aside criticism that he was too closely tied to President Boris N. Yeltsin, saying that Mr.
Yeltsin's decision to circumvent the Russian Parliament was "appropriate" and that he would give Mr.
Yeltsin "an aggressive and quite specific plan" of aid at their summit meeting.
"Boris Yeltsin is the elected President of Russia, and he has shown a great deal of courage in sticking up for democracy and civil liberties and market reforms, and I'm going to support that," Mr.
Clinton said, adding that he would begin briefing Congress this week on his aid proposals.


Mets Coping With Tragedy
Jeff Torborg has seen how the death of a player can devastate a clubhouse.
His first official day as a coach for the Yankees in 1979 was the last day of Thurman Munson's life.
"It was awful, awful," said Torborg.
Munson was the last player to die in an accident while an active major leaguer until Monday night's accident that killed Steve Olin and Tim Crews.


Iron's Role in Heart Unclear in 3 Studies
IN a startling report published last year, a Finnish study suggested that a high level of iron more than doubles the risk for heart attacks in men.
Now three new American studies have left the issue of iron as a risk factor for heart attacks far from settled.
The new studies do not dispute the Finnish report, but they do not confirm its findings, either, researchers said at a meeting of the American Heart Association last week in Santa Fe, N.M.


Small Businesses Need More Time for New Insurance Law
To the Editor:
I am outraged that the New York State Legislature has enacted a community rating insurance law which will have a devastating effect on the state's small businesses.
Because of it my company will lose health insurance April 1.
We were insured by Liberty Mutual and informed of what to expect in mid-February.


Corrections
An article on March 15 about the vigil for Wilfredo Mercado, a hotel worker who was missing after the World Trade Center explosion and was later found dead, misstated the college he attended.
It was Hostos Community College in the Bronx.
The article also misstated the year he arrived in New York.
It was 1979.


Gains Reported For P.R. Firms
An annual survey of public relations agencies, to be released today, reports that the 50 largest listed firms fared better last year than they did in 1991.
The survey, which will appear in the 1993 O'Dwyer Directory of Public Relations Firms published by Jack O'Dwyer in New York, found that 27 of the top 50 had fee income gains of 9 percent or more in 1992, 14 were nearly even and seven had declines of 4 percent or more.
In 1991, only 20 firms had income gains, 17 were even and 13 suffered declines.


People
*
Joy Sliwa was named to the new position of vice president and account director at Media First International, New York.
She was previously senior vice president and media director at Geer, DuBois, New York, which closed. *
Nicholas Cannistraro Jr. was named senior vice president and chief marketing officer at the Newspaper Association of America, Reston, Va., succeeding Ray Gaulke, who, the association said, has announced his intention to leave.
Mr.
Cannistraro was previously a senior vice president at The Washington Post, Washington.


Sales of Toyota Truck Below Expectations
The Toyota Motor Corporation's T100 was fearfully awaited by American auto makers as a 3,500-pound monster that could wreak havoc in one of the few corners of the automotive market the Big Three thoroughly dominates -- fullsize pickup trucks.
Not to worry, at least for the moment.
Sales of the new T100, despite hefty discounts, are sputtering.
Toyota has confirmed a report in Automotive News this week that production in Japan is being slashed by two-thirds, to 1,000 units a month.
The T100 is assembled by a Toyota affiliate, Hino Motors Ltd., at a factory in Hamura.


Charles A. Specht, 78, A Corporate Executive
Charles Alfred Specht, a retired corporate executive and business consultant, died on Friday at his daughter's home in Katonah, N.Y.
A former resident of Manhattan and Bedford, N.Y., he was 78.
The cause of death was heart failure, his daughter Sandra Rawlings said.


Council Shoulders Its Way Into Management of Policy on the Homeless
The New York City Council yesterday used an unprecedented legislative manuever to shoulder its way into the management of homeless policy, provoking a showdown with the Dinkins administration that may have to be resolved in court.
First Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel accused City Council members of trying to keep the homeless out of their districts, but Council members said they wanted only to limit the number of homeless families the city could house in certain private buildings.


Janet Reno Starts Badly
Janet Reno, who is pledged to restore confidence in the Department of Justice and place it above politics, has taken an odd first step in the wrong direction.
One of her first moves as Attorney General was to demand the prompt resignations of all incumbent United States Attorneys.
Nobody questions her right to dismiss every Bush Administration holdover.
But her emphasis on sweeping out the incumbents puts a premium on political control before she has established her own independence of White House politics, or even fielded her own top management.


Hanoi Sees 'Positive Sign' From U.S. on Relations
Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai says Vietnam has received what he calls "the first positive sign" from the United States since the Clinton Administration took office.
In an interview on Tuesday, Mr.
Mai disclosed that after the massacre of 34 Vietnamese by Khmer Rouge troops in Cambodia on March 10, Hanoi had requested Washington "to do everything possible" to prevent such killings.
He said the message had been delivered by the departing delegate to the United Nations, Trinh Xuan Lang.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
This week's column answers recent questions from readers about home repair and improvement problems.
Saltwater and Grout
Q.
During the now-infamous winter storm of Dec.
11, 1992, my house was flooded with about a foot of water from Jamaica Bay.
Our ceramic-tile kitchen floor has been damaged to the extent that the dark brown grout is turning white from the saltwater.
Is there a solution to this problem? -- J. W. Schilling
Jr., Broad Channel, Queens.


Privacy Fight Focuses on Social Security Numbers
Marc A. Greidinger says he began to fear for his privacy two years ago when he moved to a small town in Virginia and found it nearly impossible to obtain a driver's license, open accounts with local utilities or even rent a video without encountering demands for his Social Security number.
But he drew the line when the State of Virginia refused to register him as a voter unless he provided his number.
"I had had it," said Mr.
Greidinger, a 29-year-old staff lawyer with the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in Richmond.


Saberhagen Close to New Deal
The Mets and Bret Saberhagen, still deep in negotiations concerning incentive clauses, could nonetheless announce an agreement in principle on a contract extension by the end of the week, perhaps as early as Thursday.
"My training and experience tell me that a deal is not a deal until it is a deal down on paper, but there's a chance we could get it done soon," said General Manager Al Harazin.


Topics of The Times; Night of the Oscars
On Monday night millions of Americans will be participating in one of this country's great tribal rites.
They will be watching the Academy Awards.
Many will be watching mostly to see what the stars are wearing, and praying for at least one terrible outfit to talk about during Tuesday morning's office recap.
Failing a terrible outfit, they will have to fall back on a terrible hairdo.
No problem.
At least one terrible hairdo is a given, and two or three are a virtual certainty.


White House Plan Would Restrict Campaign Money Flow to Parties
Under pressure to curb the influence of special interests in elections, President Clinton intends to propose restricting donations to political parties, White House officials said today.
But a draft of the plan the officials are working on would permit individuals to give more over all to Federal candidates.
That feature brought protests today from groups pressing for changes in the campaign finance system.
They contended that the proposal did little to reduce the role of big money in politics because it would make it easier for candidates to raise large sums.
Many Indirect Contributions
Under current law, individuals can give a total of $25,000 a year to finance candidates for Federal office, either in donations to the candidates directly or through a national political party.


From Digital To Venture
Kenneth H. Olsen, the founder and former president of the Digital Equipment Corporation, is providing advice to a new computer hardware company called Modular Computing Technologies Inc.
The Concord, Mass., company, founded by a group of former Digital employees, including Barry C. Goldstein, a close friend of Mr.
Olsen, is building a powerful "server," a computer that distributes data through a network of personal computers.


Don't Block the Sight Lines
FOR the Seattle Opera's new production of Debussy's "Pelleas et Melisande," which opened on March 13 and closes tonight, the forest is envisioned as shimmering, transparent emerald-green columns, the garden as a single 20-foot-high, 50-foot-long amber and yellow flower made of plastic.
The sets were designed by Dale Chihuly, the Seattle glass artist.
"I began to envision immense glass forms on a black glass stage," Mr.
Chihuly said.
Metal frames were clad in transparent plastic, and the plastic was painted to resemble glass that was opalescent or transparent, ruby red or amber.
The chandelier, above, resembles an "organic radish," the artist said.


William A. Dyer, 90, Indianapolis Publisher
William Allan Dyer Jr., president of Indianapolis Newspapers Inc., publisher of Indiana's two largest newspapers, died Sunday at Methodist Hospital in Indianapolis, where he lived.
He was 90.
Death was caused by complications from a fall he had suffered at his home two weeks earlier, a spokesman said.


Exotic Orchids for the Common Sill
"I SPENT a long time trying to find just the right apartment," Rozalia Rau said.
"Just right for my orchids, that is," casually clarifying what she considered the most obvious criterion for a residence.
Orchids may sprout like weeds in their native habitats, but many folk still consider them exotic, even mysterious -- hardly candidates for windowsill gardens.
"The fact is, they're really not at all difficult to grow," said Mrs.
Rau, a retired nurse, as she snapped a spent bloom from one of scores of quivering flower stems in her Upper East Side apartment.


Shelling Grounds Bosnia Evacuation
A United Nations operation to airlift sick and wounded Muslims from a besieged town in eastern Bosnia was interrupted today when Serbian nationalist troops broke cease-fire guarantees and bombarded the landing zone with artillery fire.
Two Muslim civilians were reported killed and two Canadian soldiers with the United Nations force were wounded in the shelling, which struck a landing zone in Srebrenica before and after three French helicopters landed and evacuated 21 Muslims on stretchers.


South Africa Says It Built 6 Atom Bombs
During a clandestine 15-year program, South Africa built six crude atomic bombs and was at work on a seventh when it decided to dismantle its arsenal, President F. W. de Klerk said today.
Mr. de Klerk told Parliament that the program, one of the nuclear era's most closely guarded secrets, was begun in 1974 because of the apartheid Government's sense of isolation and its fear of Communist designs in the region.


Dance in Review
'Giselle'  Dance Theater of Harlem  New York State Theater
Dance Theater of Harlem emphasized the emotional truths of "Giselle" at performances over the weekend.
The staging by Frederic Franklin is set in Louisiana rather than in the Rhineland.
Yet the choreography remains traditional and the production is a treasure.


Airport Bonds For Indianapolis
The Indianapolis Airport Authority yesterday priced $52.1 million of tax-exempt revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 6.10 percent for a bond due in 2023 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
For investors in a 31 percent tax bracket, the taxable bond equivalent yield for the 30-year revenue bond is 8.84 percent.


Chocolate milk? No, it's milk plant
HE ancient cave painters used a form of it.
Samples of it were found in King Tutankhamen's tomb.
And until World War II, many Americans still painted houses and furniture with it.
But these days, milk paint, a durable, long-lasting paint made from milk protein, clay, earth pigments and lime, is almost a rarity.
It is not sold at most hardware stores, and although it qualifies as a paint with no toxic ingredients or fumes, milk paint is still used mainly by decorators, furniture restorers and history buffs.


ON THE ROAD WITH -- Lucinda Williams; The Queen of Loss Finds Herself


CHRONICLE
A Superior Court jury in Los Angeles ordered KIM BASINGER yesterday to pay $8.92 million for failing to appear in the movie "Boxing Helena." The actress also faces additional punitive damages for walking out of the movie on the eve of its production.
After the verdict, CARL MAZZOCONE, a first-time producer who mortgaged his house to make the movie, said to The Associated Press: "Today I was vindicated beyond all my wildest dreams. I'm a little guy in the cog and I stood up for my rights."


Corrections
A performance art listing in the Arts and Leisure Guide on Sunday for "Pass the Popcorn," tomorrow and Saturday at the Dicapo Theater in Manhattan, misstated the reservation telephone number.
The number is (212) 288-9438.


Home Video
High Season for Rentals
Inside every video dealer there is a meteorologist.
"This is the first winter we've had in three years," said Gary Messenger, who owns the six-store North American Video chain in Raleigh, Durham and Chapel Hill, N.C.
In the video business, cold is good.
On balmy weekends, the number of movie rentals drops.
In a snowstorm like the one that swept the East this month, almost every cassette at North American, and in thousands of other stores from Florida to Massachusetts, went out the door.


Sports of The Times; The Knicks' Real Loss: Poise
IT'S what championship players in every sport possess and never lose.
No matter how rattled.
No matter how annoyed at another opponent, or at themselves.
It's poise under pressure.


Daimler-Benz Is Ready to Sign Up With Wall St.
Daimler-Benz A.G., the maker of Mercedes-Benz automobiles and the largest industrial company in Germany, said yesterday that it expected to become the first German company to trade on the New York Stock Exchange.
The listing would cap a bitter battle that has pitted the exchange and its chairman, William H. Donaldson, against the Securities and Exchange Commission and its chairman, Richard C. Breeden.


Prison Overcrowding Issue Stalls Budget Negotiations
With time dwindling away before New York State's April 1 budget deadline, lawmakers said today that negotiations had stalled over criminal justice, usually a relatively easy-to-settle slice of the budget pie.
At issue is how to ease the strains on a prison system so overcrowded that more than 2,000 inmates are forced to live in dormitory rooms where bunk beds have replaced single beds.
While Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, a Democrat, has proposed expanding the system by converting a mental hospital into a prison, the Democratic-dominated Assembly has made it clear that it would not tolerate any new prisons in the state.


YM Names Agency For Trade Account
One magazine has named a new agency for its trade advertising account while a second is informally reviewing its agency.
YM magazine in New York said yesterday that it had selected the Philadelphia office of Wieden &amp; Kennedy to handle its trade account.
The account, with billings estimated at $1 million, was awarded without a review.
It was most recently handled by Griffin Bacal in New York but had been inactive.
A campaign for YM, formerly Young Miss, is expected in the summer.


At 100, Broadway Celebrates
Broadway staged a Broadway-style news conference yesterday to announce a season of hype and hoopla celebrating the 100th anniversary of the Times Square theater district.
Even Mayor David N. Dinkins made a theatrical entrance -- through billowing fog from a trapdoor on the stage of the Shubert Theater -- as he introduced stars, producers and other members of the Broadway establishment who will be the chief boosters of the yearlong marketing extravaganza.
The festival, to be titled "Celebrate Broadway: 100 Years in Times Square," will be inaugurated at this year's Tony Awards presentation on June 6.
The televised show will lead off a promotion-filled year of free public concerts, a Broadway film festival, television specials, exhibitions of Broadway memorabilia, and fund-raising efforts to preserve historic theatrical artifacts.


Keeping the Given Name
To The Home Section:
In regard to Lena Williams's article "Women Ponder the Rodham Question"  [ March 18 ] : Oh, please!
When in 1984, at the age of 23, I elected to maintain my name as it was given to me, in spite of getting married, it had absolutely nothing to do with my age, how established I was in my career, education or income.
I simply preferred my name, felt strongly attached to it and had no interest in abandoning it for my husband's -- Marple.
And yes, I did not particularly relish the thought of becoming a Mrs.
Someone Else.


Taking a chip off Pepsi-Cola's block, Frito-Lay gets ready for a multimedia blitz.
THE "Pepsification" of Frito-Lay Inc. accelerates next week when the snack-food maker begins its most ambitious efforts yet to emulate its larger soft-drink sibling, Pepsi-Cola, with "big event" advertising.
Frito-Lay, which commands 42 percent of the nation's estimated $13.4 billion snack market, will introduce Doritos Tortilla Thins, a lighter, thinner version of its Doritos tortilla chips, with the biggest marketing and promotion campaign in the company's history.


Support for Breast-Feeding
To The Home Section:
I read with interest your coverage of the new Florida law protecting breast-feeding and Patricia Leigh Brown's "Breast-Feeding Strategies for Busy Mothers"  [ March 11 ] .


Vehicle Sales Get a Boost From Trucks
Brisk sales of light trucks helped to push up overall sales of domestically built vehicles by 10.7 percent in mid-March, the nation's auto makers said today, although car sales rose only slightly from the sluggish level of a year earlier.
Car sales were 170,329 for the March 11-20 period, up 1.6 percent over the period a year earlier.
But sales of light trucks -- which include mini-vans, sport-utility vehicles and pickups -- rose 24.6 percent, to 136,078.
Total sales of vehicles built in North America, which are considered domestic vehicles for reporting purposes, were 306,407.


Bombing Suspect Flown to U.S. After 10 Days in Egypt's Custody
An Egyptian-born cabdriver, described by Federal officials as a major suspect in the bombing of the World Trade Center, returned to New York yesterday in the custody of the police and Federal agents, after being captured in Cairo and turned over to United States agents for a trans-Atlantic flight on a chartered plane.
Mahmud Abouhalima, a 33-year-old New Jersey resident who the authorities said had fled with his German wife and four children after the Feb. 26 bombing, landed at Stewart International Airport in Newburgh, N.Y., late in the afternoon.
He was driven to the Metropolitan Correctional Center in Manhattan for arraignment today, the authorities said.


Cauthen Goes to ABC
STEVE CAUTHEN, who rode Affirmed to the 1978 Triple Crown, has been hired by ABC Sports as an expert analyst on this year's telecasts of the Kentucky Derby, the Preakness and the Belmont Stakes.
Cauthen, 32, who has no broadcasting experience, is expected to provide a jockey's perspective on the races.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Winter Blooms
Q.
Can you tell me which branches I can now force to bloom inside? -- Seymour Brensen, Harrisburg, Pa.


Herbert Tenzer, Ex-Congressman And Philanthropist, Is Dead at 87
Herbert Tenzer, a lawyer, philanthropist and former Democratic Congressman from Nassau County, died yesterday at his home in Lawrence, L.I.
He was 87.
Yeshiva University reported his death and said the cause was heart failure.
Mr.
Tenzer was a trustee and chairman emeritus of Yeshiva.


Son of North Korean Leader May Be Succeeding to Power
North Korea held its annual mass rallies and gymnastic stunts last month to celebrate the 51st birthday of the "Dear Leader," Kim Jong Il, the reclusive, mysterious son of the man who has run North Korea for 45 years.
Now, after the celebrations, everyone from American intelligence officials to South Korea's nervous leadership has begun to conclude that the younger Mr.
Kim was quietly given the gift he has long coveted: total control of his father's country.


Essay; A Virgin No More
Now we know why President Clinton resisted for two months the serious test of a formal news conference: the traditional format reveals his weaknesses.
He and his staff are patting each other on the back for not having made a gaffe and for anticipating the likely questions.
Here is a more astringent view of Mr.
Clinton's first foray into communications reality -- answering sustained professional questioning from grown-ups.


Polluted Air in Schools Causes Health Problems, Study Finds
Internal air pollution afflicts buildings in about one in 10 of New York State's public school systems, causing a variety of health problems, a survey by the state's largest teachers' union has found.
The union, the New York State United Teachers, said the problem had been reported in 74 of New York State's 734 school districts.
Statewide, 155 school buildings were involved, with a handful of them in New York City.
The problem has also affected some schools in New Jersey, Connecticut, Florida, Texas and California, the survey said.


Suns' Biggest Beef Is Over Anthony's 'Sucker Punch'
The Phoenix Suns today painted Knicks guard Greg Anthony as the villain.
They have no serious beef with another Knicks guard, Doc Rivers -- who chased down and wrestled their cherished point guard, Kevin Johnson, on Tuesday night -- but some of them want Anthony banned for the season for coming off the bench in a silk shirt to "sucker punch" Johnson from behind.


Mets' Spring Picture Still an Out-of-Focus Negative
The intrasquad game that matched the regulars for the Mets against a lineup called the Bench Bunch, began at 10:15 A.M. instead of noon today because of a fear of more rain, perhaps even a tornado.
It began without umpires and with four designated hitters.
It lasted 11 innings, and not because the score was even, but because nearly a dozen underworked pitchers needed exercise.
Oh, the Mets lost, 4-3, to the Bench Bunch, a motley outfit that had outfielder Joe Orsulak at first base for the first time since Class AA ball and Jeff McKnight in three different positions including catcher.


Northeast Making Progress in Meeting Auto Emission Goals
The Northeast appears to be well on its way to adopting California's tailpipe pollution standards, the strictest in the nation, which will mean substantial changes to all new cars and trucks and the widespread sale of electric vehicles.
Although cobiGeneral Motors is engaged in a state-by-state struggle to block the standards, advocates say they gained a crucial victory this month with New Jersey's adoption of the program.


Mickelson's Only 22, But Game Is Mature
Despite the impressive depth of his dimples and the improbable length of his backswing, Phil Mickelson is no longer a golf Wunderkind.
His air is too serene, his shots too controlled, and his putter too steady.
Coming into the Players Championship, which starts Thursday, the 22-year-old left-hander has shown signs of evolving into a one of a kind.


Jean Branscombe, 64, Friend of City's Parks
Jean Murray Branscombe, who helped develop one of New York City's first vest-pocket parks and was an aide to Laurence A. Rockefeller, died on Tuesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 64 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Whatever Yeltsin's Fate, Russia Can't Go Back
To the Editor:
Faced with Russian political gridlock and an economic crisis, President Boris N. Yeltsin has assumed emergency powers and called for an April 25 "referendum" (front page, March 21).
But, even if he survives the Russian Parliament's attempt to remove him from office, the referendum strategy is risky and inappropriate.
He will likely emerge weakened, not stronger.
Even success will not eliminate the causes of the economic problems overwhelming Russia.


Top I.B.M. Issue: How, Not Who
Any day now, any minute even, I.B.M. is expected to announce that Louis V. Gerstner Jr. will be its new chief executive, concluding the most avidly watched and feverishly handicapped beauty contest Corporate America has ever seen.
Yet the more pressing question for the International Business Machines Corporation is not who will be the new boss, but whether Mr.
Gerstner, currently the head of RJR Nabisco, or anyone else can cope with the company's deep-seated problems -- chiefly the accelerating slide in its mainstay business of mainframe computers.


Justice Prevails in Ruling on Accountants
To the Editor:
The Supreme Court's action in limiting the suing of accountants under the Federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (Business Day, March 4) is a major step in curbing the abuses of trial lawyers.


Settlement Slow in India Gas Disaster Claims
Resentment is growing here at the slow pace of compensation to victims of the 1984 gas disaster as nearly $700 million sits in an Indian bank.
In more than one year since the compensation payments began, fewer than 700 people have received funds totaling about $2 million.


An Israeli Hawk Turned Dove Is Elected President
Ezer Weizman, a blunt-talking swashbuckler who evolved from a hawkish general into a leading voice for peace with the Arabs, was elected by Parliament today to be Israel's seventh President.
A befuddled and embarrassed legislature had to vote twice because the first time, for reasons unclear, it wound up with 124 ballots being cast -- four more than its membership.


Players Were Unaware Of Impending Disaster
As the Cleveland Indians resumed their baseball lives today following the deaths of two pitchers, investigators learned that their teammates apparently never saw the pier their boat rammed.
Steve Olin and Tim Crews were killed when the 18-foot fishing boat Crews was piloting Monday nightstruck and went under a pier on Little Lake Nellie, about 30 miles north of the Indians' spring training camp.
Investigators have been trying to determine the circumstances surrounding the accident, such as why the boat hit the pier, how fast the boat was traveling and whether or not alcohol was involved.


Rangers' Leetch Say It Hurts. It Hurts Bad.
After the first day, the batteries in the cordless phone went dead.
Brian Leetch didn't mind.
It gave him an excuse, a reason to ignore the incessant ringing.
The regular phone is in the other room, far from the living room couch that has become the center of his existence.
It is too much of an effort to hobble there on crutches, dragging the plaster cast that encases his broken right ankle.
He lets the answering machine pick up.
Most of the time, Leetch doesn't want to talk anyway.
What can he say?
His hockey season ended early Saturday morning, when he stepped from a cab in front of his Upper West Side apartment building and slipped on an ice bank, turning his ankle.
He had been out sharing dinner and a few beers with his teammates, Mark Messier and Tony Amonte.
They had talked about how the Rangers finally seemed to be putting things together.
They had talked about playoff hopes.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  4TH BOMB SUSPECT BROUGHT FROM EGYPT An Egyptian-born cabdriver, described by Federal officials as a major suspect in the bombing of the World Trade Center, returned to New York in the custody of the police and Federal agents after being captured in Cairo and turned over to United States agents.
A1.
American officials feared that if news of the capture leaked, Egypt might back away from a deal struck in a week of negotiations.
B7.


Review/Film Festival; A Theatrical Farce As Allegory for Taiwan
"The Peach Blossom Land," a gentle Taiwanese film with a theatrical spirit, revolves around a single contrivance: that two different theater troupes might find themselves trapped in the same rehearsal space, and that their seemingly different plays might overlap thematically.
Once known as "Secret Love for the Peach Blossom Spring" and developed by Performance Workshop, a well-regarded Taiwanese theater company, it finds its basis in a fifth-century allegory by the Chinese poet Tap Yuanming.
This utopian text tells of a paradise called the Peach Blossom Land, and of a fisherman who accidentally finds his way there.
The residents are peaceful and happy, knowing nothing of the outside world and its troubles.
Having lived serenely in this place for a while, the fisherman departs and is never able to find his way back.


John Hersey, Author of 'Hiroshima,' Is Dead at 78
John Hersey, the novelist and journalist whose "A Bell for Adano" won a Pulitzer Prize for fiction in 1945 and whose nonfiction work "Hiroshima" awakened Americans to the horrors of atomic warfare, died yesterday at his home in Key West, Fla.
He was 78.
The cause of death was cancer, said his family.


CHRONICLE
A tribute to RUDOLF NUREYEV, modeled after the memorial service that the ballet star choreographed for his funeral service in Paris, is scheduled today at the Russian Embassy in Washington.
The paradox is that Mr.
Nureyev, who still had a sentence of seven years' hard labor hanging over his head when he died in January, was said to have steered clear of Russian embassies until the 1980's.
"The great talent of Rudolf Nureyev belongs to the whole world," noted ALEXANDER POTEMKIN of the American-Russian Cultural Cooperation Foundation, sponsor of the tribute.
"Still, we remember proudly that this talent was discovered in Russia and was cultivated on a Russian ballet stage."


COMPANY BRIEFS
GEC-MARCONI ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS CORP., Wayne, N.J., plans to close its plant in San Marcos, Calif., in 1994, putting 375 people out of work, because of a decline in military contracts.
GEC Marconi, a unit of General Electric of Britain, builds aircraft computers, navigation equipment and communications systems.


Russian Papers Shed Little Light on Hungary
Last November, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia arrived in Budapest for a state visit with a crate full of gifts meant to soothe lingering aches in Hungary, a onetime satellite of the Soviet Union.
Hungarians had little reason to love the Russians, who crushed the Hungarian uprising in 1956 and had helped the Austrians put down a republican revolt in 1848.
Several generations of Communist-era Hungarian students proudly completed a decade of compulsory Russian language training without being able to utter much more than "Russians go home."


New York State Plan Would Require Jobs To Be Part of School
The New York State Commissioner of Education is proposing to make work as integral a part of the requirements for high school graduation as math, reading and science.
The proposal is intended to address concerns that public schools are not giving students even basic job skills.
If it is approved by the State Board of Regents on Friday, New York would become the first state in the nation to require high school juniors and seniors to work before they graduate, according to the National Governors Association.


Review/Theater; A Sad Song of Grief, Violence and Apartheid
The music of Ladysmith Black Mambazo rises to greet the audience as if sound were a tidal wave.
These nine male a cappella singers from South Africa, who are at the heart of the new Broadway play "The Song of Jacob Zulu," make music so insidiously penetrating that you seem to absorb it with your whole being rather than just the ears.
Fond of reverberant harmonies that can skirt doo-wop and gospel, Ladysmith Black Mambazo is not loud in volume or showy in its effects.
Rather, this group, best known to American audiences for its "Graceland" collaborations with Paul Simon, seems to have a ventriloquist's gift for tossing its voices lightly through space.
The voices seem to be pitched to aurally subliminal frequencies more suggestive of heaven than of earth.
Because their unaccompanied music rises out of nowhere, the group's first entrance in "Jacob Zulu," from a deep well far upstage at the Plymouth Theater, has a theatricality so stunning the rest of the evening is hard pressed to match it (and never does).
Simply dressed, the men climb to stage level and then advance toward the audience as if to push their airy music forward.
They keep coming and coming, their singing expanding as they walk, and by the time they reach the stage's edge, the whole house is ready to embrace them.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
2.93
3.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.91
4.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.00
3.01
4.14
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.62
5.58
7.22
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.82
6.76
7.93
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.70
8.87
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.98
5.97
6.77
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Dance in Review
Dances Patrelle Gould Hall 55 East 59th Street Manhattan
There isn't a great deal an adventurous choreographer can do to turn "Romeo and Juliet" into something other than itself.
But Francis Patrelle, who presented his production of "Romeo and Juliet" on Friday night, gives the traditional tale some ingenious twists.


Corruption Case May Sway Judge's Ruling in Drug Trial
In the first test of the impact of a police corruption scandal on hundreds of drug convictions and pending trials, a Federal judge is expected to rule this week on whether to dismiss a major drug indictment in New York City because an undercover agent who worked on the investigation is now accused of being corrupt.
At a hearing that ended yesterday, a defense witness, Joseph Serrano, 41, testified that Officer Robert Robles, 38, recruited him to commit robberies and burglaries of drug dealers in the last 18 months, sometimes using unmarked police cars.
Elite Reputation Damaged
Officer Robles was a member of the New York Drug Enforcement Task Force, a group whose elite reputation was damaged when three of its members were arrested two weeks ago.
Mr.
Serrano's testimony provided a glimpse into the apparently lavish life style of Officer Robles while he was a member of the task force.
Mr.
Serrano said that Officer Robles often wore expensive jewelry, flashed huge rolls of money that he said had been stolen from drug dealers and boasted about trips to Puerto Rico with other supposedly corrupt narcotics officers and their girlfriends.


Weep for Beige: Bloomie's Finds Color
IF the model rooms that open today at Bloomingdale's say anything about interior design trends, the news is that beige is out.
The seven rooms are brightly colored: walls are emerald green or flamingo pink; furniture is covered with plaids in purple, magenta and green.


Lured by Lady Liberty, French Artisans Stay On
WHEN a French metalworking company won the job of restoring the torch of the Statue of Liberty over nearly two dozen other companies, it discovered that the United States is still the land of opportunity.
And it has decided to stay on permanently to do business here, opening a shop in this once-thriving industrial city better known for making locomotives, guns and textiles than for the kind of elegant metalwork that graces Versailles and the Grand Hotel in Paris.


California Sets Out to Prove Youth Can Have Its Privileges
Everything has changed, and nothing has changed.
The sense of ambition that attracted outstanding young basketball players to the University of California in the last two years has been rechanneled, not removed.
But the dramatic rise of the Golden Bears, who have reached the round of 16 in the national collegiate tournament for the first time in 33 years, has been fueled, in part, by a shared sense of purpose redefined by their 29-year-old coach, Todd Bozeman.


Some Kremlinesque Architectology
IN 1955, Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, issued a decree "On the Elimination of Excesses in Architecture and Construction." Some young architects took this as a mandate to design strong, modern architecture that while not ornamental, was also not typical of the massive, bunkerlike buildings in the Soviet republics.
The work of 10 architects is the subject of "Moscow Avant-Garde Architecture: 1955 to 1991," which opens next Thursday at the Architecture Society at the Art Institute of Chicago.
The show includes 150 drawings and photographs of schools, offices, civic complexes and apartments.


Rights of Commercial Speech Affirmed
Reaffirming its view that advertising is a form of speech protected by the First Amendment, the Supreme Court ruled today that a city may not automatically exclude advertising brochures from the newspaper vending machines that it licenses for use on public property.
The 6-to-3 decision held that the City of Cincinnati violated the First Amendment rights of two companies by revoking permits for their 62 vending machines while leaving in place the nearly 2,000 vending machines used by newspapers.
The decision upheld rulings by two lower Federal courts.


Calendar: Buildings Of Spain
Explorations in Architecture
Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street; (212) 708-9400.


A Hawk Turned Dove Becomes President of Israel


Topics of The Times; Noble Widows
A woman of immense dignity and courage, Anna Larina, was honored at Columbia University this week for the English translation of a book that has been a surprise best seller in Russia.
"This I Cannot Forget" describes her marriage at 20 to the Old Bolshevik Nikolai Bukharin, a famous victim of Stalin's purges.
Before his execution he asked her to memorize his last letter, protesting his innocence.
She survived, and five decades later was able to publish her husband's testament, and her own memoirs.


Durables Orders Up 2.2% in Month
Offering fresh evidence that the economy is gaining strength, the Commerce Department reported yesterday that February orders for durable goods -- factory machinery, aircraft, autos, military hardware and other expensive, long-lasting items -- rose a healthy 2.2 percent, the fourth increase in the last six months.
But like most recent Government reports, this latest measure of the economy's health also suggested weaknesses that could dilute the recovery in coming months.


F.D.A. Ends Ban on Women in Drug Testing
The Food and Drug Administration said today that it would end its ban on women's participation in most drug safety tests and require companies to carry out analysis by sex in virtually all applications for new drugs.
The Commissioner of Food and Drugs, Dr.
David A. Kessler, said today that he would send rules to companies in the next few weeks "saying that women simply must be included and we are lifting the 16-year ban we have had on women in early drug trials."


Cuomo Joins Effort to Help Murdoch Buy Post
Describing Rupert Murdoch as "the only realistic hope for long-term survival" of The New York Post, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday joined a Congressional lobbying effort intended to help the bankrupt newspaper's former owner to reacquire it, even though Federal regulations would normally bar the purchase.
As efforts favorable to Mr.
Murdoch appeared to gather steam, a close friend of the multimillionaire publisher said Mr.
Murdoch was all but ready to try to acquire The Post if he could be assured that he could win a waiver from the regulations that prohibit a company from owning a newspaper and a broadcast outlet in the same media market.


More Women Step Behind the Bar
There are certain things Stephanie Novotny will not tolerate in Dave's Tavern: demands for blender drinks, fights over cue sticks, customers who try to punch each other out.
She will brook none of this, even if it means taking a right hook to the head, as she did one night when she broke up a fight in the doorway of Dave's, a dimly lighted tavern on 43d Street in Times Square where she tends bar.


Let's Leave Class Out Of Glen Ridge Case
To the Editor:
"Cruelty and Justice in Glen Ridge" (editorial, March 18) is rife with classist assumptions.
You note that the convicted defendants Christopher Archer and Kevin and Kyle Scherzer are "children of affluence," and as such, their conviction serves as a "sobering reminder that cruelty knows no class." This implies we might reasonably expect such behavior from children of the lower class, but that upper- and middle-class codes of behavior are more stringent.
Following this line of reasoning, if these young brutes were poor, would their crimes be any less heinous?
Or would their lower class status have minimized -- or better yet, explained -- their abominable actions?


2 Top Bond Traders May Return to Field
Two of Wall Street's most successful bond traders, John W. Meriwether and Eric R. Rosenfeld, are exploring getting back into the business, possibly by starting a money management firm.
Formerly the vice chairman of Salomon Brothers, Mr.
Meriwether was in charge of all bond trading at the firm until he resigned in 1991 after it became involved in a Treasury auction scandal.
After Mr.
Meriwether's resignation, Mr.
Rosenfeld, one of Mr.
Meriwether's deputies, was named to oversee the firm's bond trading desks.
But he resigned in January to pursue other interests.
Lure of Independence
A spokesman for Mr.
Meriwether said he and Mr.
Rosenfeld were exploring possible avenues for working together, but declined to be more specific.
Bloomberg Business News reported yesterday that Mr.
Rosenfeld had told friends that he was trying to raise money for a new company that would manage money.
Mr.
Rosenfeld did not return calls seeking comment last night.


Riley Should Shoulder A Share of the Blame
The only thing less surprising than the identities of the Knick players who were ejected following Tuesday night's wild brawl with the Phoenix Suns was Coach Pat Riley emerging from the middle of the free-for-all with not a greased hair out of place.
Three cheers for the mousse, and three Bronx cheers for the six-fisted menace known as Anthony, Mason and Starks.
Having invested millions in front-office, coach's and players' salaries, and having emerged with their first legitimate chance to win a championship in 20 years, it is unfortunate for the Knicks that all is being risked by senseless belligerence.
Forget for the moment the danger Anthony Mason, Greg Anthony and John Starks present to opponents and to the integrity of the sport.
If I were Patrick Ewing, and these hockey-imitating goons were threatening to ruin my first serious run for a ring, they would be on the locker room carpet to explain what they think they are doing.


Lindros's Disputed Goal Leaves Rangers Aghast and Adrift
Ron Smith thought the game should have ended in a tie, plain and simple.
He didn't agree with the officials' decision on the final, game-winning goal for the Philadelphia Flyers, who beat New York 5-4 at Madison Square Garden last night.
Smith was probably right.
Eric Lindros's tally, his third of the evening, was scored after Greg Hawgood triple-pumped in the slot, then fired a shot that richocheted off Lindros's ribs into the net.
The goal, scored with 3 minutes and 49 seconds remaining in the game, capped a three-goal, third-period comeback by the Flyers, and it infuriated the Rangers, who felt that Lindros was in the crease when the goal was scored.
The officials reviewed the play, but allowed the goal to stand.


Whatever Yeltsin's Fate, Russia Can't Go Back; Unemployment Crisis
To the Editor:
The fundamental economic issue in the contest between the Yeltsin Government and the Parliament is the choice between inflation and unemployment.
The Government is right in its determination to halt accelerating inflation.
That requires reining in the state budget deficit, which requires curtailment of the subsidies to wasteful and unprofitable enterprises.


Blue Chips Are Led Lower by Drug Stocks
Led by big drug stocks, prices of blue-chip issues fell yesterday on worries that first-quarter earnings would fall short of expectations.
The decline in drug stocks was almost preordained after Merck announced after the market's close on Tuesday that it would eliminate 1,000 of its 38,400 jobs this year and predicted slower earnings growth.


Russia's Unnoticed Revolution
Ten million new capitalists.
No, they're not Koreans, Americans or Western Europeans.
They're Russian.
In a matter of months, tens of thousands of Mom and Pop shops and hundreds of large enterprises have been privatized -- turned over to workers, managers and outside investors, some foreign.
By the end of April, when the number may reach 10 million, Russia will be well launched on an astonishingly quick traverse from Socialism to capitalism.
While the West fixates on Russia's political turmoil that threatens to bury Boris Yeltsin's reform Government, an economic revolution goes on largely unnoticed.
Privatization hasn't always been pretty or fair.
But it has been popular.
It's been very, very quick.
And, for Mr.
Yeltsin, quick counts for a lot.
When Russians go to the polls next month, he's counting on the new capitalists to back his pro-market reforms.


Ronald P. Kriss, 58, An Executive Editor Of Time Magazine
Ronald P. Kriss, an executive editor at Time magazine, died yesterday at the John F. Kennedy Medical Center in Edison, N.J.
He was 58 and lived in Manhattan and Woodstock, N.Y.
The cause of death was complications from cancer, his family said.


Yanks' Starting Rotation Putting Pitchers in a Spin
Bob Wickman has not spoken to Manager Buck Showalter about his status in the starting rotation since arriving for spring training last month.
Scott Kamieniecki and Sam Militello do not remember speaking to Showalter at all about their situations.
Strange?
Maybe.
Although it was obvious before camp that the three pitchers and Mike Witt, if healthy, would compete for the final two spots in the Yankee rotation, the apparent lack of communication has made the uncertain situation even more tense with opening day only 12 days off.
Militello and Kamieniecki diplomatically said they were not overly concerned, but Wickman conceded to being confused.


Nets Win as Coleman Does His Superman Act
Derrick Coleman sat at his locker, speaking in a whisper, so tired he could barely talk, so exhausted that when Rick Mahorn handed him a drink and congratulated Coleman on what was basically a Superman-like effort against Charlotte tonight, he was too tired to drink it.
If toasts are in order, Coleman deserves more than a glass of champagne.
He deserves his own personal vineyard.


Clinton Meets Russian On Assistance Proposal
Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev of Russia asked President Clinton today to help stabilize his country's teetering economy by purchasing its oil, lifting trade restrictions, rescheduling the repayment of its debt and lobbying for the country's admission to the club of industrialized nations.
Mr.
Clinton in turn pledged to continue his efforts on behalf of Russia by telephoning foreign leaders, asking Americans for support for an extensive economic aid package and avoiding potentially inflammatory comment on Russia's political turmoil.


8 Are Charged in Drug Slayings
Eight people were charged yesterday with participating in a Bronx gang whose members posed as city police officers, kidnapped reputed drug dealers for ransom or their drugs and then murdered six of them.
The six slayings took place in two incidents in 1990, according to the charges in an indictment filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan.


A. S. McWilliams, 77, Comic Strip Cartoonist
Alden S. McWilliams, a cartoonist and co-creator of the first black lead character in an American comic strip, died last Friday at a hospital in Stamford, Conn.
He was 77 and a resident of Darien, Conn., and Eastham, Mass.
The cause was respiratory failure, his family said.


Support for Breast-Feeding
To The Home Section:
I read with interest your coverage of the new Florida law protecting breast-feeding and Patricia Leigh Brown's "Breast-Feeding Strategies for Busy Mothers"  [ March 11 ] .


Executive Changes
AMERICAN SIGNATURE, New York, a printer of catalogues and magazines, named Jack R. Hubbs senior vice president and chief operating officer.
DUN &amp; BRADSTREET CORP., New York, a marketer of business information and related services, named Michael F. Brewer senior vice president for communications and government affairs.


Status on Artemiev
Doctors said yesterday that they will keep SERGEI ARTEMIEV in an induced coma while his injured, swollen brain heals after a weekend fight in Atlantic City.
But they cannot tell yet if he will recover.
Artemiev, who came to this country from Russia three years ago to turn professional, suffered a brain clot and collapsed Sunday night in the 10th round of a bout against CARL GRIFFITH that had put him on the doorstep for a world lightweight title.


Ballet Benefit: Everything but Kisses
Boxes of ballet memorabilia were being unpacked in the massage office, toe shoes were being spray-painted gold in a storage room and a huge white plastic high-heeled shoe was waiting to be filled with flowers donated by a florist in Hawaii.
The finishing touches were being put on "Not Just Another Gala," a benefit tonight at American Ballet Theater.
Planning began in the winter, as the extent of Ballet Theater's financial problems became increasingly evident.
"Somebody should do something," dancers told Raymond Serrano, the company's masseur, as he pounded muscles into shape.
A home-grown party was the outcome.


Keeping the Given Name
To The Home Section:
In regard to Lena Williams's article "Women Ponder the Rodham Question"  [ March 18 ] : Oh, please!
When in 1984, at the age of 23, I elected to maintain my name as it was given to me, in spite of getting married, it had absolutely nothing to do with my age, how established I was in my career, education or income.
I simply preferred my name, felt strongly attached to it and had no interest in abandoning it for my husband's -- Marple.
And yes, I did not particularly relish the thought of becoming a Mrs.
Someone Else.


Decibels, Not Bullets, Bombard Texas Sect
Throughout the night, beneath a star-studded sky and across a patch of Central Texas prairie, the F.B.I. blasts the ear-splitting tape recordings into the Branch Davidian compound.
Chanting by Tibetan monks.
Sing-along-with-Mitch Miller Christmas carols.
An Andy Williams album.
Nancy Sinatra's "These Boots are Made for Walking." At dawn, a trumpet blares reveille over and over and over again.


Behind Deal for Custody, Fears of Islamic Wrath
As anxious officials waited by phones in Washington and New York in the middle of the night, F.B.I. agents sat in a small jet on the runway of an airport on the outskirts of Cairo.
Then Mahmud Abouhalima arrived in the back of a car driven by Egyptian officials, who took him aboard.
But not until they had left and the agents had arrested Mr.
Abouhalima, a major suspect in the bombing of the World Trade Center in Manhattan, did the fears subside that Egypt's worries over the wrath of Islamic fundamentalists could undo a deal that had been worked out in a week of delicate diplomatic negotiations.


SERGEANT ASSERTS BLOWS SAVED KING
Jurors who had heard Rodney G. King tell of a harrowing beating by the police heard the ranking officer at the scene assert today that the torrent of baton blows and kicks may have actually saved Mr.
King's life.
Sgt.
Stacey C. Koon, the first defendant to testify in his own defense in the trial of four officers on Federal civil rights charges, said they would have been forced to shoot Mr.
King or apply a potentially deadly chokehold if their blows and kicks had not thwarted his efforts to get to his feet.
Sergeant Koon said he had ordered the officers to club Mr.
King's joints after blows to his arms, legs and torso failed to subdue him.


Communications Rivals Spar on a Clinton Network Proposal
Executives from rival communications industries gathered today to tell Congress of their support for President Clinton's plan to develop an advanced national communications network.
But they quickly fell into turf fighting that may prove to be the network's biggest obstacle.
At a packed Congressional hearing, top executives from the telephone, cellular and cable television industries all argued that the most important role of Government was to let private companies tackle most of the work in building a high-speed information superhighway that would be available to businesses, schools and even homes.


Sidney Regner, 89, Rabbi Who Worked In Peace Movement
Rabbi Sidney L. Regner, a retired officer of the Central Conference of American Rabbis who was active in the peace movement, died on Tuesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 89 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from pneumonia, said his daughter, Babette Melmed of Stamford, Conn.


A Tale of Treasures Lost and Memories Rekindled
THE suspended staircase with the crystal fringe dangled over the two-story gallery like a necklace, floating children amid paintings, then tinkling as they raced downstairs.
Chandeliers sprouted tiny glass balls from narrow metal stalks, like giant Queen Anne's lace hung up to dry.
In the library, above the Rembrandt paintings, shimmered a ceiling quilted with Japanese silk brocades.
The enchanted rooms at the Havermeyer house at 1 East 66th Street in Manhattan were created in 1891 by Louis Comfort Tiffany and the artist Samuel Colman, for clients any interior designer would crave: Henry Osborne Havemeyer, who made his millions in sugar refining, and his wife, Louisine.
While their neighbors copied Versailles, the Havemeyers gave Mr.
Tiffany total freedom and an open purse, asking only that he create something new, opulent and truly American to frame their world-class art collection.
He rewarded them with mosaics, friezes, hand-blocked wallpapers, ornamented ceilings, filigreed railings and tile floors.


On Not Being Taxed Into Good Behavior
To the Editor:
"The Value of Cigarette Taxes" (editorial, March 7) is disturbing.
The idea of using a tax to control the behavior of a population away from what the Government deems inappropriate is scary.
While no one would argue that smoking is healthy, that is hardly the point.
We accept the Government's right to restrict goods deemed dangerous, such as narcotics.
But cigarettes, though dangerous, are not illegal, and until they are, the Government should not use a "sin tax" to restrict our behavior.


Pitino Hopes Lightning (Rogers) Doesn't Repeat Laettner's Strike
On a day reserved for light practice and flattering the opposition with little white lies, Rick Pitino explained today just when he realized how good a player Wake Forest's Rodney Rogers is.
The University of Kentucky coach was relaxing on the team's flight here from Lexington Tuesday, studying film of Wake Forest, the Wildcats' opponents in Thursday's night in the Southeast Regional semifinal.
Rogers, the Demon Deacons' 6-foot-7-inch, 235-pound all-America forward, beat his man along the baseline and rose for a shot.


Prices of Treasury Securities Drop
Treasury prices declined yesterday as traders and investors continued to buy and sell in alternating waves that are keeping prices and yields in a tight trading range.
The price of the 30-year bond, which had gained 14/32 Monday and Tuesday, was off 22/32 yesterday to yield 6.82 percent, up from 6.76 percent Tuesday.
The price of the 10-year note, which was up 11/32 Monday and Tuesday, was off 14/32 yesterday, to yield 5.96 percent, up from 5.90 percent.


David Rattray, 57, Poet and an Editor At Reader's Digest
David Greig Rattray, a poet and translator and an editor for Reader's Digest, died on Monday at his home in Amagansett, L.I.
He was 57.
The cause was a brain tumor, for which he had been undergoing treatment for three months, said his wife, Carolyn.


After 50 Years, Real Fighters Will Slug It Out in the Capital
In what began as a lighthearted spoof of a political convention and later degenerated into a real political event, official Washington made it official today: "The Great Heavyweight Debate" between the incumbent champion, Riddick Bowe, and his challenger, Jesse Ferguson, will be held at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium on May 22.
It will be the first heavyweight title bout held in the nation's capital in more than 50 years, and Bowe's manager, Rock Newman, a well-connected Washington native, made the best of it.


Between College and Job, Real World
Ted Ernst started thinking differently about computer chips last summer while tutoring underprivileged children at a day camp in Ewing, N.J.
His life has not been the same since.
"I realized that what I was studying in school -- how to make computer chips -- was not going to help the kids I was with," Mr.
Ernst, who is an electrical engineering major at Princeton University, recalled recently.
"So I just weighed the option of making computer chips or working with people to make a difference in their lives, and for me there wasn't really a choice to be made: I wasn't going to be an engineer."


Ruth Tester Carothers; Singer, 89
Ruth Tester Carothers, a singer and dancer in Broadway musicals in the 1920's and early 30's, died on Sunday at a nursing home in Weston, Mass., where she lived.
She was 89.
Miss Tester was best known for her rendition of "Sing Something Simple" in "The Second Little Show." She sang the number again in "Garrick Gaieties of 1930," whose stars included Imogene Coca and Rosalind Russell.


INSIDE
U.N. Bosnia Rescue Halted
An airlift of sick and wounded Muslims from a besieged town was halted when Serbian forces broke a cease-fire, killing two civilians.
Page A3.
A Siege of Sound
Chanting by Tibetan monks.
An Andy Williams album.
Reveille.
They're all Federal weapons in the standoff with David Koresh in Texas.
Page A16.
Tale of 2 New York Regions
More than ever, New York's economic landscape is divided between the densely populated south and industrial north, a report says.
Page B1.


Money Market Fund Yields Are Mixed in Latest Period
The average yields on tax-exempt and taxable money market funds were mixed in the latest week, according to the most recent survey by IBC's Money Fund Report.
Tax-exempt yields were up sharply in the week ended Tuesday for the second consecutive reporting period, as the supply of new municipal issues continued to outpace the demand.
With so much new debt available, yields are moving higher to attract buyers.


Review/Film Festival; When School Bullies Grow Up to Rule Nations
If Park Chong Won, the South Korean director and co-writer of "Our Twisted Hero," is to be taken literally, the social structures formed by children in elementary school precisely mirror the hierarchy of adult society.
That is the message of the film, a blunt political fable of repression and corruption in modern South Korea that the New Directors/New Films series is showing this evening at 6 and on Saturday at noon at the Museum of Modern Art.
The film, based on a popular Korean novel by Yi Mun Yol, portrays an English teacher's boyhood recollections that are prompted by the news of a grade-school teacher's death.


'Dwarf' Mammoths May Have Put Off Demise
Three Russian scientists have turned up evidence that a race of "dwarf" mammoths, cut off from the rest of the world on a remote Arctic island, survived the extinction of all other mammoths by up to 6,000 years, living on into comparatively recent times.
The scientists' conclusion came after the discovery of 29 complete but very small mammoth teeth, as well as many tooth and bone fragments, on Wrangel Island, a Russian possession in the Arctic.
By analysis of proportions of carbon isotopes in the teeth, the scientists determined that the teeth were 7,000 to 4,000 years old, which is far younger than any previously known mammoth fossils.


Washington Welcomes de Klerk Disclosure, but Wants More Details
South Africa's announcement today that it had developed a small nuclear arsenal confirmed the long-held suspicions of American intelligence officials and specialists outside Government.
But while the White House praised South Africa's candor in acknowledging that it had manufactured nuclear weapons, Government experts said Washington needed to learn more about the program to be sure all the nuclear devices had been destroyed.


Some Regions Join and Some Shun Fight
From the Finnish border to the Arctic expanses of eastern Siberia, local reaction to the power struggle in Moscow has been varied and contradictory, offering a realistic picture of the strains within the giant and increasingly wobbly Russian Federation.
In some regions, the conflict in the capital has been mirrored on the local level, with regional councils, known here as "soviets," taking the side of the Russian Parliament, and the heads of local administrations following the lead of President Boris N. Yeltsin, who in most cases had a direct hand in their appointments.


Bridge
Another high-ranked team was eliminated from the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship here Tuesday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals.
Malcolm Brachman of Dallas, who headed the second-seeded team, lost by 23 imps when a second-half surge fell short.
His teammates were Mike Passell of Dallas; Mark Lair of Canyon, Tex.; Paul Soloway of Mill Creek, Wash.; Bobby Goldman of Highland Village, Tex., and Eddie Wold of Houston.
The victors were David Rowntree of Cambridge, Mass.; Peter Lieberman of North Providence, R.I.; Simon Kantor of Agawam, Mass., and George Sullivan of Longmeadow, Mass.


Side Effects
Drug stocks skidded yesterday amid renewed uncertainty over how earnings would be affected under a Clinton Administration health-care plan that might include price controls.
An announcement by Merck &amp; Company on Tuesday that it would report lower-than-expected earnings this year sent the entire sector lower.


Move to Revive Independent Counsel Law
The House Judiciary Committee voted today to revive the independent counsel law, which lapsed four months ago.
The vote came soon after the rejection of a Republican proposal to expand the powers of independent counsels to investigate members of Congress.
The law, which requires the Attorney General to request an independent counsel to investigate serious charges of wrongdoing in the executive branch.


Corrections
An entry in the News Summary yesterday about the killing of an Arab in the occupied territories referred to the reported killer incorrectly.
He is an Israeli settler, not a soldier.


Increasingly, Women Tending to Business Are Tending Bar


Officer Guilty In Killing Man During Holdup
A New York City police officer was convicted of murder last night in the killing of a Brooklyn liquor store owner during a robbery two years ago.
The officer, Robert Cabeza, 29, was found guilty of second-degree murder and five other charges in the death of Man Sing Chan, 41, the owner of Eden Liquors at 110 Tompkins Avenue in Bedford-Stuyvesant.


Continental President Quits as Dispute Is Seen
Lewis H. Jordan, the president and chief operating officer of Continental Airlines, has resigned after an apparent policy dispute with the company's chief executive, analysts said today.
Separately, Continental informed the Securities and Exchange Commission today that it was talking with the Boeing Company about ordering an unspecified number of new aircraft.


Suddenly, the Crisis Is Worrisome to Muscovites
Snow fell again today, a fast end to a false spring, and as the Russian power struggle ground on without quick compromise, in the cafes and streets of Moscow there was confusion, exhaustion and, suddenly, some real fear about what is at stake.
With a tradition of autocratic rule, many Russians tend to regard politics as above and beyond them, a different circle of existence, best avoided.
In the beginning of this latest collision between President Boris N. Yeltsin and the legislature, the reaction of many ordinary people was to regard it as one more clash of egos among politicians.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  PRETORIA BUILT NUCLEAR BOMBS  During a 15-year clandestine program, South Africa succeeded in building six crude atomic bombs and was at work on a seventh when it decided to dismantle its arsenal in 1989, President F. W. de Klerk said.
A1  OLD SUSPICIONS CONFIRMED  With its nuclear announcement, South Africa has confirmed suspicions of American intelligence officials and specialists.
And while the White House praised South Africa's candor, Government experts said that Washington needed to learn more about the program.
A12


U.S. IS CUTTING AID TO LATIN DRUG WAR
Congress and the Clinton Administration are quietly reversing a Bush Administration anti-drug initiative that sent hundreds of millions of dollars to South American governments.
In January, Democrats in Congress slashed military and economic assistance for Peru, Colombia and Bolivia after concluding that the program was failing to produce the desired effect: encouraging the South American nations to reduce production of drugs, principally coca leaf and its refined product, cocaine.


Cremins Is Heading To South Carolina
BOBBY CREMINS, intent on leaving a legacy at the school where he played basketball, took the coaching job at South Carolina yesterday, replacing STEVE NEWTON, who resigned Jan. 18 after the school's internal report outlined five secondary National Collegiate Athletic Association violations.
Cremins, whose teams were 240-135 in 12 seasons at Georgia Tech, inherits a team that went 9-18 last season.
The 45-year-old silver-haired coach received a five-year contract worth $106,928 a season.
The deal also allows Cremins to earn outside income through television, radio and endorsements and provides for five annual contract extensions.


New Research Prize Is Named for Ogilvy
The Advertising Research Foundation said it was creating the David Ogilvy Award for research excellence to honor research that has best supported and enhanced a successful advertising campaign.


Results Plus
N.B.A Barkley Powers Suns  Charles Barkley scored 33 points last night to lift Phoenix over Los Angeles, 120-115.
It was the Lakers' fifth consecutive loss at the Forum, a franchise record.
The Suns have defeated the Lakers three times this season, including twice at the Forum, where the Suns had lost 17 straight games.
James Worthy and Sedale Threatt led Los Angeles with 16 points each.
Danny Ainge came off the bench and scored 27 for Phoenix. (AP) Bulls 113, 76ers 100: Michael Jordan scored 19 of his 43 points on 9-for-10 shooting in the third period, leading Chicago to its fifth consecutive victory.
Scottie Pippen had 18 points, 10 rebounds and 8 assists as the Bulls won for the ninth time in 11 road games despite losing Coach Phil Jackson with two technical fouls 27 seconds into the game. (AP) Celtics 115, Heat 109: Reggie Lewis scored 22 points and Dee Brown's basket midway through the fourth quarter gave Boston the lead for good in a victory over the Miami in Boston.
After the Celtics fell behind by 5 points early in the fourth quarter, Brown's jumper with 6 minutes 32 seconds remaining put Boston ahead by 97-96, the 26th lead change of the game.
The Heat, who made all 30 of their free throws, were led by Glen Rice with 35 points. (AP) Mavericks 101, Bullets 98: Jim Jackson scored 9 of his 27 points during a 14-2 third-quarter spurt as Dallas won for only the second time in 33 road games, defeating Washington at Landover, Md.
The Mavericks improved their overall record to 7-59 with their third victory in five games.
The worst record in National Basketball Association history was 9-73 by Philadelphia in 1972-73. (AP) Spurs 105, Timberwolves 92: David Robinson had 29 points, 11 rebounds and 7 assists, as visiting San Antonio defeated Minnesota. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Providence in N.I.T.
Semis  Providence, snubbed by the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, moved into the semifinals of the National Invitation Tournment as Dickey Simpkins matched his career-high of 23 points in a 75-58 victory last night over Boston College.
The Friars (20-11) capped the first half with an 8-0 run that made the score 31-22 and led by at least 9 points the rest of the way. (AP) Minnesota 76, Southern California 58: Voshon Lenard scored 25 points and ignited a decisive 18-7 run by the Gophers (20-10) on their home court.
The Gophers held Oklahoma to 31.3 percent shooting in their second-round N.I.T. victory. (AP) Ala.-Birmingham 61, S.W.
Missouri St. 52: Flu-ridden Robert Shannon scored 18 points as Alabama-Birmingham (20-13) finally had an easy N.I.T. game.
The Blazers won their first two tournament games this year by a total of 3 points. (AP) N.H.L.
Bruins Blank Sabres  First-period goals by Adam Oates and Ray Bourque and some timely saves by Andy Moog gave the Boston Bruins a 2-0 victory over the Buffalo Sabres last night in Buffalo.
Moog made 21 saves in recording his first shutout of the season.
The Bruins have won seven of their last eight games and nine of their last 11. (AP) SOCCER U.S.
Ties El Salvador  The United States tied El Salvador, 2-2, Tuesday night in a game at San Salvador, El Salvador, that cost the Americans the services of defender Erik Imler, who tore ligaments in his right knee.
After the hosts went ahead by 1-0, the United States got its goals four minutes apart.
Yari Allnutt, who replaced Imler, scored from 12 yards.
Sadri Gjonbalaj passed to Mark Chung, who knocked the ball down and sent it to Allnutt, who connected 49 minutes into the game.
Midfielder Cobi Jones gave the Americans the lead in the 53d minute.
El Salvador, which scored first when Raul Diaz Arce beat goalie Scoop Stanisic in the 29th minute, tied it in the 69th minute.
Mauricio Cienfuegos took a diagonal pass from Mayo Gonzalez and beat Stanisic, a 30-year-old making his debut with the United States.
The United States finishes its Central American trip today at Honduras. (AP) BOWLING  Two Roll Perfect Games  Amleto Monacelli and Adam Colton rolled perfect games last night and tied for the lead at the Professional Bowlers' Association Leisure's Long Island Open in Sayville, L.I.
Colton and Monacelli have pinfalls of 2,892 for the first 12 games. (AP)


Times Magazine Fills A New Editing Post
Adam Moss, a magazine editor and consultant, has been appointed editorial director of The New York Times Magazine.
The appointment was announced yesterday by its editor, Jack Rosenthal.
Mr.
Moss, 35, will work with Mr.
Rosenthal in all aspects of managing and editing starting next month.
The editorial director's position is new and replaces that of deputy editor, which has been vacant since Mr.
Rosenthal became editor in January.


A Philosophy Built It; Solar Logic Keeps It Warm
It was the quintessential New Hampshire winter day: bright sun, snow underfoot as crisp as corn flakes and temperature around zero, cold enough to make the teeth ache.
But that was outside.
Inside, Jonathan Sands waved a desktop thermometer with a gesture that suggested either Merlin with a wand or Perry Mason with the crucial piece of evidence.
The thermometer said 75 degrees, although his 1,900-square-foot house has no boiler or furnace.
It does have a wood stove, but the fire had gone out almost 12 hours earlier.


Laredo Replaces Schneider
The concert by the Brandenburg Ensemble that the violinist Alexander Schneider, who died last month, was to conduct on Sunday at Avery Fisher Hall will be conducted by the violinist Jaime Laredo.
As a tribute to Mr.
Schneider, Vivaldi's Sinfonia in B minor, a favorite of his, has been added to the program, which comprises Haydn's Symphony No. 68, the "Spring" and "Winter" movements from Vivaldi's "Four Seasons," and Mozart's Sinfonia Concertante for Violin and Viola, with Mr.
Laredo and Scott St.
John as soloists.
Tickets: $13 to $25; information: (212) 721-6500.


CHRONICLE
Act I: WENDY WASSERSTEIN, gifted undergraduate, applies to the Columbia Business School and to the Yale Drama School at the same time.
Act II: Ms. Wasserstein goes to Yale, writes hit plays and wins a Pulitzer Prize.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday, about a Federal judge's supplemental order in an antitrust settlement against airlines, misstated some instructions for air travelers eligible to apply for discount coupons for future flights.
Travelers seeking claim forms should write to Airline Antitrust Legislation, P.O.
Box 209, Philadelphia, Pa. 19107.
Information on filing a claim is available by telephone from (800) 854-7264.


Trouble Reported for Expected Nomination
The Clinton Administration was reported today to have rejected the idea of nominating Charles F. C. Ruff to be Deputy Attorney General because of his failure to pay Social Security taxes for a woman who cleaned his house.
The Washington Post reported tonight that President Clinton had decided not to nominate Mr.
Ruff, a Washington lawyer.
A White House official confirmed tonight that the nomination was in trouble but added that no final decision had been made.


Huck Finn Adventure for a Mississippi River Boy
Like Huck Finn, Stephen Sommers seems, most definitely, a free spirit.
In the 1980's, he eked out a living as a street performer on the streets of Paris, Dublin and Amsterdam.
"It was a great life style," he said with a grin on Tuesday.
"We were guitar players and puppeteers and mimes. I earned 12 to 15 bucks an hour, tax-free."
Not any more.


John Hersey Dies


Suspect's Arrest in Blast Puzzles His Family in Egypt
In the gritty back streets in Kafr El Dauwar, 15 miles southeast of Alexandria, the arrest of Mahmud Abouhalima in the World Trade Center bombing was a mystery to his family.
They said they had not seen their son since he left the country for Germany more than a decade ago.
"He has not been back and he was not arrested here," said Mohammed Halima, his father.


Clues to Earliest Americans In 11,700-Year-Old Campsite
The remains of a prehistoric hunting lookout in Northern Alaska have been identified as the earliest well-documented evidence of people living in America, archeologists announced today.
The discovery of some finely worked stone lance points and charcoal from campfires at the 11,700-year-old site appeared to solve one mystery of the earliest Americans: If they had indeed migrated across land then connecting Siberia and Alaska, where were the remains of this paleo-Indian culture in the Far North?


Dance in Review
'Song for Dead Warriors'
Dance Theater of Harlem  New York State Theater
Broadway and film came to the ballet stage on Saturday afternoon in Dance Theater of Harlem's bold, evocative production of Michael Smuin's "Song for Dead Warriors." But beneath the splendid spectacle there beat a ballet heart, thanks to the performances of Luis Dominguez and Tai Jimenez as the doomed young American Indian lovers.


A Fabric That's Light, In Both Senses
JUNICHI ARAI, a Japanese textiles artist, has woven one fabric that looks like a spider's web and another that resembles hair.
Now he has made fabric with its own aura of light.
In "Hand and Technology," an exhibit of his newest experimental work at the Pacific Design Center in Los Angeles, the nearly weightless fabrics glow with reflected light.
The show runs through April 30.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
EXTRACURRICULAR activities like music and sports can enthrall children.
Yet even the most enthusiastic young participants will sometimes tell their parents that they want to stop their tuba lessons, stop going to dance class or leave the Little League team.
Should you give in to what is perhaps only a passing feeling of frustration?
Should you force your child to continue and risk turning what should be an enjoyable experience into an emotionally painful one?


Trading Skateboards for Scalpels, Children Get a Taste of Medicine


A Courtroom Drama; Woody Allen Finds Himself in New Role
Courtroom 341 of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan is not Woody Allen territory.
It belongs to the other New York, down-at-heel and dispirited, the part of the city that never makes it into Mr.
Allen's films, and presumably, until quite recently, did not take up much space in his mind.
The paint is peeling, the wooden chairs creak loudly enough to make Mr.
Allen's answers all but inaudible, the three yellow window shades, pulled all the way down to the sill, look like oversize flypaper.
Yet it is here, very far from Elaine's, that Mr.
Allen has found himself on the stand, trying to explain his complicated life, express his thoughts on child rearing, and at all costs, to avoid eye contact with his ex-lover Mia Farrow, seated with her lawyers at a long wooden table facing the judge's bench.


Officer Is Held in Shooting
An off-duty police officer was arrested yesterday in the early-morning shooting of a man during a dispute in a Staten Island bar, the police said.
The officer, Anthony Asaro, 22, was suspended from the department and charged with first-degree assault in the shooting of Dario Martano, 19, of Staten Island, in Millard Fillmore's Restaurant, at 141 East Service Road in the Travis section.


Books of The Times; What Went Wrong in One Life and a Generation
Remembering Denny By Calvin Trillin 209 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.


Forecasts by Drug Makers Send Clintons a Message
The announcements of slumping pharmaceutical earnings that depressed drug stocks yesterday sent messages to Washington and investors alike, health-care analysts said.
Analysts noted that Merck &amp; Company's announcement Tuesday that growth in profits was slowing would reach Hillary Rodham Clinton and the President while they were in the final five weeks of drafting plans for broad changes in the health care system.
The Clintons have singled out drug prices for sharp criticism.


Times Mirror in Talks to Sell TV Stations
The Times Mirror Company today confirmed industry reports that it was in talks to sell its four network-affiliated television stations.
Industry analysts say Times Mirror, which publishes The Los Angeles Times and six other newspapers including Newsday, is trying to shed its broadcast group to concentrate on areas in which it holds a dominant position, like some newspaper and cable television markets.
It has failed to attain market dominance with its television stations, analysts say.


U.N. Postpones Enforcing Ban On Serb Flights
The United Nations Security Council today indefinitely postponed authorizing NATO warplanes to shoot down aircraft flying over Bosnia out of concern that it might weaken President Boris N. Yeltsin in his power struggle with the Russian Parliament.
The postponement was accepted by the Clinton Administration at the urging of the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, who is visiting Washington.


No Celebrating the End of This School Year


Corrections
An article yesterday about the nomination of Pamela Harriman as Ambassador to France omitted the official name of the political action committee she formed.
It was Democrats for the 80's, known informally as Pampac.


CHRISTOPHER PICKS EL SALVADOR PANEL
Declaring human rights central to United States policy, Secretary of State Warren Christopher appointed a panel today to investigate charges that State Department officials misled Congress about atrocities by the Salvadoran military throughout the 1980's.
Mr.
Christopher's announcement came a week after a United Nations-sponsored report was issued documenting widespread abuses by Salvadoran Army officers, including several whose careers benefited from long relationships with United Nations officials.
The report also criticized the Reagan Administration for neglecting to stop Salvadoran exiles in the United States from financing right-wing "death squads" linked to the army.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Federal Reserve chairman called for even deeper cuts in the budget deficit.
Alan Greenspan said the deficit would begin rising again late this decade unless Congress cut more over the five years covered by the Clinton economic plan.  [ Page D1. ]
Democrats held ranks on the President's economic program, defeating a Republican amendment to scrap a proposal to raise taxes on the Social Security benefits.  [ A1. ]


Lockheed Now a Leader in Airport Management
At a time when more and more cities are hiring private companies to improve public services, the Lockheed Corporation, a major military contractor, has emerged as the industry leader in helping cities resolve the knotty problems of the nation's overburdened airports.
Earlier this month, Lockheed officials announced that they were seeking to greatly expand the market for airport management, specifically by trying to obtain a long-term lease to run two of the world's busiest airports -- Kennedy International and La Guardia in New York.


Greenspan Calls for More Cuts
With Congressional approval nearly clinched for President Clinton's economic plan, Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve's chairman, called today for even deeper cuts in the budget deficit, saying he was worried that it would begin rising again late this decade.
Testifying before the Senate Finance Committee, Mr.
Greenspan said the deficit would soar again late this decade unless Congress cut more over the five years covered by Mr.
Clinton's plan and enacted new cuts after that.


Market Place; Even as it picks up the pieces, I.B.M. is a puzzle to investors.
BUY, sell or hold?
That's the question that has haunted investors in I.B.M. over the last several months as the company went through the arduous task of seeking a chief executive to take the place of John F. Akers.
Now, with the company apparently close to wrapping up its search with the expected selection of Louis V. Gerstner Jr., the chairman of RJR Nabisco, uncertainties about the stock should be decreasing.
But investors could never guess that from the share price.


Raiders Land Hostetler For 3 Years, $8 Million
A month ago, the Giants discarded Jeff Hostetler, a quarterback who won a Super Bowl for them in January 1991.
Yesterday, Hostetler found a new job with the Los Angles Raiders.
Marvin Demoff of Los Angeles, Hostetler's agent, said by telephone last night that Hostetler had agreed to a three-year contract and would fly to Los Angeles this morning to sign it.
The contract was reported to be worth $8 million over three years.
Last year, Hostetler's salary was $1.6 million.


A Military Town Makes Its Anti-Gay Feelings Clear
Marines and their families began arriving at the auditorium an hour early on Tuesday night for a forum on President Clinton's plan to allow homosexuals in the military.
"Which side is the nay side?" a woman asked an usher as he handed her a program.
"That's what I want."


Valenzuela Is on a Roll
FERNANDO VALENZUELA did it again yesterday, making yet another statement in his bid to win a job with the Baltimore Orioles by tossing two scoreless innings.
He faced the minimum six batters in two innings of the Orioles' 4-2 victory over the Cincinnati Reds.
In four games, the left-hander has allowed five hits, four walks and no runs over 12 innings.


Costly Aftermath to Knicks-Suns Donnybrook
In the aftermath of Tuesday night's Knicks-Phoenix Suns brawl, the Knicks have lost two players to suspensions, $99,000 in fines and added to the villainous reputation they have tried all season to erase.
The most severe punishment handed out today by the National Basketball Association went to the Knicks' Greg Anthony, who was suspended without pay for five games -- after which he must petition the league to be allowed to return to action -- and fined $20,500.
He came off the bench in street clothes to punch the Suns' Kevin Johnson, just as the brawl was on the verge of being diffused shortly before halftime.


Perot Wants A Trial Run Of Trade Pact
Ross Perot, who spoke out strongly against the North American Free Trade Agreement during the Presidential campaign, told a House committee today that the accord should be tried only on an experimental basis because of the big gap in wages between the United States and Mexico.
During a hearing that Administration and other supporters of the agreement had looked to with considerable alarm, Mr.
Perot recited a litany of criticisms, emphasizing that American workers could not compete with Mexican workers earning less than $1 an hour.


Teammates Are Remembered as Emotions Erupt
They came from all over baseball's spring training map, more than 500 strong.
Team owners, general managers, managers, players, management and union officials, gathering in a small central Florida convention center to pay a final farewell to Steve Olin and Tim Crews, the Cleveland Indian pitchers killed in a boating accident Monday night.
And for nearly an hour last night, the audience, mostly filled with athletes and former athletes who live the motto that the strong don't cry, did not.


No Headline
"I'll bring my stopwatch." -- BILL GRADISON, whose group will have three minutes to address the health-care task force.  [ A1:5. ]


Foreign Affairs; Wealth Crosses The Pacific
Boris Yeltsin's struggle for political survival, which rivets Europe and America, stirs mostly rhetorical yawns from East Asian leaders gathered here in southern China for a conference.
To these government officials, business moguls and scholars, Russia is a long-term wreck about which outsiders can do little.
Whether democratic or authoritarian, it is for them neither a threat nor, more importantly, a market.
What preoccupies East Asians today is not the old strategic mumbo-jumbo, but money.
For the first time they are making it hand over fist as a region.
And they want more -- as well as a bigger slice of the power salami.


Short Sales Outstanding Are Up 4.4% on Nasdaq
The number of Nasdaq shares sold short and not yet covered rose to record levels from mid-February to mid-March, the National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday.
Short interest in all Nasdaq securities totaled 498.3 million shares, up 4.4 percent from the previous period's level of 477.2 million.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Placed John Marzano, catcher, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Exercised their option on Bo Jackson, outfielder, for the 1993 season.


Probation in Racial Slaying Sets Off a Protest
A 17-year-old white supremacist who had been convicted in the murder of a black man was sentenced here Tuesday to probation only, and today hundreds of protesters took to the streets to vent their outrage.
The sentence, imposed by Judge Everett Young of Tarrant County District Court, apparently resulted from a misunderstanding among the jurors, all of whom were white, as to the punishment they could recommend.


Wesley Holder, 95, Political Organizer For Black Officials
Wesley McD.
Holder, a Democratic politician who helped break racial barriers to elective office as a mentor to Mayor David N. Dinkins and other black officials in New York City, died on Monday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 95.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


Leno's Plan To Counter Letterman: Be Funnier
Having slogged through the storm, Jay Leno has decided he can put down his umbrella -- and his dukes -- at least for a while.
"I feel things are going pretty good now," Mr.
Leno said during an interview last week in his dressing room, downstairs from the set of the "Tonight" show in NBC's studios in Burbank, Calif.
"I'm very happy with the show, though we'll be tinkering with it."


Soldiers Battle for Food In Besieged Angola City
As manager of the United Nations' emergency food distribution here, Jorge Modesto has become accustomed to seeing nasty shoving matches erupt in hungry mobs when relief planes land at the tiny airport.
But what is genuinely terrifying, he says, is that increasingly some of the most bitter brawling over food handouts is between relief officials and Government soldiers.
"Almost every day I get a gun stuck in my face by some crazed soldier yelling, 'Give me food! Give me food!' " said Mr.
Modesto, a 33-year-old Brazilian who is here for the World Food Program, a division of the United Nations.


Haikou Journal; For Treasure (and Pleasure), Their Special Island
A middle-aged man in a business suit entered the nightclub and placed his order.
A moment later, it was delivered: a pretty woman in a flowing robe eased into the seat beside him with a glittering lipsticky smile.
Filled with 50 or so love seats and sofas and about 15 private karaoke singing rooms, the International Trade Club represents the kind of life that people come from all over China to taste.
There is easy money, easy housing and, sometimes, easy love.


Economic Scene; If Government rides to the rescue of ailing airlines, will consumers get trampled in the process?
IF there is an economic recovery in progress, it's news to the airlines.
The 10 largest have lost an awesome $10 billion over the last three years and Washington is scrounging for ways to help.
A soon-to-be-formed blue-ribbon commission, charged by Congress with the job of coming up with a plan by summer, will not lack for suggestions.
The airlines and their unions are floating proposals ranging from loan subsidies to tax breaks to a get-tough policy on foreign competitors.
But in the view of many economists, the proposed fixes put the cart before the horse.
It is still not clear that anything important is really broken.


After Faulting Dinkins, Rohatyn Endorses Him
Felix G. Rohatyn, the influential chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation who has often been critical of Mayor David N. Dinkins's management of New York City's finances, said last night that he would support the Mayor for re-election.
Mr.
Rohatyn's endorsement came following a speech to the City Club in which he said the Mayor was not working hard enough to make the city's work force more productive.


Books of The Times; What Went Wrong in One Life and a Generation
Remembering Denny By Calvin Trillin 209 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.


Report Notes Urban Woes In New York
After a decade of economic turmoil, the cities of New York State have emerged in worse condition than those elsewhere in the nation, but New York City and its Westchester County neighbors have in many ways fared better than their upstate counterparts, according to a report by Moody's Investors Service.
More than ever, the Moody's researchers found, the economic landscape of New York is divided between two regions, the densely populated south and the industrial north.
For mayors, legislators and other officials, the findings could add to longstanding competition for school aid and other government support.


Clinton Health Team Agrees To Let Public Speak, Quickly
Hillary Rodham Clinton's Task Force on National Health Care Reform has scheduled its first session, a public hearing, for next Monday and is soliciting comments from consumers and industry groups.
Very short comments.
Lobbyists and trade groups representing the health-care and insurance industries have been clamoring for a chance to give their views to the task force, which is just weeks away from delivering recommendations for overhauling the American health-care system.


Review/Dance; Myth and Metaphor In 'Peau du Monde,' By Angelin Preljocaj
The human condition is the subject to which French experimental choreographers are inevitably drawn, and Angelin Preljocaj is no exception.
The United States premiere of his 75-minute work "La Peau du Monde" on Tuesday night here as part of the France Danse festival at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts was true to form but striking in its imagery.
Homemade myth and metaphor lie at the heart of this fascinating if only partly successful mix of formal choreography and expressive gesture.
The personal but recognizable universe imagined by Mr.
Preljocaj (pronounced prel-zho-KAHJ) and Dany Leveque, who is listed as "choreography adviser," is a wasteland symbolized by the polished wood ramps that faced the audience at the Eisenhower Theater.


N.F.L. Meetings Over; Free Agents Keep Coming
The National Football League's annual owners meeting concluded here today with the new free agency system taking center stage.
Quarterback Jim McMahon left the Philadelphia Eagles for the Minnesota Vikings and it appeared that the San Francisco 49ers would not match the Atlanta Falcons' offer sheet for defensive lineman Pierce Holt.
The Los Angeles Raiders scheduled a news conference here on Thursday morning and will announce the formal signing of New York Giants free agent quarterback Jeff Hostetler.
The Raiders also began negotiations with agent Bob Woolf for the services of Rocket Ismail of the Canadian Football League's Toronto Argonauts.


Angry Japanese Deplore Clinton's Remarks
Japan reacted harshly today to tough trade talk from President Clinton, angrily rejecting his strong suggestion that the Japanese market was closed and threatening a legal battle if the Clinton Administration imposed higher tariffs on Japanese mini-vans.
The latest exchange was set off by comments President Clinton made at his news conference Tuesday in Washington, in which he pressed the combative tone of his Administration on trade relations with Japan.


Just a Normal Rug, With Normal Red Hair
TO Daisy Curbeon, the possibilities of plaiting hair, real or synthetic, are endless.
Ms.
Curbeon, who has been a model and a hair designer, has woven braids (usually synthetic) into people's hair, as well as into hats, skirts, dresses and, in the last week, a rug.
Made of concentric ovals of blue, black, green, yellow and red synthetic braids, the rug has little fluffs of red and yellow hair sticking out on the sides and ends.


Events: Workshops for Gardeners
Proper Pruning
New York City Street Tree Consortium, 44 Worth Street; (212) 227-1887.


Abortion-Choice Bill Renewed, and So Is a Battle
The Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee approved the proposed Freedom of Choice Act today, reopening the struggle over legislation to bar states from imposing a variety of restrictions on abortion.
The approval, which was expected, came on a vote of 12 to 5 in a session that provided only a brief taste of the passions roused by this bill.
The measure failed to win Congressional passage last year, and people on both sides of the issue predict another hard fight over the measure this year.


SENATE DEMOCRATS UNIFIED ON BUDGET
Democratic Senators held ranks today and defended President Clinton's economic program against a fierce volley of political potshots from Republicans.
By a vote of 52 to 47, the Democrats rejected the most serious Republican threat to the Clinton budget plan, an amendment that would have scrapped the President's proposal to raise taxes on the Social Security benefits of the most affluent retirees.
Only four Democrats voted against the President.


Meadowlands Freebies For Workouts Today
The throws from the foul line will not be the only free things at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
There will be no charge for parking and admission for fans seeking to watch today's workouts of the four teams involved in the National Collegiate Athletic Association East Regional semifinals tomorrow night.
The public is invited at 11:45 A.M., with Virginia scheduled for a noon practice.
Starting at 1 P.M., Arkansas, Cincinnati and North Carolina will hold one-hour workouts in that order.


Review/Television; Mary Tyler Moore's Smile Turns Evil
"Stolen Babies," tonight's movie at 9 on Lifetime, has a practically fail-safe "inspired by actual events" plot.
Powerfully connected pillars of a Tennessee community in the 1940's are running an illegal adoption ring, listing among their customers such Hollywood celebrities as Joan Crawford and Dick Powell.
The story is obviously explosive.
But this version prefers to take the standard television route of milking the sentimentally obvious for all it's worth.
Nevertheless, a cluster of fine performances is very much worth catching.
Lea Thompson ("Back to the Future") plays Annie Beales, who returns to Tennessee in 1945 from the University of Chicago to begin a career as a social worker.
Kathleen Quinlan is Bekka Stern, the wealthy socialite who will introduce Annie to all the right people in Memphis.
One of them turns out to be Georgia Tann, a prim, somewhat icy but charismatic woman who runs the Tennessee Children's Home Society.
She is portrayed to a chilling fare-thee-well by none other than Mary Tyler Moore, taking another giant step away from the sunny Mary Richards, who is right up there with Mary Pickford when it comes to America's sweethearts.


Literary Agents Worry, but Less Than Authors
To the Editor:
Re "When Publishers Unite, Authors Must Worry" (letter, March 18) by Ronald Goldfarb, lawyer and literary agent: Writers are not systematically hurt by what Mr.
Goldfarb sees as colluding publishers, although with a modest advance the boost into wealth may not be dramatic.
Those who stand to be most hurt by lower advances are literary agents.
Agencies are businesses, necessarily concerned with the bottom line.


Corrections
Tables and an article in Business Day on Saturday about uncovered short sales on the New York Stock Exchange -- in effect, shares borrowed and sold, and yet to be repaid -- included several erroneous figures supplied by the exchange.
On March 15, the exchange reported short positions of 991.2 million shares, up 3.3 percent for the monthlong period.
In addition, the exchange revised the short position data for eight stocks: Magma Copper, 470,035 shares; Storage Technology, 2,391,327 shares; Textron, 284,575 shares; Tyco Laboratories, 1,131,627 shares; UAL, 937,314 shares; Varian Associates, 169,991 shares; Warnaco Group, 731,656 shares, and Wal-Mart Stores, 16,296,280 shares.


Changes for Management at Merrill Lynch
The management sweepstakes at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company entered a new phase yesterday as the country's largest securities firm announced the creation of an office of the chairman to focus on building relationships with key corporate clients, and an office of the chief executive to manage the day-to-day affairs of the company.
Because Merrill's chairman, William A. Schreyer, is due to retire in June, and the company's president, William A. Tully, is scheduled to ascend to the chairman's office, speculation about the next president has been intense within and outside the company.


Wolves Re-sign Coach
The Minnesota Timberwolves yesterday signed their interim coach, SIDNEY LOWE to a three-year contract as head coach.
Lowe, 33, who was named to fill in Jan. 11 after the dismissal of JIMMY RODGERS, has compiled a 9-25 record.
Lowe, the youngest head coach in the National Basketball Association, is off to the best start of any Timberwolves head coach through 34 games.


Soviet Files on '76 Revolt Frustrate Hungary
Last November, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia arrived in Budapest for a state visit with a crate full of gifts meant to soothe lingering aches in Hungary, a onetime satellite of the Soviet Union.
Hungarians had little reason to love the Russians, who crushed the Hungarian uprising in 1956 and had helped the Austrians put down a republican revolt in 1848.
Several generations of Communist-era Hungarian students proudly completed a decade of compulsory Russian language training without being able to utter much more than "Russians go home."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Mellon Financial Co., a unit of Mellon Bank Corp., Pittsburgh, is offering $200 million of floating-rate notes due in 1996 at par through Lehman Brothers.
The notes, priced to float quarterly at a spread of 30 basis points more than the three-month London interbank offered rate, are callable in a year and rated Baa-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and Duff &amp; Phelps. *
New York State Electric and Gas Corp. is offering $50 million of 7.55 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2023 at 98 to yield 7.722 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Callable in 10 years, the bonds are rated A-3 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Review/Television; A Sampler of Russian Parapsychology
Step right up, folks, and see home movies of women moving a ball, a cigarette, a cigar tube, a matchbox, a saltshaker, apparently without touching them!
It's telekinesis, Russian style!
And that's just one of the marvels, or vaudeville acts, on display in "Powers of the Russian Psychics," tonight's offering in "ABC's World of Discovery" series.
One of the magic movers also calls out numbers as they are hung on a wall behind her and demonstrates (on an uncomfortable-looking volunteer) her power to radiate burning heat from her hands.
The narrator says this star of the Soviet parapsychology circuit, who died in 1990, won a defamation case against Pravda, then the official Communist Party newspaper, which had accused her of charlatanism and fraud.
Well, whatever the court ruled, when it came to fraud, you could usually count on Pravda.


Bo Gets Welcome Nod
BO JACKSON, the first All-Star in two sports, is now set to become the first pro athlete to play with an artificial hip.
The Chicago White Sox exercised the option on Jackson's 1993 contract yesterday and assured him of making the 25-man roster.
"I have never worked so hard in all my life," Jackson said.
"Things always came easy for me."


COMPROMISE OR NO, RIVALS OF YELTSIN STILL SEEK OUSTER
President Boris N. Yeltsin softened his emergency measures today, but efforts at compromise with the legislature faltered and the full Congress of People's Deputies was summoned for Friday to take up the question of removing him from office.
Hopes for a political settlement rose in the early afternoon when the four top officials of the Russian federation -- Mr.
Yeltsin; the chairman of the Congress, Ruslan I. Khasbulatov; the chairman of the Constitutional Court, Valery D. Zorkin, and Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin -- agreed to meet.


In a Shift, Apple Licenses a System
Apple Computer Inc. announced several new licensees today for its Newton hand-held computing system and indicated that it planned to share the technology even more widely.
The move is a significant shift by the computer maker, which has a tradition of fiercely protecting its Macintosh and Apple II computers from imitators.


U.S. to Protect a Songbird But Give Builders Leeway
The Clinton Administration will play the first major card in its environmental policy Thursday by proposing to list a small Southern California songbird as threatened rather than endangered.
The Administration's action on the bird, the California gnatcatcher, has been widely expected as a sign of a new policy direction toward protecting species while also encouraging economic growth.
The decision is to be announced in Washington by Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt, who oversees the Fish and Wildlife Service.


Results Plus
N.H.L.
Moog Is Red-Hot Again  Andy Moog got his second straight shutout and 10th consecutive victory as the Boston Bruins moved within 3 points of Adams Division leader Montreal with a 2-0 victory over the Canadiens last night in Boston Garden.
Relying on relentless checking, the Bruins held Montreal to one harmless shot in the third period, 13 for the game. (AP) Flyers 5, Sharks 2: In Philadelphia, Mark Recchi had two goals and an assist and Eric Lindros scored in his sixth straight game as Philadelphia upended San Jose.
San Jose lost its eighth straight and dropped to 3-34-1 on the road this season.
Philadelphia won its second in a row. (AP) North Stars 3, Maple Leafs 3: In Bloomington, Minn., Doug Gilmour scored a wraparound goal at 14 minutes 50 seconds of the third period to lift Toronto over Minnesota.
Gilmour, who also had two assists in the game, tied Toronto's single-season point record of 117, set by Darryl Sittler in 1977-78. (AP) Sabres 6, Blackhawks 4: In Chicago, Aleksandr Mogilny scored his 72d goal and added two assists as Buffalo defeated Chicago, keeping the Blackhawks from gaining at least a share of first place in the Norris Division.
Pat LaFontaine, who scored an empty-netter and assisted on power play goals by Donald Audette and Mogilny, increased his league-leading point total to 137. (AP) N.B.A.
Wilkins Paces Hawks  Dominique Wilkins scored 38 points as the Atlanta Hawks scored a 106-96 victory last night over the visiting Houston Rockets.
Mookie Blaylock added 22 points, including four 3-pointers, and had 10 assists to help the Hawks to their ninth victory in 10 games and seventh straight at home.
Their record is 35-32, the first time this season they have been three games over .500. (AP) SKIING  Gales Wipe Out Races  Marc Girardelli and Anita Wachter, the overall points leaders, were the winners yesterday on a wind-swept day without having to race in Are, Sweden.
The final men's and women's downhills of the World Cup season were canceled because of high winds on the Olympia course. (AP) BOWLING  Aulby Leads L.I.
Open  Mike Aulby won six of eight matches last night to hold a comfortable lead at the $150,000 Leisure's Long Island Open in Sayville.
He averaged 250 during the first round of match play en route to raising his pinfall to 6,424 pins for 26 games. (AP) TENNIS  Australia Leads U.S.
Wally Masur beat Brad Gilbert in four sets early this morning to give host Australia a 1-0 lead over the United States in a first-round Davis Cup match in Melbourne.
Masur won, 6-3, 6-7 (6-8), 6-4, 6-2, on the grass courts of Kooyong to put the defending champion Americans in trouble in the three-of-five match event.
American David Wheaton was to play Mark Woodforde in the second singles match today. (AP) Maleeva Is Upset: Sandra Cecchini upset seventh-seeded Katerina Maleeva, 7-6 (7-3), 6-0, yesterday in the second round of the Virginia Slims of Houston.
Cecchini will meet top-seeded Gabriela Sabatini, who routed Debbie Graham, 6-0, 6-1. (AP) SWIMMING  Burgess Breaks Record  Olympic silver medalist Greg Burgess of Florida lowered his own National Collegiate Athletic Association and American records in the 200-yard individual medley to 1 minute 43.52 seconds last night at the 70th N.C.A.A. men's swimming and diving championships in Indianapolis. (AP)


Budget Battle Won, 'Now the Hard Part'
As the House did last week, the Senate approved a five-year budget outline that is almost identical to that proposed by President Clinton last month.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  BLAST INQUIRY CLOSES CIRCLE Moving rapidly to charge a fifth suspect and step up the hunt for a sixth, Federal authorities said they believe they have captured or identified the local Arab militants who carried out the World Trade Center bombing.
A1.
A picture has emerged of a small circle of immigrants committed to their faith.
B2.


A Touch of Normalcy, a Courageous Appearance
The mourning for Steve Olin and Tim Crews has not yet ended for their families or the Cleveland Indians.
The concern for the health of Bob Ojeda has not yet dissipated.
But signs of healing were evident at the team's spring training home three days after a boating accident claimed the lives of two Indians pitchers and seriously injured another.
That healing was evidenced several ways one day after the team held an emotional memorial service.


U.S. Presses Serbs by Hinting at End of Arms Embargo on Bosnia
Seeking to step up pressure on the Bosnian Serbs now that their foes in the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government have signed a peace agreement, White House officials said today that President Clinton was considering lifting an arms embargo that has hampered Government forces.
The message, first hinted at by Mr.
Clinton in a television interview Tuesday night, was repeated today with varying degrees of forcefulness by Administration officials in an effort to get the Serbs to join in the deal.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: N.C.A.A. Tournament -- Southeast; Big Kentucky Rolls; Li'l Kentucky Falls
A torrent of Kentucky 3-pointers rained on Wake Forest here tonight, washing out the expected showdown between the Wildcats' Jamal Mashburn and the Deacons' Rodney Rogers.
It was all Mashburn, all classic Rick Pitino basketball, all Kentucky, as the Wildcats destroyed one challenger from the Atlantic Coast Conference, by 103-69, for the chance to sink its paws and its long-range bombing into another, Florida State, in Saturday's Southeast Regional final.
The Seminoles fought off stubborn Western Kentucky, 81-78, in overtime, despite missing 20 of 38 free throws.


'Fanatic' Races to Join Cult
After weeks of waiting for people to leave the encircled compound of the Branch Davidians, the F.B.I. saw the number of people inside rise Wednesday night when a man described as a "religious fanatic" eluded hundreds of Federal agents and dashed to the front door.
He was met there by cult members who immediately accused him of being a double-agent for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, perhaps sent to assassinate their leader, David Koresh.
But after a long phone conversation in which F.B.I. negotiators insisted that they had nothing to do with the man, he was let inside and given a lengthy dose of Bible instruction by Mr.
Koresh.


Kenneth Siminski, 41, Actor and Director
Kenneth E. Siminski, a stage manager, an actor and a director, died on Monday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 41 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said his brother Julian.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: N.C.A.A. Tournament -- Midwest; Kansas and Indiana in the Semi-Promised Land
California's dramatic run in the national collegiate basketball tournament came to a sudden, emotional end tonight when the Kansas Jayhawks took control in the final minutes of a 93-76 victory in a Midwest regional semifinal game.
And Indiana's Calbert Cheaney dominated a decisive stretch in the second half as the Hoosiers outlasted Louisville, 82-69, in the other semifinal to advance to the final 8 for a second consecutive tournament.


U.S. Plan to End Extra Pay For Controllers Is Assailed
The airline industry today assailed a proposal by Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena to eliminate extra pay of 20 percent for traffic controllers who work in high-cost, heavy-traffic areas like New York.
Chris Chiames, a spokesman for the Air Transport Association, which represents the major carriers, said the extra pay had "succeeded in beefing up the work force in hard-to-staff areas, and therefore we hope Secretary Pena has an alternative to retain these controllers and keep up employee morale."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.92
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.89
2.90
4.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
3.00
4.16
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.65
5.62
7.28
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.85
6.82
8.00
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.80
7.75
8.93
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.00
5.98
6.78
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Art in Review
'In Transit'
New Museum of Contemporary Art  583 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through April 11
"In Transit" is a show whose reach far exceeds its grasp.
With works by a host of artists -- among them Mildred Howard, Larry Rogers, Helen Levitt, Krzysztof Wodizcko, Glenn Ligon and Aki Fujiyoshi -- addressing what the museum calls "the involuntary movement of human beings and objects through different urban spaces" and the changing nature of cities, the exhibition should be far more interesting than it is.


Kenya Revokes Its 'Cruel' Economic Changes
Barely a month after it began putting key economic changes into effect, the Kenyan Government revoked them this week in a major disagreement with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund over economic policy.
The policy reversal, announced on Monday, came a few days after the Kenyan President, Daniel arap Moi, accused the I.M.F. and World Bank of trying to force "cruel, dictatorial and unrealistic" changes on the country.


Al Davis Looks Way Downfield
Although National Football League free agents have been free to sign with new teams for the last 25 days, only the tip of the iceberg has been reached in player movement, Los Angeles Raiders owner Al Davis said today.
"Players are free to move until July 15," Davis said.
"There are a lot of great players that will yet move. Some teams are going to trade some big-name quarterbacks to prepare for the salary cap that is expected for next season. It's a big issue for a lot of teams.


When the Dust Settles, Who Will Own What?
Despite the battering of President Boris N. Yeltsin and his Government by conservatives in the Congress of People's Deputies, no one expects a return to the centralized command economy of socialism, which is widely understood to be as failed an economic idea as Communism is a political one.
The consensus among diplomats, economists and other analysts is that some sort of market economy will emerge, in large part because no alternative seems readily available.


China Finds Way to Slay Dragon of Inflation
One of the biggest headaches for China's leaders as this year began was an overheating economy, which threatened to ignite inflation.
They fretted about it, fought about it and warned the public about it.
Now, in a demonstration of the power of positive thinking, the problem has disappeared.


A View's a View, but Is It a Right?; Developer's Proposal Threatens Hudson Vista, Foes Say
For centuries, the towns of Esopus and Rhinebeck have gazed across the Hudson River at each other and have liked the views -- landscapes of gently sloping hills and stately bluffs framed by flowing water and tall sky.
Now a developer wants to build 390 condominium apartments and town houses in Esopus, a sizable share of which will sit on a high ridge commanding the river's western shore.
The development will offer spectacular river views for a whole new group of weekend homeowners, many from New York City.
But many people in Rhinebeck, on the eastern shore, are upset because the buildings will irrevocably scar the almost pristine views from their side of the river.


Unit Says Budget Balanced, but It Faults Dinkins
The state agency that monitors New York City's fiscal health said yesterday that the city would achieve its 13th consecutive balanced budget this year, but it warned that the Dinkins administration was not doing enough to solve long-term problems and faced a grimly rising fever line of multibillion-dollar deficits over the next four years.
In an evaluation of a budget plan issued by the city in January, the state's Financial Control Board said City Hall had balanced a $30.3 billion budget for the 1993 fiscal year ending next June 30 with $245 million left over from 1992 and $675 million in savings devices that will not be available in the 1994 to 1997 fiscal years.


Reviews/Film Festival; Life in the Country, With and Without Sheep
"Vermont Is for Lovers" is vaguely amiable in the way of a home movie made by people you don't know.
It was directed, photographed and edited by John O'Brien, a 29-year-old Harvard graduate and film maker who runs his family's sheep farm near Tunbridge, Vt.
Though Mr.
O'Brien is also responsible for the story, the screenplay was reportedly improvised by the nonprofessional actors, mainly by George Thrush, an architect, and Marya Cohn, who is studying to become a film maker herself.
The film will be shown in the New Directors/New Films series at the Museum of Modern Art today at 6 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.


The City's Rogue School Board
Mayor David Dinkins says that New York City's Board of Education has become "sidetracked and politicized," and he's right.
He wants a board that answers to him.
But accountability is only one problem.
The board also strays from its main mission, which is to set broad education policy.
Each of the five borough presidents appoints one member and the mayor appoints two.
The board, as a whole, is accountable to no one.
The borough chiefs have little influence over their appointees.
The mayor's people are outnumbered.


Surveyed Baseball Fans Aren't Losing Interest
With opening day just 10 days away, there is a new indication that Americans are maintaining their recent interest in major league baseball even as their cynicism about the national pastime has been growing.
Those, at least, are among the conclusions that can be drawn from a nationwide telephone survey of 1,200 adults conducted on Monday by EDK Associates, an independent polling company in New York.


U.S. ACTS TO SAVE HOME OF RARE BIRD
In a turning point in Federal policy, the Clinton Administration began collaborating today with the State of California, private developers and conservationists to avert clashes over environmental protection.
The instrument of this collaboration was a small songbird, the California gnatcatcher, that few Southern Californians have ever seen.
And the scene at a news conference in Washington, where today's action was announced, was extraordinary: Environmentalists and their archenemies in the housing industry looked on in approval as Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt declared the bird a threatened species -- with a new twist.


Drug Raid in Washington Square Park


TVWeekend; 3 African Leaders and David Frost
South Africa's three pre-eminent political figures are honored tonight by the attentions of David Frost.
You may not learn much that is new from the encounters, but it is an opportunity to catch their election-year styles, along with the style of the recently dubbed Sir David himself.
Mr.
Frost is most businesslike in his opening conversation with the Zulu chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, leader of the Inkatha Freedom Party, whose members have been involved in bloody encounters with supporters of Nelson Mandela and his African National Congress.
The longtime rivals blame each another for their failure of communication.
Mr.
Frost, like an imperial emissary to feuding tribesmen, advises, "The sooner the two of you get together, the better."


Twice a Victim, of Cancer and Health-Care System
ROSALYN SCHWARTZ is a divorced, financially strapped, emotionally spent 45-year-old mother of two who has lost a breast, a hip and her ovaries to cancer.
She is also a walking, protesting, wise-cracking symbol for a cause: reforming the nation's health-care system.
Individuals have a power over America unmatched by mere ideas.
A baby in a backyard well, a reporter held hostage in Lebanon, a motorist beaten on videotape.
Would such attention have been paid if the subject were not Jessica McClure, but child safety?
Not Terry Anderson, but Mideast politics?
Not Rodney King, but police brutality?


In the Big Time Again
CHARLIE (WHITE LIGHTNING) BROWN, who fought for a world lightweight title in 1984, will move back to main-event status when he fights April 22 at the Paramount.
Brown's 10-round juniorwelterweight match against JAKE (THE SNAKE) RODRIGUEZ was announced yesterday.


After a Slaying, Panel on Violence Draws Parents
Just days after the girlfriend of a drug dealer was killed on the street in a fusillade of 100 bullets, a group of parents gathered today for a conference on the violence plaguing this city.
Among the speakers were Henry Mena, a former gang leader in California who is now a minister trying to help gang members change their lives.


Washington Memo; Job Plan Sounding Less Monumental
In his economic message to a joint session of Congress last month, President Clinton described a soaring effort "to create jobs and guarantee a strong recovery," to rebuild the nation's decaying foundation, feed and house the unfortunate and give jobs to half-a-million unemployed.
But as the Senate began a raucous debate today on Mr.
Clinton's proposal to inject $16.3 billion as an emergency stimulus for the economy, the effort was in peril of becoming something considerably more mundane: a political football, fumbled by the White House and pounced on by Republicans and dissidents in the President's party.


Boitano Is Expected To Seek Reinstatement
BRIAN BOITANO, the 1988 gold medalist in figure skating at the Calgary Olympics, is expected on Monday to announce his intention to apply for reinstatement with the International Skating Union.
Assuming his application is accepted in June by the union, the American will be eligible to compete in the 1994 Olympics at Lillehammer, Norway.
Boitano has been busy for the last six years on professional tours while lobbying for reinstatement.


The Art Market
A Kunsthalle for NoHo
NoHo may never be able to match SoHo's gallery scene, but it is about to get a serious alternative artists' space.
Two adjacent landmark buildings, at 210-14 East Fifth Street, the site of Beethoven Hall in the 19th century and more recently the home of Mother's Sound Stages, a film studio, are about to be transformed into the New York Kunsthalle.


On My Mind; Memo To H.R.C. And V.P.
President Clinton is clear, on the record, on what he thinks about the American tragedy of drug abuse.
Running for office, he linked it plain and realistically to crime in America, said both were growing dramatically and that "we have a national problem on our hands that requires a tough national response."


Bosnian Muslims Join Croats in Accepting Peace Pact
The President of Bosnia's Muslim-dominated Government agreed today to a plan to end the year-old war that has torn apart his country, and international mediators said later that the world must prepare to take tougher action against the Serbs, whose leadership in Bosnia still refuses to make peace.
After a day of last-minute bargaining and delays, President Alija Izetbegovic approved a map dividing Bosnia and Herzegovina into 10 near-autonomous provinces and an amended plan for governing the country while a new constitution is drawn up.


Restaurants
For much of its 12-year history, La Gauloise suffered a problem that is not uncommon in the restaurant world: it looked better than it was.
With its romantic Belle Epoque decor, polished boiserie, mirrored panels and cozy lighting, La Gauloise raised the expectations of those who entered, which can be dangerous.
This phenomenon, plus uneven cooking, finally did it in little over a year ago.
Then, just as it seemed this prime West Village location might become a Gap outlet, it was taken over by Steve Tzolis, the low-key mover and shaker who also owns Il Cantinori, Periyali and Aureole, all in Manhattan. (In fact, Mr. Tzolis was an original partner in La Gauloise.)


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday about George Stephanopoulos and Thomas F. McLarty 3d of the White House staff, at President Clinton's news conference, misstated the circumstances.
The time of the photograph could not be determined, but it was not during discussion of homosexuals in the military.


At Chrysler, Success Has Its Rewards
In a year that saw the Chrysler Corporation dodge financial disaster and introduce a flock of successful models, the 1992 pay envelopes of the company's top executives grew fatter than ever, according to a preliminary proxy statement made public today.
Lee A. Iacocca, who retired as Chrysler's chairman on Dec. 31, took home $12.2 million in salary and other compensation last year, four times his 1991 pay of nearly $3 million, according to the statement Chrysler filed on Tuesday with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


ABC to Join News Teams With BBC
ABC News announced a news-gathering partnership with the British Broadcasting Corporation yesterday that both organizations said would extend their access to events around the world.
The deal calls for ABC and BBC to share news coverage, including the exclusive sharing of correspondents and production crews, as well as the joint planning of coverage of news events.


Rage at I.R.A. Grows in England As Second Boy Dies From a Bomb
As a second boy died today from wounds from a bombing in Warrington on Saturday, there were signs of a growing public backlash against the Irish Republican Army, which seems to attack more and more ordinary civilians.
For some time now bombs or bomb scares have become a feature of life in England, and people appear to accept them with resigned fatalism.
But widespread anger and revulsion have been touched off by the two bombs that went off in metal trash baskets in a crowded shopping area Saturday afternoon in Warrington, a town on the Mersey River 16 miles east of Liverpool.


INSIDE
Campaign Finance Battle
The White House offered to compromise on new limits for campaign financing, but it still met opposition from House Democrats.
Page A16.
Quandary Over Stray Dogs
Concerned about its image, the A.S.P.C.A. plans to stop killing stray dogs in New York City, and the city may have to take over.
Page B1.
Company Guilty in Boycott
Baxter International will pay about $6 million in Government penalties for cooperating with the Arab economic boycott of Israel.
Page D1.
New Israeli Opposition Chief
The Likud Party changed generations with the election of its new leader, Benjamin Netanyahu.
Page A2.


Games! Games! Games! Try Some Commentary
CBS's Billy Packer said he understood those critical of the network for being so action-oriented during the National Collegiate Athletic Association men's basketball tournament that post-game interviews and lengthy studio analyses have been squeezed until they scream for lack of time.
"It's a dilemma," he said, "but the criticism is justified. Wouldn't you have liked to have heard Jim Harrick after the Michigan-U.C.L.A. game? Or the referees? Or Jason Kidd? Or what Bobby Hurley must have felt walking off the court for the last time? The top focus is to show the game, so unless there were half-hour pregame and postgame shows, there isn't enough time. It's a drawback."


Wickman Is Hard To Ignore
With his position on the Yankee pitching staff tenuous and his patience diminishing, Bob Wickman strode to the mound today and used his nasty sinker to send Buck Showalter a message.
Every sinking pitch that fooled another Atlanta hitter on this soggy day was his way of daring the Yankees to continue ignoring him.
Wickman did not allow a hit to the two-time National League champions in six shutout innings and further complicated the competition for the fourth spot in the rotation.
Wickman has challenged the criticism that he has only two quality pitches by refining his changeup and allowing only one earned run in 15 innings this spring while limiting opponents to a .120 batting average.


Review/Film; Classic Dumb Blonde, With Melanie Griffith
They don't make "dumb broads" like Billie Dawn anymore, or, if they do, they don't call them that in our sensitized society.
This may be one of the reasons why "Born Yesterday," based on Garson Kanin's classic 1946 Broadway farce, plays so lamely in its glitzy new film version updated to the 1990's.
You can take Billie Dawn out of the chorus, but you can't take her out of her own post-World War II time.
It's difficult to believe that this Billie Dawn, played by Melanie Griffith, even shares the same planet with Oprah Winfrey and Phil Donahue.
If she did, she couldn't be quite as stupid as she must be to make the glorious transformation to wisdom that is the drop-dead heart of the Kanin comedy.


Zolton Ferency Dies; Political Champion Of Liberals Was 70
Zolton Ferency, retired professor at Michigan State University, former Democratic state chairman and perennial crusader for liberal causes, died on Tuesday at Sparrow Hospital in Lansing, Mich.
He was 70 and lived in East Lansing.
His son Mark of Bath Township, Mich., said the cause was cardiac arrest.


Cosell Turns 75 All Too Quietly
HAPPY Birthday, Coach.
Howard Cosell turned 75 yesterday, just another quiet day in a muted time.
His volume has been turned down by cancer, heart disease, kidney disease, diabetes, mild strokes.
He sat on a soft chair in his big, airy living room on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, smoking cigarettes and waiting for the phone to ring.
Although he was expecting no one special, he was cleanshaven, in a fine blue suit and a rich Christmas tie.
His toupee was broadcast ready.


Guilty Plea By Baxter On Boycott
Baxter International Inc., the world's largest medical supplies company, agreed today to the stiffest punishments the Government has ever meted out to an American business for cooperating with Arab countries in their longstanding economic boycott of Israel.
But experts say the outcome of the three-year investigation may only serve to underscore how difficult it has been to enforce the Federal laws that forbid American companies to honor economic boycotts that the United States does not sanction.


Fed Chief's Loan Hopes For Small Businesses
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, expressed optimism today that lending to small business would soon increase as banks were willing to take more risks.
Testifying before the House Committee on Small Business, Mr.
Greenspan was not ready to declare the credit crunch over, however, saying, "I find reasons for optimism but not complacency."


Presidential Perch


Auction Again Fails to Lift Bonds
For the second consecutive day, the Treasury held a successful auction that did not give the market a lift.
The result was that the price of the 30-year bond slumped 13/32 yesterday and the yield rose to 6.85 percent, not too far from the 6.89 percent top of its three-week trading range.
"Customers are beginning to feel that the bull market has run out of steam," said Steven R. Ricchiuto, chief financial economist at Barclays de Zoete Wedd.
"They are a little more yield-sensitive because they are developing a trading-range mentality."


For Children
Children's Opera  Teaneck Public Library  840 Teaneck Road  Teaneck, N.J.
(201) 837-4171  Recommended ages: 5 to 10  Sunday
The 72-year-old composer Seymour Barab has written 10 children's operas, enough to know the right ingredients.
Mr.
Barab, who lives and works in New York City, says a successful children's opera can't be boring or have love scenes, but it should have a moral, with a hero and villain.
A supernatural element or two also helps.


Clinton's Trials With the Justice Dept.
After a dozen years in which Democrats complained that the Justice Department had been turned into a partisan preserve for conservative ideologues, the arrival of a lawyer as President (and a lawyer as First Lady) brought predictions that the department would be restored to a position of independence and primacy.
Instead, it has emerged as the most troubled department in the Administration, nearly immobilized by what Mr.
Clinton last week jokingly called "nanny purity" -- the hiring issue that felled his first two choices for Attorney General and that has now forced Charles F. C. Ruff, the leading candidate for the No. 2 job, from contention.


CHRONICLE
MAGIC JOHNSON is touring again, not as a Los Angeles Laker or as an author, but as a spokesman for the battle against AIDS.
He was in Tokyo yesterday, where AIDS and sex are spoken about only in whispers behind closed doors, away from the ears of children.
Mr.
Johnson, at an international symposium on AIDS, spoke of the need for more research and education about the disease and for more compassion for people who have it.


A Perfect Day for Birdie-Watching
The friendliest conditions possible turned one of the most adversarial courses in the world into a supplicant lap dog today as a record number of players shattered par in the first round of the Players Championship.
Leading the assault were last year's P.G.A. champion, Nick Price, and journeyman Kirk Triplett, both of whom shot eight-under-par 64's on the Stadium Course at the TPC Sawgrass.
That was one shot short of the course record, and one stroke better than Bernhard Langer and Joey Sindelar did today.


Second Chance on Environment
Four laws that help form the foundation of United States environmental policy are up for renewal in the next two years, and leading environmental advocates in Congress say they intend to use the opportunity to begin redefining how the nation safeguards its air, land and water.
The Clean Water Act, the Endangered Species Act, the Superfund law for cleaning up toxic wastes and the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act for disposing of hazardous chemicals all are under Congressional review.
Calls for change from lawmakers focus on their desire for more rigorous science and better analyses of the costs and benefits.
Several leading members said that too often Congress has moved from panic to panic and not developed a uniform approach to consider risks.


Turning Up Gas
Natural gas stocks have thrived in the last two months, benefiting from gas prices that have firmed even in the mostly temperate regions of the country, after a long period of decline and unusually harsh winter conditions.
The sector has risen 15.3 percent since the beginning of February.


Art in Review
Joseph Stella's Madonnas
Snyder Fine Art  588 Broadway, at Houston Street  SoHo  Through April 10
Joseph Stella (1877-1946) was born in southern Italy and came to America as a child.
His affection for both places was fervent.
His best-known paintings are of the Brooklyn Bridge, presented as a near-mystical apparition and combining the dynamism of Italian Futurist art with the glowing colors of stained glass windows.


Morgenthau Creates Unit to Root Out Police Corruption
Faced with a growing tide of police-corruption complaints, the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, has established a special unit with a new investigative strategy to handle only police cases.
And in a shift from the traditional policy of beginning inquiries into possible police misconduct only after receiving complaints, the unit is initiating investigations by looking for patterns of misconduct, setting up sting operations to test the honesty of officers and routinely questioning arrested drug dealers to determine if they have been paying for protection.


Western Trip Is Going South As Jazz Dominates Knicks
There were no fights for the Knicks tonight, but there was no victory either.
Playing without suspended point guards Doc Rivers and Greg Anthony, New York succumbed to the Utah Jazz, 104-87, at the Delta Center.
It was the second consecutive loss for the Knicks (45-20), who fell behind the Chicago Bulls (47-20) in their race for best record in the Eastern Conference.


Sounds Around Town
Stepping Up to the Mike
Belly and Velocity Girl, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
In her former group, Throwing Muses, Tanya Donnelly maintained the role of the quiet sister, letting her guitar work do most of her talking behind the mystical ravings of the band's leader (and Donnelly's real life stepsister), Kristin Hersh.
Now, Ms.
Donnelly has claimed a microphone of her own, with unexpected popular success.
Her group Belly's "Feed the Tree," an MTV-friendly song that perks up traditional notions of gentlemanliness and fidelity, has catapulted the trio toward alternative-rock stardom.
These small shows should prove how a woman who seemed as if she very much wanted to be a rock star is handling her new-found fame.
Opening the show is Velocity Girl, a fine Washington group with a new album out on Sub/Pop and a knack for shaping artful music from memories of playground noise.
Shows are at 9 P.M. and midnight tonight and tomorrow.
Tickets are $12.


John Caldwell Memorial
A memorial service for John Caldwell, the curator of painting and sculpture at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, is to be held on Monday at 6 P.M. at the Dia Center for the Arts at 548 West 22d Street, Chelsea.
Speakers are to include John R. Lane, director of the museum, and the artists Richard Serra, Emil Lukas and Joan Witek.
Mr.
Caldwell died of a heart attack on March 14 while vacationing in Miami Beach.


Home of First Revolution Is Puzzling Over This One
Two days after he used his nightly program "600 Seconds" to call for volunteers to defend the Motherland against what he called President Boris N. Yeltsin's anti-constitutional coup, Aleksandr Nevzorov was forced off television.
Wednesday night several thousand of Mr.
Nevzorov's supporters gathered in front of the television building, but during a week of intense power struggles in Moscow, such demonstrations have been the only sign of a confrontation in the cradle of Russia's last revolution.


Review/Dance; The Paris Opera Ballet in Nureyev's 'Bayadere'
In Rudolf Nureyev's sumptuous three-act staging of Marius Petipa's 1877 ballet "La Bayadere" for the Paris Opera Ballet, the warrior-hero abandons his hunting in the forests of India to arrive at his engagement party atop a huge prop elephant on wheels.
The symbolism is apt.
"La Bayadere" remains a white elephant of a ballet.
Its 19th-century melodrama and confused Orientalisms are tolerable only because they frame the set pieces of classical dancing that lead up to Petipa's masterpiece of pure classicism: the scene known as "Kingdom of the Shades."


Bridge
The quarterfinal stage of the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams began this afternoon at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals with one Cinderella foursome in contention and two more high-ranked squads on the sidelines.
David Rowntree of Cambridge, Mass., Peter Lieberman of North Providence, R.I., George Sullivan of Longmeadow, Mass., and Simon Kantor of Agawam, Mass., took over the No. 2 seed two days ago, and yesterday squeezed past a strong Midwest team headed by Steve Landen of Southfield, Mich., by 2 imps.


Claude Lemieux Sits As Devils Fall Flat
The Penguins and Mario Lemieux supplied the story of tonight's 4-3 victory by Pittsburgh over New Jersey, but the Devils and Claude Lemieux provided the drama.
Coach Herb Brooks benched the Devils' leading scorer for the third game in a row, and continued to refuse to discuss the nature of the rift with the player.
Lemieux says he has no idea what's going on.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  A BOOST FOR YELTSIN  The leader of Russia's legislature indicated on the eve of a session of the Congress of People's Deputies that he would try to head off a vote on ousting President Boris N. Yeltsin.
A1  NO GOING BACK FOR RUSSIA?
Despite the battering of President Boris N. Yeltsin and his Government by conservatives in the Congress of People's Deputies, no one expects a return to the centralized command economy of socialism, which is widely understood to be as failed an economic idea as Communism was a political one.
A8


Farrow Testifies That Daughter Accused Allen of Molestation
Speaking slowly and choosing her words carefully, Mia Farrow testified yesterday that her 7-year-old daughter, Dylan, told her last summer that she had been sexually molested by her adoptive father, Woody Allen.
But Ms.
Farrow conceded that the girl would not tell a doctor of the abuse, and that a medical examination a few days later showed no sign of it.
In a grueling day of questioning by Mr.
Allen's lawyer, Elkan Abramowitz, Ms.
Farrow testified that she had feared for years that Mr.
Allen's attachment to Dylan O. Farrow was sexual.
She also admitted attacking another of her adopted daughters, Soon-Yi Farrow Previn, after learning of her affair with Mr.
Allen.


Balkanizing the Balkans
As the Bosnian war approaches its first anniversary next week, Serbian forces have embarked on a major offensive apparently intended to bury current peace plans beneath the upheaval and devastation on the ground.
Given their growing diplomatic isolation, the Serbs seem to have concluded that the only thing on their side is military might.
And that isolation increased today when the head of the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government signed an international mediation team's peace plan in New York.  [ Page A12. ]


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Acquired Tom Lampkin, catcher, from the San Diego Padres for future considerations.
Designated Troy O'Leary, outfielder; Matt Maysey, pitcher, and Mike Mathey, catcher, for reassignment.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Acquired Jeff Grotewold, catcher, from the Philadelphia Phillies for Mica Lewis, outfielder, and assigned Grotewold to Portland of the Pacific Coast League.


Edwin J. Gould, 61, Real Estate Investor In Manhattan, Dies
Edwin Jay Gould, a retired investor, wildlife conservationist and outdoorsman, died Wednesday at a hospice in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 61.
Mr.
Gould, who lived in Palm Beach, had been a private investment banker in New York City.


Argentine Health Ills Betray Weak Economy
A rash of public health crises deadly wine, poison pills, contaminated milk and an outbreak of cholera -- taking scores of lives over the last few months has Argentines wondering whether Government services will improve under President Carlos Saul Menem's economic changes.
Last year, 23 people died after taking an illegal over-the-counter drug laced with a toxic chemical.
No one has been charged with the crime, and officials admit similar uncontrolled drugs are regularly sold in the country.


Core Group in Bombing Plot Identified, Authorities Report
Moving rapidly to charge a fifth suspect and step up the hunt for a sixth, Federal authorities said yesterday they believe they have captured or identified the core group of local Arab militants who carried out the bombing of the World Trade Center.
More and more, one leading law enforcement official said, the bombing is seen as an act by ill-trained New York-area plotters operating independently and without direct orders from a foreign government or international terrorist network.
But he cautioned that this view could change as the investigation progressed.
Symbols and Showmanship
At a crowded news conference wrapping up a hectic day of courtroom developments, officials insisted they still faced months of investigation before the full scope and motive of the Feb. 26 attack was exposed.
But they privately suggested that some of the most important questions were finally yielding answers.


Diner's Journal
Staying Within the (Dietary) Law
Considering the enormous demand for kosher dining in New York City, the pickings are woefully thin.
One dependable budget-priced spot on the Upper West Side is La Kasbah, a seven-year-old glatt kosher restaurant on West 71st Street off Columbus Avenue.
Couscous and other Middle Eastern specialties are featured here, and recent visits reveal that if you are not too fussy about meticulous service, a pleasing (and filling) meal can be had.


Corrections
A map yesterday showing possible migration routes of ancient peoples into the Americas gave outdated estimates of the ages of some archeological sites in some editions and misstated the scientific acceptance of some estimates in other editions.
The Meadowcroft site, near Pittsburgh, has been estimated at 19,000 years old; the Pedra Furada site, in Brazil, more than 30,000, and the site in Monte Verde, Chile, 13,000.
The estimates have not been generally accepted; there is wider agreement about the dates of other sites.


New, Extra Component Suspected in Explosive
The afternoon before the World Trade Center bombing, Mohammed A. Salameh and another man broke into frantic Arabic when an attendant at a Jersey City storage shed said they could not store a shipment of large cylinders of hydrogen gas in their locker, investigators said they were told.
Flustered, Mr.
Salameh asked to make a telephone call, then pleaded with the attendant to let him keep the steel cylinders in the locker for only a half-hour.
Minutes later, a yellow Ryder van arrived to take the cylinders away.
Remains of an identical van were the first clues dug out of the trade center rubble that led to the arrest of Mr.
Salameh seven days after the Feb. 26 blast.
The investigators, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said they believe that van carried the bomb.
And after a monthlong search of the explosion site, they now say that an almost complete picture of the bomb and how it was set off has emerged.


Saberhagen Signs Deal Of (Next) Century
Almost three weeks after they began intensive negotiations on a contract extension, the Mets and representatives for Bret Saberhagen agreed today on a deal that guarantees the pitcher $15.337 million for the next three years, through 1996.
The value of the deal, which includes an option year in 1997, could potentially pay the 28-year-old right-hander $27.75 million and end in the year 2028.
The contract, which pays an average of $5.11 million a year for 1994-96, makes Saberhagen the seventh-highest paid pitcher on a list headed by David Cone, his former teammate with the Mets and Kansas City.
Cone signed a three-year deal worth $18 million with the Royals over the winter, an average of $6 million a season.
Dwight Gooden remains the Mets' highest-paid pitcher at $5.15 million.


Exposing the Lies About El Salvador
Secretary of State Christopher is right to order a full-scale inquiry into what looks like deliberate concealment of human rights crimes in El Salvador.
Senior officials in the Reagan and Bush Administrations appear to have suppressed or ignored damning evidence of Salvadoran military complicity in atrocities.
Instead, anxious to avoid any cutoff of U.S. aid during El Salvador's 12-year civil war, officials kept assuring Congress that things were getting better.
In fairness, the inquiry should begin in 1980, since dissimulation began under President Carter.
It should address not only official attempts to dupe Congress but also efforts to discourage investigation by news organizations.
And it should examine why officials acted the way they did.





Clinton Eases Plan On Campaign Funds
In a compromise intended to win Congressional support for a campaign finance proposal, President Clinton has offered to back off his pledge to limit donations by political action committees to $1,000 a candidate, officials involved in negotiations with Congress said today.
But even the compromise proposed by Administration aides -- limiting donations from individual PAC's to $2,500 a candidate for each election -- is running into strong opposition among House Democrats.
The current limit is $5,000.


Grand Jury to Hear Amy Fisher's Allegations Against Buttafuoco
The Nassau County District Attorney announced today that his office would present to a grand jury "certain allegations" by Amy Fisher against Joseph Buttafuoco, with whom the Long Island teen-ager said she had an affair before she shot his wife, Mary Jo, almost a year ago.
Miss Fisher, who is serving a prison term of 5 to 15 years for assaulting Mrs.
Buttafuoco, has long insisted that she had an affair with Mr.
Buttafuoco when she was only 16 and that he had encouraged her to shoot Mrs.
Buttafuoco.


Methods in Stock Option Madness
In his company's latest proxy statement, Sam L. Ginn, the chief executive of the Pacific Telesis Group, reported earning millions of dollars more in stock options than he had to divulge under new Government rules.
So did John F. Welch Jr., the chief executive of the General Electric Company, and John F. Akers, the outgoing chief executive of I.B.M.
More than half of all chief executives will probably join them by the time the year's proxy statement season ends this spring.
Motive Not Apparent
Shareholders may well wonder what is going on, especially because the chief executives are being egged on by the Business Roundtable, an ordinarily conservative group representing 200 of the nation's chief executives.
Is it a case of collective guilt?
Or has the business elite capitulated to the shareholder activists who pick on their lucrative pay packages?


Role of State Is Key to Gender-Based Asylum
To the Editor:
"Asylum by Gender" (editorial, March 10), your endorsement of the need to recognize gender-based persecution for granting asylum, is welcome, but you raise misleading concerns.
You suggest that inclusion of gender-based persecution might open the floodgates to all women fearing discrimination or violence.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: N.C.A.A. Tournament -- West; McCaffrey Transfers, And Vandy Gets 'A'
The only thing Billy McCaffrey brought with him from Duke to Vanderbilt was his grade point average.
His national championship ring is not on his finger -- it rests in his family's trophy case -- and the off-white scooter he drives on campus is fresh out of the factory.
Neither is he the same, one-dimensional, stand-still shooter he was two Marches ago.
In 1991, McCaffrey was Coach Mike Krzyzewski's designated zone destroyer, needing a Bobby Hurley feed before he could release a free and clear shot.
At the time, he was a spare part on Duke's title team, scoring an imperative 16 points off the bench against Kansas in the final and seemingly amenable to strolling Duke's campus as a role player.


TV Weekend; Classic, But Hardly Traditional
Henrik Ibsen's Hedda Gabler is back, and she's every bit as tantalizing and electrifying as when the playwright created her in 1890.
Liberties have been taken, of course, with the original conception and traditional interpretations.
This "Hedda Gabler," the "Masterpiece Theater" presentation on Channel 13 on Sunday at 9 P.M., has been directed by Deborah Warner, one of the more adventurous and often more provocative figures in British theater today.
The title role is filled to neurotic bursting by Fiona Shaw, who, as host of this American presentation, warns viewers that Miss Warner is "famous for sandblasting texts." In this version, the bored, frigid, domineering Hedda, newly married to the plodding Jorgen Tesman (Nicholas Woodeson), does not come apart gradually over the course of the play.
She is already destroyed by her fears when the curtain goes up on what, at first glance, looks like Strindberg territory.


4 Columbia Students Ordered Suspended
Four Columbia University students were ordered suspended for one semester for their part in a protest last December of the university's plans to turn the Audubon Ballroom, where Malcolm X was assassinated, into a biomedical research center.
But in a twist, the retired Federal judge who presided over the hearing, Harold R. Tyler, criticized the university's rules of conduct as inflexible and urged the students to appeal.


Let's Forget Sexes and Think of Handedness
To the Editor:
What is it about human sexuality that leads people to engage in extraordinarily fuzzy thinking?
In "How Many Sexes Are There?" (Op-Ed, March 12) Anne Fausto-Sterling, a leading genetics researcher, states her apparent belief that, because there are occasional people born with defects in their urogenital tracts, that there are "at least five sexes -- perhaps even more."


Caracas Journal; New in the Seat of Power: A Two-Fisted Radical
Black in a land dominated by Latins, a political outsider who founded his own underground party, Aristobulo Izturiz Almeida is the kind of visitor who could rattle the crystal chandeliers of Caracas's ornate city hall.
Only a few months ago, Mr.
Izturiz got into a fistfight with bank guards in an attempt to block the sale of part of Venezuela's state telephone company to an American-led consortium.


In Newest Bid, Murdoch Offers To Buy The Post
Rupert Murdoch formally offered to buy back the bankrupt New York Post yesterday and to operate the cash-starved newspaper for at least 60 days while he attempts to win the Federal approvals necessary for the purchase.
The offer, made by a lawyer for Mr.
Murdoch's News Corporation, came at an extraordinary hearing conducted by telephone by a Federal bankruptcy judge in which the paper's managing agent, Abraham Hirschfeld, said he would not contribute any more money to the paper.


Review/Jazz; McCoy Tyner's Lush Piano Sounds and His New Big Band
Pianists who arrange for big bands reveal how they hear their own styles on the most orchestral instrument in jazz.
With McCoy Tyner's 15-piece big band, the leader's splashy, thick-chorded approach to the piano translates to lush orchestrations in which every register is densely populated: tuba sharing bass lines with the bass, congas meshing rhythms with the trap drums, and brasses (including French horn along with trombones and trumpets) trading melodic sections with saxophones and woodwinds.
Harmonies become chorales that use unexpectedly rich chromatic chords, and a prominent flute or piccolo often twitters up above.
The arrangements add detail to the music, but never at the expense of its drive.
In Tuesday's second set at the Five Spot (4 West 31st Street, Manhattan), uptempo compositions by Mr.
Tyner bustled along, especially "Fly With the Wind," in which a modal vamp and a quasi-African polyrhythm emerged from a rumble of percussion to spur ensembles and solos, then melted into a percussion coda as if to say that rhythm was the music's wellspring.
A version of the ballad "Lover Man," featuring a trombone solo by Frank Lacy that was by turns bluesy and comic, savored the ways its harmonies could be recast.


Corrections
A report in the Music Notes column on Wednesday about a benefit concert at Lincoln Center referred incorrectly to the president of the Sony Corporation.
He is Norio Ohga.


Add Hostetler and Bavaro To New Millionaires' Club
Two former players who won Super Bowls with the Giants found new homes this week in the National Football League, beneficiaries of the new bonanza of unrestricted free agency.
Mark Bavaro, the tight end who played last year for the Cleveland Browns, will sign a two-year, $2.3-million contract with the Philadelphia Eagles today.
On Wednesday night, Jeff Hostetler and his agent, Marvin Demoff, confirmed that the exiled Giant quarterback had signed a three-year contract with the Los Angeles Raiders worth $8 million.


Art in Review
Malcolm Morley  Mary Boone Gallery  417 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through April 24
Malcolm Morley seems to be caught in his own private Bermuda Triangle.
His new tropical images are adrift in waters bounded by the artist's 1980's Neo-Expressionism, his eccentric Photo Realism of the 70's and the faux primitive style of Rafael Ferrer.
In other words, these new Morleys are eminently transitional, but they're not all bad.
They show the artist trying to move on, which he very much needed to do; jettisoning some of his overheated painting riffs, which is a definite relief, while circling back to recoup some favorite themes, even if they are a tad on the boyish side.


5 Hoffenberg Affiliates File for Bankruptcy
Steven Hoffenberg, chairman of the embattled Towers Financial Corporation, intensified his skirmishing with securities regulators and with his own bondholders yesterday by seeking bankruptcy court protection for five subsidiaries that have sold $200 million in bonds.
After filing, Mr.
Hoffenberg dropped another bombshell, asserting last night that the subsidiaries' bonds -- which had been sold by Towers beginning in 1990 as an "asset backed" issue, secured by collateral and rated AA by Duff &amp; Phelps -- were not secured at all.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about President Clinton's news conference comments about the possibility of restricted military assignments for gay troops referred incorrectly to a leading advocate of homosexuals in the military.
The advocate, who was quoted on his reaction to the comments, is Thomas B. Stoddard.


People
*
Kerri Fox was named marketing director at Family Circle magazine, New York, succeeding Julie Baker, who is now promotion director at McCall's magazine, New York.
Ms.
Fox was previously promotion director at Woman's Day, New York.


SPEAKER IN RUSSIA NOW VOICING DOUBT ON YELTSIN OUSTER
The leader of Russia's Legislature indicated on the eve of a session of the Congress of People's Deputies that he would try to head off a vote on ousting President Boris N. Yeltsin.
His statement reinforced speculation that the deputies lacked the two-thirds majority needed to vote the President out of office.
But as the deputies converged on Moscow from around Russia and both sides issued their final appeals, it was evident that this would be the most contentious and fateful session of the Congress in the three years since it was elected.


Review/Film; 3 Couples, Being Cute Together
"Married to It" presents a small Noah's Ark of wedded stereotypes, as three cute couples are conveniently thrown together.
For reasons that would be most apparent to the makers of a television sitcom, they all become fast friends.
Two are blushing newlyweds (Mary Stuart Masterson and Robert Sean Leonard).
Two are sexual athletes (Cybill Shepherd and Ron Silver).
Two are wearily middle-aged (Beau Bridges and Stockard Channing).
All would be better off anywhere else.
As directed by Arthur Hiller and written glibly by Janet Kovalcik, "Married to It" at least starts off on a lively note.
Everyone bustles about ferociously, trying to establish character and some sort of socio-economic milieu.
The newlyweds exemplify yuppie ambition, though much is made of their honest Iowa background.
The middle-aged parents groan about their rent-controlled apartment and their low-paying government jobs, lamenting the loss of their hippie past.


Frank Barrera, 85; Lawyer Specialized In Property, Probate
Frank A. Barrera, a Brooklyn lawyer who specialized in real estate and probate law since 1931, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 85.
The cause of death was a brain tumor, his family said.


Myths of Special Treatment for Black Students Fan Racial Fires; Not So at Columbia
To the Editor:
You relate that many colleges have difficulty attracting black students and offer special financial aid to persuade them to enroll (front page, Feb. 28).
Not at Columbia College.


Abroad at Home; Washing Our Hands
The tragedy in Bosnia is terrible now, the worst human disaster in Europe since the crimes of the Nazis.
It is going to get a lot worse soon.
The last Muslim enclaves in eastern Bosnia cannot hold out against Serbian attacks more than another two or three weeks, according to United Nations officials there.
If and when the Serbs overrun them, 60,000 desperate civilians will try to find some way out through the mountains to join the already more than one million refugees.


Farrow Tries to Avoid Role of a Woman Scorned
The plaintiff's strategy was simple.
Throughout the day, Elkan Abramowitz, representing Woody Allen in his custody suit against Mia Farrow, tried to portray her as a woman so wounded by Mr.
Allen's affair with her adopted daughter, Soon-Yi Farrow Previn, that she would stop at nothing to strike back, a devious, manipulative woman whose thirst for vengeance had turned her into a howling fury.
But someone slipped a different Ms. Farrow into the witness box.


Review/Photography; A Trove of Images Collected From the Past
For anyone interested in photography or, for that matter, in art or in recent history, "The Waking Dream: Photography's First Century," a stunning exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is not to be missed.
Seldom has an exhibition presented such a breathtaking array of photographic works united by their exceptional beauty and historical importance.
The 253 works that make up "The Waking Dream" are drawn from the Gilman Paper Company's collection, which the museum describes as "the finest private collection of photography in the world." These images are among the more than 5,000 gathered over the last two decades by Howard Gilman, the company's chairman, with the advice of Pierre Apraxine, the curator of the company's collection.
The current show was assembled by Mr.
Apraxine and Maria Morris Hambourg, the Metropolitan's curator of photography.


Imported Bitter Apricot Pits Recalled as Cyanide Hazard
A health-food snack from Pakistan that contains dangerous levels of cyanide has been ordered removed from health-food stores in New York, the State Department of Agriculture and Markets announced yesterday.
"Oh boy, that's high; my goodness, that's very toxic," said Dr.
Gilbert Stoewsand, a food science and technology professor at Cornell University, when told how much cyanide was found during the Agriculture Department's laboratory tests of the product, Himalayan Harvest Apricot Kernels Naturally Bitter.


Stars' Green Is Sued
NORMAN GREEN, the owner of the Minnesota North Stars, is being sued by a former executive assistant who accuses him of sexual harassment.
KAREN DZIEDZIC, 30, charged in the suit presented to a Minneapolis court yesterday that Green often instructed her to wear cosmetics, described her outfits as "very hot" and "very sexy," and humiliated her by rubbing her hand through a client's hair.


O'Rourke Denies Conflict Over Hiring 2 Concerns
Andrew P. O'Rourke, the Westchester County Executive, today defended his role in approving county contracts for concerns that hired his daughter and the woman with whom he lives.
At a news conference, Mr.
O'Rourke said that, because of a deep family estrangement that followed his separation from his wife, he lost touch with his daughter Aileen and was unaware that she had been hired by a Manhattan law firm that went on to do $2.8 million in medical malpractice work for the county.


What Nicaraguan Land Claims Mean
To the Editor:
Your correspondent in Managua again champions the "oppressed" upper classes of Nicaragua in a March 6 news article concerning the efforts to regain ownership of a house by a woman wealthy enough to have sat out the revolution in Miami.


Review/Film; A Cultural Mix-Up, North of the Border
Srinivas Krishna's audacious comedy "Masala" is a film distinguished by extreme cultural double vision.
Its 25-year-old director, writer, co-producer and star is a film maker who was born in India and moved to Canada in 1970.
Rather than aspire to a traditional Western style of film making for his first feature, the director has larded some of the quirkier aspects of Indian commercial movies into a film that is already an experiment in scrambled genres.
Indian phantasmagoria and Bombay-style movie kitsch keep bubbling up unexpectedly in this frantic comedy about a bunch of middle-class Indians who live in Toronto.
In one subplot, an Indian grandmother (Zohra Segal) carries on a running argument with Lord Krishna (Saeed Jaffrey), a deity who appears on her television set whenever she summons him.
Periodically, the film breaks completely away from conventional storytelling for a glitzy musical-comedy number or an erotic fantasy sequence.
Such sudden changes of pace are commonplace conventions in commercial Bombay cinema.


At the Bar; Lawyers, never at a loss for words, get a fresh arsenal of imported eloquence.
Spare me quotations, which though learn'd, are long,
On points remote at best, and rarely strong.
They are the words of Judge Joseph Story, taken from an 1842 poem titled "Lines Written on Hearing an Argument in Court." But on that point, at least, lawyers have never paid Story much mind.
Indeed, his very words are among the more than 3,500 selections in the recently published Oxford Dictionary of American Legal Quotations, a book that should enable a whole new generation of lawyers to sound erudite or witty or pompous at will.


Market Place; Maneuvering at Marvel comics vanquishes the short-sellers.
THE good people of Investorville were frightened.
The short-selling gang was romping through town again, using its mythical powers to cripple Marvel's superheroes and bring their lofty flight down to earth.
All seemed lost, but then . . .
Look!
Down at the bank!
It's Super Ron!
O.K., maybe Ronald Perelman as superhero is a stretch.
But in a single bound this week, he rescued investors in his Marvel Entertainment Group from financial peril with a deal that left Wall Streeters scratching their heads.
In turn, he clamped down one of the tightest short squeezes in years.


The Spoken Word
GENEALOGY WORKSHOP, Temple Israel, 112 East 75th Street, Manhattan.
An introductory workshop on exploring family roots.
Sponsored by the Jewish Genealogical Society.
Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Fee: $45, including course materials and refreshments.
Information: (212) 330-8257.
DESIGN LECTURE, National Arts Club, Grand Gallery, 15 Gramercy Park.
An illustrated lecture on styles in design and fashion given by Richard Martin, curator of the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Sponsored by the Metropolitan Historic Structures Association, a nonprofit preservation society.
Tonight at 6:30.
Admission: $15.
Information: (212) 473-6045.
POLITICAL CONFERENCE, New York University Law School, D'Agostino Hall, 110 West Third Street, Greenwich Village.
"The Global Refugee Crisis: Rethinking Policy and Methods of Empowerment," sponsored by Amnesty International.
Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $15; $5 for students.
Information: (212) 633-4262.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: N.C.A.A. Tournament -- East; For One, A Laugh And an Ax To Grind
Of the four teams in the N.C.A.A.
East Regional semifinals, none may be more loose, more irreverent, than the University of Cincinnati Bearcats.
And no other player here is more outspoken than senior forward Terry Nelson, who says he is seriously considering something rare when he graduates: suing the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
Nelson, an intelligent man with a quick wit who wants to be a standup comic, isn't joking when he talks about suing one of the most powerful organizations in sports.


Sacramento Portrait; Well Liked Even by California Rivals, Latest Brown Is Now Early Favorite
There was a made-for-television moment here one recent morning that most politicians could only dream of.
With a baby on each hip and the cameras rolling, Kathleen Brown, Treasurer of California, went to the bank to buy bonds for her twin grandchildren and remind voters that politics is her family business.


Henry Crofoot Jr., 75, Lumberman and Miner
Henry Clay Crofoot Jr., a Northern California lumberman and Nevada miner, died Tuesday in a local hospital.
He was 75.
He had had cancer for 10 years.


Israel's Likud Passes Torch, Naming Netanyahu Leader
Israel's main political opposition changed generations today, from the founders of the Jewish state to their heirs, when Benjamin Netanyahu resoundingly won a nationwide primary to become leader of the Likud Party.
Mr.
Netanyahu, born in 1949, a year after Israel came into being, succeeds former Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, 77, who led the party for the last decade.


A.S.P.C.A. Plans to Stop Killing Strays
Saying that killing stray dogs and cats has obscured its mission -- and its image -- the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals has decided to give up the job in New York City.
The decision is likely to leave the city with the unpopular and unpleasant task.
The decision by the A.S.P.C.A., which has collected and destroyed stray animals in New York since 1894, follows a nationwide trend over the last decade in which the society has backed away from killing, which it calls animal control.
"As far as we can tell," said Roger Caras, president of the society, "New York is the last major city where animal control is still handled by the A.S.P.C.A."


For four airlines, the competition is shifting from fares to chairs
BAD news for all those people who enjoy the neck-wrenching sport of following fare battles among the airlines: A rousing chair war is under way.
American Airlines, Trans World Airlines, Virgin Atlantic Airways and Continental are playing up the comfort and roominess of their seats as a marketing strategy these days, at times with an entertaining feistiness.


CHRONICLE
ROGER CLINTON sings.
He also fishes.
Next Thursday, he will rise at dawn and cast his line into Junction Pool, the place in the Catskills where the Beaver Kill and Willowemoc Creek meet.
At that moment in Roscoe, N.Y., he will join many other anglers in opening the trout season.
But does Mr.
Clinton, the President's brother, actually fish?
Butch Stone, Roger Clinton's personal manager, said, "If you don't fish, you're not really from Arkansas." Next question: Is he a good fisherman?
"I have no idea," Mr.
Stone said.
"I have never gone fishing with him."


Review/Art; Havemeyer Collection: Magic at the Met Museum
"SPLENDID LEGACY: The Havemeyer Collection," which opens tomorrow at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is so vast and diverse that it constitutes virtually a museum within the museum.
But don't be daunted: just wear comfortable shoes, because the show of more than 450 objects is not only beautiful and fun, it gets better as it goes along.
It also illustrates the extraordinary accomplishments of two women, Louisine Havemeyer and Mary Cassatt.
In recent years, much has been made of female artists who have been overlooked.
But it was as collectors and advisers that women during the last century often played roles at least as significant as men's, particularly in the promotion of modern art.
It was a woman, Isabella Stewart Gardner, who helped get Bernard Berenson's career under way and whose eponymous museum in Boston is one of the greatest in this country.
It was three women who founded the Museum of Modern Art in New York, and it was a woman who founded the Whitney.
And although Henry Osborne Havemeyer was by no means merely a walking checkbook, it was his wife, Louisine, and Cassatt who were principally responsible for putting together the astonishing group of 19th-century French paintings that are at the heart of the collection celebrated in this exhibition.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Baxter International will pay $6 million in Government penalites for cooperating with the Arab boycott of Israel.
It also settled shareholder suits charging its activities hurt its stock.  [ Page D1. ]
Many chief executives are reporting receipt of millions of dollars more in stock options than they have to in hopes of protecting pay packages from a proposed accounting rule.  [ D1. ]


Sounds Around Town
An Iranian Master
Majid Kiani, Washington Square Church, 135 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 545-7536.
Majid Kiani, one of Iran's most renowned musicians, is a master of the santur, a trapezoidal instrument with 72 strings whose shimmering sound comes from striking the strings with light wooden hammers.
The 51-year-old musician, who was born in Teheran, has revived ancient santur techniques that had almost disappeared.
The concert, which features music from the classical Persian repertory, is his American debut.
Show time is tonight at 8.
Tickets are $15.
Blues Harmonica
"Blues Harp Summit," Triplex Theater, Borough of Manhattan Community College, 199 Chambers Street, TriBeCa, (212) 346-8510.
A meeting of blues harmonica players from Chicago and the East Coast features four semi-legendary players.
Sugar Blue, who has been called the Jimi Hendrix of the harmonica, has played with everyone from Willie Dixon to the Rolling Stones.
David (Honeyboy) Edwards, who is in his late 70's, is one of the few surviving links between early blues and the later Chicago style.
Charlie Sayles is a street musician from Massachusetts who is famous in his adopted home of Washington.
Little Sammy Davis, who lives in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., comes from the Mississippi Delta and played in the South with Earl Hooker for 12 years.
Show time is tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $16.


A New Approach For the Mets
The New York Mets' record last season left a lot to be desired.
That's why for the 1993 season, the ball club is introducing a campaign that focuses on the experience of attending baseball games rather than the outcome of the games.
"You make the call" serves as the theme for two humorous 30-second commercials, created by TBWA Advertising in New York.
In one spot, a hot dog is passed through a stadium crowd to a young boy who delightfully takes a bite.
"Hot dog and a cold one," is superimposed on the screen followed by "Or . . . Another night of takeout." On the screen, a man is featured receiving a greasy bag of takeout food, while the same boy grimaces in disgust.


Past Drew Bomb Suspects Into Circle
Some of them would gather for long lunches and heated discussion at Hungry Hamed's, a dingy Brooklyn luncheonette, or stop in at the nearby Fertile Crescent, a Middle Eastern food store that also stocks paperbacks by Muslims known for their radical interpretation of Islam.
They lent their support to a fund-raising office for the Afghan rebels fighting the infidel Soviet-installed government, an office that moved from a Brooklyn mosque to a Jersey City mosque and eventually set up quarters behind a steel door on Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn.


Be Kind To Rivals Night in Nassau
If the Islanders make the playoffs -- and it is a real "if" now -- they might have to play the Washington Capitals in the first or second round.
Should that happen, they might consider petitioning the National Hockey League for an extension of this season's neutral-site experiment.
Perhaps they could "play host" to the Capitals in Halifax, Nova Scotia, or Hamilton, Ontario.
Anywhere but the Nassau Coliseum.
By losing, 5-2, to Washington tonight, the Islanders went 0 for 4 this season against the Capitals in games played on Long Island.
And their overall record fell to 16-16-2 in this building, not the sort of percentage that earns one of the four playoff berths in the Patrick Division.


No Headline
"Segregation is morally repugnant to us and we will never ever accept segregation as a sign of progress." -- DAVID B. MIXNER, a gay political fund-raiser and friend of the President.  [ A15:1 ]


Art in Review
Chris Macdonald
Baron/Boisante Editions  50 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Wednesday
Until now, Chris Macdonald has specialized in chunky, slightly abstracted sculptures in rough-hewn wood: playful toylike forms suggesting tractors and other big-wheeled machines that, large or small, had a monumental scale and density.
For his latest show, which is one of his best, Mr.
Macdonald has forsaken monumentality and for the most part wood, although mobile machinery is still a central concept.


Dow Up 15.94 for Its First Gain of the Week
Investors returned to blue-chip issues yesterday as the political crisis in Russia appeared to cool, igniting a fairly strong and broad-based advance after three losing sessions.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 15.94 points to end at 3,461.32, thanks to a rebound in several Dow components including Westinghouse, United Technologies and Eastman Kodak.


They're Selling Lawyers on Selling Their Services
When the founders of the National Association of Law Firm Marketing Administrators gathered here in the dark ages of lawyer merchandising nine years ago, they fit around a single table at the St.
Francis Hotel.
The 14 of them met secretly, lest their law firms be embarrassed, and conversed warily, for fear of disclosing trade secrets to one another.
Just about the only thing they agreed upon was a name, though even that was not easy.
There was no problem with "national" or "association." But to some, "marketing" implied hucksterism -- still a radical and repulsive notion to the bar seven years after the Supreme Court legalized advertising by lawyers, in 1977.


Times Co. Chooses Editor For 31 Regional Papers
John M. Lee, an assistant managing editor of The New York Times, will become director of editorial development for the Times Company's 31 regional newspapers on Nov. 1.
The appointment was announced yesterday by Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, chairman and chief executive of the company.
Mr.
Lee, 62, is a former business and financial editor and foreign correspondent for The Times.
He will succeed Seymour Topping, who was recently appointed administrator of the Pulitzer Prizes and a professor at the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism.
Mr.
Topping has held the editorial development post since 1986 and was previously managing editor of The Times.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BOLAR PHARMACEUTICAL CO., Copiague, L.I., which has faced numerous lawsuits related to its manufacture and sale of generic drugs, has changed its name to Circa Pharmaceuticals Inc.
STERLING BANCORP, New York, has agreed to acquire the assets of Zenith Financial Corp., Great Neck, L.I.


Report of Intervention In Inquiry on Bush Son
A top White House official during the Bush Administration intervened in a Government investigation of Neil Bush, the President's son, according to L. William Seidman, former chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
"Here was a neat little story for some investigative reporter, and I could even write the headline: 'White House Tries to Influence Neil Bush Case,' " Mr.
Seidman wrote in a forthcoming book, "Full Faith and Credit: The Great S.&amp; L. Debacle and Other Washington Sagas," to be published by Times Books.


Marines Can't Defer Aircraft Replacement
To the Editor:
"Guide for Pentagon Budget Cuts" (editorial, March 9) offers suggestions drawn from a Congressional Budget Office report and supplies another of your own, which is, as we say in Texas, a mile wide and an inch deep.
The case you present, without substantiation, is to defer buying the V-22 Osprey tilt-rotor aircraft for at least a decade to save $1 billion now.
The saving would be a false one.


Contrite Anthony Attempts To Explain the Inexplicable
With their two point guards suspended, and with a cloud of controversy hanging over them, the Knicks tried to move forward tonight.
But a central figure in the Tuesday night brawl and resulting issuance of $160,500 in fines by the National Basketball Association wasn't finding forward progress so easy.
"I haven't been able to sleep," said Greg Anthony, who was suspended five games and fined $20,500 for coming off the bench in street clothes and punching Kevin Johnson of the Phoenix Suns.
The act rekindled a bench-clearing brawl that had appeared to be on the verge of ending.
"I couldn't even talk to my mom about it. I just feel bad."


On Stage, and Off
There'll Be No Changes Made
A week into rehearsals, Christopher Chadman withdrew on Sunday as the director and choreographer of "On the Town," Leonard Bernstein's 1944 musical going up at the Goodspeed Opera House in East Haddam, Conn.
The problem was that Mr.
Chadman, who choreographed the current Broadway production of "Guys and Dolls," wanted to make changes in Bernstein's dance arrangements and the Bernstein estate wouldn't allow it.


Fernandez's Free Lodging Leads to U.S. Tax Audit
The stately town house bought in 1990 by the New York City Board of Education for Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez's use has been a regular target of criticism: for its $995,000 price, for the cost of its renovations, and even for its lack of a garage.
Now, the Internal Revenue Service is involved.
The agency is auditing Mr.
Fernandez's tax returns to determine if he has acted properly in paying no taxes on the housing benefit he receives by living rent-free in the elegant Federal-style house at 80 State Street in Brooklyn Heights.


A Misunderstanding?
Disciplinary action against MIKE TYSON this week was the result of a misunderstanding over the imprisoned boxer's telephone privileges, his lawyer said yesterday.
"There are misunderstandings in prison -- this was one of them," said ALAN M. DERSHOWITZ, the Harvard law professor handling Tyson's appeal of a rape conviction.


Backsliding at the White House; A Bad Draft on Campaigns
President Clinton said he would provide some kind of political reform, and he has -- phony reform.
Here's the Clinton plan as it stands: Double the amount of money the richest Americans can give to support Federal campaigns.
Don't fight the House on PAC's.
Allow corporations, unions and the wealthy to make unlimited gifts to build party headquarters.
The White House spokesman said the formal plan may not be ready for another few weeks, so it's still possible his boss may get religion.
But the draft provisions depict a rush to compromise.
This plan, shaped by Congressional greed and the Democratic National Committee, is a formula for legalized influence peddling.


Video Service to Offer Data On Municipal Bond Market
The leading broker of municipal bonds announced plans yesterday to begin publishing information about municipal bond prices and yields on the network of video terminals operated by Bloomberg Financial Markets.
The J. J. Kenny Company, a broker or middleman for municipal bond trades between securities firms, collects information about individual bond issues, prices of trades, estimated prices for bonds that have not traded recently and the bid and ask prices quoted by securities firms.
An unspecified portion of this information will be supplied to Bloomberg, which will display it over its network of 24,000 machines, mostly in financial offices across the country.


Myths of Special Treatment for Black Students Fan Racial Fires
To the Editor:
I am a 21-year-old college graduate working on a master's degree.
"Colleges Luring Black Students With Incentives" (front page, Feb. 28) is very misleading.
When I was applying to college, my Scholastic Aptitude Test scores were well over 1100 combined, and I had a lot more than a B average.
Still, I never received offers to waive my application fees or application deadlines, nor did I receive offers of full scholarships, though my parents' income falls well below the $150,000 bracket.


Backsliding at the White House; Justice Disrupted
Any hope that the Clinton Administration would operate a Justice Department free of political taint -- or even the appearance of political taint -- grew dim yesterday when the White House confirmed that it would dismiss the U.S.
Attorney investigating one of its chief Congressional allies.
When Attorney General Janet Reno first announced the blanket dismissal of about 70 United States Attorneys who are Bush Administration holdovers, her aides said she might exempt those needed to wrap up significant investigations.
But yesterday the White House, making clear once more that Ms.
Reno is not fully in charge at the Justice Department, removed most of that fig leaf of an exception.


It's Showcase Time For Advertisers
Marketers, like Hollywood stars, are gearing up for the high-profile 63d Academy Awards ceremony on Monday.
Eleven sponsors are buying commercial time on what is usually the year's second-most-watched program after the Super Bowl.
The Prudential Insurance Company of America is introducing a campaign, created by Lowe &amp; Partners in New York, that brings back its well-known "Piece of the rock" theme.


Japanese Mix and Match Auto Plants and Markets
Every so often on the Toyota Motor Corporation assembly line here, a Toyota Camry takes shape with the steering wheel on the right side.
But more surprising than the steering wheel's location are the cars' destinations: the ports of Tawara, Japan, and Sheerness, England.
After a decade of making cars in America, Japanese auto makers like Toyota and Honda are turning their ships around and sending American-made cars to Japan, Taiwan, the Middle East and Europe.


Reviews/Film Festival; A Drifter, a Woman, a Husband, Etc.
The events that shape Takashi Ishii's "Original Sin" won't startle anyone who has seen or read "The Postman Always Rings Twice," but they cast contemporary Japanese mores in a surprising light.
Even viewers familiar with recent Japanese film at its most iconoclastic may be startled by some of the rebelliousness seen here.
The film's central character is an anomaly by definition: a surly young drifter in a society that seemingly places much value on discipline and purpose.
"Original Sin" takes a slightly awed view of this drifter's utter amorality and self-interest.
The film begins startlingly as this drifter, Makoto (Masatoshi Nagase), glimpses the demurely beautiful Nami (Shinobu Ohtake) at a train station.
Almost literally thunderstruck, he watches her through torrential rain that is filmed so slowly and grandiosely it looks like snow.
After this, he feels destined to follow her to the real estate office where she works, and where the boss turns out to be her husband.
Undeterred by this, Makoto gets a low-level job in the same office.
"If I can work with a woman like you, I won't be greedy about money," he tells Nami, who looks stunned by his brash assurance.


KOHL, DUE IN U.S., LOSES SOME LUSTER
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany, the strongman of Europe for most of George Bush's Presidency, went to Washington today for a meeting with President Clinton on Friday.
But the country he leads now looks far less economically formidable and politically self-confident than it did after reunification two and a half years ago.


Corrections
An Education page article on Wednesday about Education Secretary Richard W. Riley's efforts to improve South Carolina's schools when he was Governor referred incorrectly to Sandra McLain, a teacher at Joseph Keels Elementary School in Columbia.
She teaches first grade, not third.


Wickman Is Hard To Ignore
With his position on the Yankee pitching staff tenuous and his patience diminishing, Bob Wickman strode to the mound today and used his nasty sinker to send Buck Showalter a message.
Every sinking pitch that fooled another Atlanta hitter on this soggy day was his way of daring the Yankees to continue ignoring him.
Wickman did not allow a hit to the two-time National League champions in six shutout innings and further complicated the competition for the fourth spot in the rotation.
Wickman has challenged the criticism that he has only two quality pitches by refining his changeup and allowing only one earned run in 15 innings this spring while limiting opponents to a .120 batting average.


Review/Rock; The Eternal Seductions Of Prince
PRINCE is a lover, not a fighter, and not a deep thinker, either.
He has a cornucopia of songs that bump and grind, songs that whisper erotic endearments and songs that command listeners to party: so many that even Wednesday's concert at Radio City Music Hall, with two and a half hours of music, was only a sampling.
It was the first of three Radio City shows, to be followed by an invitational concert tomorrow night at the Apollo Theater in Harlem.
The concerts let loose a performer who can do everything: sing, dance, play all the instruments (although this time, he doesn't show off his drumming), and rework pop and rock genres from silky falsetto soul to James Brown's funk to triumphal Jimi Hendrix-style guitar solos.
He has been making albums since 1978, most of them as a one-man band, and while rhythms and techniques have evolved through the years, Prince's ambition to be all seducers to all listeners has barely wavered.
The attempts he made at social relevance in the mid-1980's have vanished; now, it's back to the bedroom.


Fare Increase Fading, at Least for Now, Transit Officials Say
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority is expected to delay a vote on a proposed 25-cent increase in bus and subway fares at its regular monthly meeting this morning, and board members said it was unlikely that there would be a fare increase this year.
Several members of the board said yesterday that it was reluctant to vote on the increase, to $1.50 from $1.25, while legislators in Albany negotiate a transportation financing package that is likely to cover a $241 million deficit in operating funds at the agency.


Senate Approves First Step In President's Budget Plan
Voting along party lines, the Senate today approved a five-year budget outline that is almost identical to what President Clinton proposed last month and what the House passed last week.
In a telephone conversation with Senate leaders after the vote, Mr.
Clinton called it a remarkable achievement, and said, "Finally we've done something to break the gridlock."


Clinton Tries to Erase Impression He Would Set Gay Troops Apart
Facing open criticism from allies inside and outside the Government, the White House is seeking to erase the impression that President Clinton would consider separating troops by sexual orientation.
Mr.
Clinton said his assertion during a news conference on Tuesday that he would not rule out restrictions on the deployment of homosexual soldiers did not represent a change of heart.
He said -- in comments repeated by his aides today -- that he was merely keeping an open mind in anticipation of a Pentagon report recommending how best to carry out his pledge to allow homosexuals to serve.


Review/Film; Playing Games, Waiting to Grow Up
"Watch It," the first film to be written and directed by Tom Flynn, is a surprisingly enjoyable romantic comedy about four young men, three of whom are recent graduates of Northwestern University, and the women they become involved with during one Chicago summer.
The most unusual thing about the movie is the way it appreciates its characters' mini-problems without for a minute overplaying them.
Though small in scale, "Watch It" isn't trivial.
The title is taken from an undergraduate game, an obsessive, trivial pursuit, really, in which extremely elaborate practical jokes are played on unsuspecting victims, who then must answer in kind.
As the film begins, the jokes are becoming increasingly complicated.
On his first night in Chicago, staying in the house shared by his cousin and three friends, John (Peter Gallagher) is set up for a "watch it" gag.


An Electric Courtroom Duel In Los Angeles Beating Case
A crucial battle in the Rodney G. King civil rights trial was fought today as the most aggressive of the prosecutors tried to shake the most confident and knowledgeable of the police defendants.
Dueling over fine points, the prosecutor, Steven D. Clymer, focused on small inconsistencies in the story of the beating that Sgt.
Stacey C. Koon has told many times in court, on the lecture circuit and in a book.


Review/Music; Overture to 'The Ring' at the Met
Two curiously contradictory ideas have assumed political correctness in music.
One has been the re-enactment of music at its historical source.
Transformations made by time and tides are circumvented and music returned to the virgin state of its first performances.
A thriving cottage industry has built instruments devoid of 19th-century "improvements." Scholarly research becomes avant-garde.
The opera stage has sought fame and fortune in the opposite direction.
Old operas are kicked out of their museums, asked to shed literal accuracies and are redesigned to instruct audiences about the lives they themselves are leading.
In one case, authenticity becomes an altar.
Before it, the pure of heart may worship.
In another, authenticity is a villain, robbing opera of meaning for a 20th-century sensibility.
No one ever accused the artistic process of excessive logic.


Bronx Student Stabs Teen-Ager Despite School Metal Detectors
A 14-year-old boy was stabbed in the chest and seriously injured yesterday during a fight with a 15-year-old classmate inside a Bronx high school equipped with metal detectors.
The victim, whose identity was withheld by the authorities because of his age, was taken to Lincoln Hospital where he underwent surgery for a punctured lung, and was in critical condition last night, officials said.


Critic's Notebook; Touring New York Underground
FOR many New Yorkers, the subway is like the picture of Dorian Gray.
It exposes the foul countenance of their city's wayward soul.
Dorian banished his festering portrait to the attic.
We keep ours in the basement.
Over the years, ravages intermittently suppressed at street level have settled below ground in a dense sediment of urban pathologies: poverty, insanity, anger and crime.
It is not a pretty picture.
Still, a ridership of 3.5 million daily descends to this underground gallery of fear, undeterred by visions of scurrying rats, defaced walls, hollow-eyed vagrants and platforms perilously overcrowded or frighteningly vacant.
And, in fact, the subterranean picture has brightened considerably in recent years.
Remarkably, at a time of national drift away from public amenity toward increased privatization, the subway has been shuttling valiantly in the opposite direction.
In the past decade, supported by two five-year programs authorized by the New York State Legislature, the Transit Authority has carried out extensive overhauls of the aging subway system.
New cars and tracks.
A fully air-conditioned, graffiti-free fleet.
Renovated stations.
Beefed-up security.
New automated turnstiles (looking something like an airport metal detector crossed with a casino slot machine) that will soon accept plastic fare cards.
There's even a running campaign of radio ads intended to lure New Yorkers back to the depths.


Scientists Create an Enzyme That May Curb Addiction to Cocaine
Scientists say they have developed an artificial enzyme that reduces the addictive effect of cocaine in test tube studies, a development some experts say could eventually lead to a new weapon to treat cocaine abuse.
New York researchers said initial tests indicated that the enzyme they developed seeks out and binds to the cocaine molecule and then breaks it into two inert byproducts.


Art in Review
Steve Gianakos
Barbara Toll Gallery  146 Greene Street  SoHo  Through tomorrow
Steve Gianakos's black-and-white, cartoonlike images have been holding their own on the oddball fringe of New York art since the mid-70's, and, in a sense, the times have finally caught up with him.
Artists like Mike Kelley and Raymond Pettibon are getting a lot of attention for exploiting the popular graphics medium that Mr.
Gianakos has been using for years.


Sudan Is Described as Trying to Placate the West
The Sudanese Government has made a series of gestures that are meant to placate the West but are also emblematic of the country's need to become more flexible and pragmatic, relief officials say.
The moves come as the United States threatens to add the Sudan to the list of countries that sponsor terrorism and considers creating safety zones for refugees in the south, which is devastated by war and famine.


E.D.S. Set to Restore Cash-Machine Network
The Electronic Data Systems Corporation said today that it expects to restore full service Friday to 5,200 automated teller machines shut down nearly two weeks ago when one of its computer centers was disabled by a huge snowstorm.
E.D.S. has also covered $50 million worth of cash withdrawals made through alternate A.T.M. networks while its network was not fully operational, according to people familiar with the arrangements.


Art in Review
Adam Fuss
Robert Miller Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through tomorrow
In his newest pictures, Adam Fuss continues to explore variations on the photogram process, arranging rabbits' entrails on large sheets of color photographic paper and exposing them to light.
In the resulting images, the stringy forms of the entrails appear in bruiselike purples, reds and yellows; in some cases, acids from the rabbits' organs have eaten into the paper, causing other colors to appear.


Review/Theater; To Manipulate Men, First Go for the Heart
Despite the intimations of innocence in her name, the title character in "Candida" is wise to the ways of men.
She knows exactly how far she wants to carry a challenge or a seduction.
Both her husband, the Rev.
James Morell, and Eugene Marchbanks, adore her.
The play does not have the thematic texture of works like "Heartbreak House" or "Misalliance." Rather, it is a brief but loquacious study of a romantic imbalance between the loved and the loving.
It is also, of course, a case history of a Shavian-style feminist.
Although her time on stage is limited, Candida is always the subject of the conversation.
In her absence, Morell and Marchbanks talk about her and argue about her.
The play dawdles until she appears, a woman introduced in Shaw's stage directions as someone "who has found that she can always manage people by engaging their affection." In her home, Candida is the quietly efficient managing director.


AMERICAN HOME BUYS UNIT OF DUTCH COMPANY
A unit of the American Home Products Corporation, which makes Chef Boy-Ar-Dee pasta and Jiffy Pop popcorn, said yesterday that it had acquired M. Polaner, a fast-growing jam, jelly and spice producer from Dutch-based Artal N.V.
Terms were not disclosed.
Polaner, based in Roseland, N.J., had revenue of $65 million last year and is the nation's third-largest jam and jelly producer after the J. M. Smucker Company and the National Grape Cooperative, which markets under the Welch's brand.


Corrections
A film review on Tuesday about "Tito and Me," in the series New Directors/New Films at the Museum of Modern Art, omitted the name of a co-director in a brief appraisal of the short "When I Was a Boy." He is William Todd Field.


Insurers Cited on Barring Rebates
The insurance commissioner of California accused three large insurance companies yesterday of violating a state law that allows insurance agents to rebate part of their commissions to customers.
The controversial practice of rebating has been advocated by consumer groups as a way to reduce prices and increase competition.


Parents in Bridgeport Seek a Solution to Growing Violence


CHRONICLE
NAURA HAYDEN, the author of "How to Satisfy a Woman Every Time" (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton), is going to speak about her book at 3 P.M. on April 3.
At the Pleasure Chest?
No, at the Brooklyn Public Library's central library at Grand Army Plaza.
When speaking, she says, she's "a prude." She will answer questions and talk about why women think they're frigid when in truth they are not.
She will not explain aloud the technique that she writes about in detail in the book. (Why the library? Her book is on the shelves.)


I.B.M. Said to Be Ready To Hire Nabisco's Chief
I.B.M. plans to announce today that Louis V. Gerstner Jr. will become chief executive of the struggling computer giant, according to a person familiar with the search.
Mr.
Gerstner, 51, who is chairman of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation, would be the sixth chief executive in the 79-year history of the International Business Machines Corporation, and the first picked from outside the company's ranks.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend  "SOPHISTRY," Playwrights Horizons, 416 West 42d Street, Clinton.
Drama about a college professor accused of sexual harassment.
Directed by Jonathan Marc Sherman.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M., and Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $5.
Information: (212) 279-4200.
"THE VIEW FROM HERE," Lamb's Little Theater, 130 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
A comedy by Margaret Dulaney, with Angelina Fiordellisi, Lily Knight, Adam Lefevre and Tudi Roche, directed by Matt Williams.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M., and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 997-1780.
"TOUCHING INTERIORS: THE PRINTS OF MARY CASSATT"; "DARKNESS AND LIGHT: 20TH-CENTURY PRINTS FROM SWEDEN"; "THE LEGACY OF WHISTLER: AMERICAN PRINTS FROM THE COLLECTION," National Academy of Design, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street.
Through Saturday.
Hours: Today, noon to 8 P.M.; tomorrow, noon to 5 P.M.
Tickets: $3.50, $2 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 369-4880.
DANCE THEATER OF HARLEM, New York State Theater.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8 P.M.; tomorrow, 2 and 8 P.M., and Sunday, 1:30 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $50.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
Closing Next Weekend  "THE FREE ZONE," Ubu Repertory, 15 West 28th Street, Chelsea.
A drama about a Jewish family seeking refuge in unoccupied France during World War II, by Jean-Claude Grumberg; directed by Francoise Kourilsky.
Through April 4.
Performances: Tuesday through Saturday at 8 P.M.; Sundays at 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $18.
Information: (212) 679-7562.


Let's Forget Sexes and Think of Handedness; A Lifetime Continuum
To the Editor:
Further to "How Many Sexes Are There?" (Op-Ed, March 12): In the book "The Sexual Continuum," the British geneticist Winston Holt notes that all of us fall between two continuum terminals: the complete heterosexual and the complete homosexual, with the true bisexual at the center.


Bertram Selverstone Is Dead at 76; Educator Advanced Neurosurgery
Dr.
Bertram Selverstone, professor emeritus of neurosurgery at Brown University, died Saturday at his home in Boston.
He was 76 and also had a home in Providence, R.I.
Professor Selverstone was best known for his work with radiotherapy to localize brain tumors and surgery to control cerebral aneurysms, the bulging of the wall of a blood vessel often caused by hardening of the arteries or high blood pressure.
He invented a device known as the Selverstone Carotid Clamp that is used to control the flow of blood through the carotid artery.


Restaurant Chain Settles Charges of Racial Bias
Denny's, one of the nation's largest restaurant chains, said today that it had reached agreement with the Justice Department to settle Federal charges that it had discriminated against black customers in California by requiring some to pay cover charges and to pay for their meals in advance, among other practices.
Under a consent decree that still requires approval of a Federal court in San Francisco, Denny's admitted no wrongdoing.
But it agreed to put an end to all practices in question and undertake a program to insure fair treatment of all customers, regardless of their race.


Installing a Shadow-Maker


Marlins: Can They Swim With Sharks?
You think expansion, you think '62 Mets. Of course.
It is an image that will not go away, probably not ever.
In their first season, those Mets lost 120 games in an endless summer.
They were equal parts laughable and pitiful and even spawned Marv Throneberry, whose name alone seemed to define their ineptitude.


Review/Pop; Folk Singing That's Beyond Folksy
"You know what this is?" said Carolyn Hester to Nanci Griffith just before the two Texas-born folk singers began a jaunty version of Tom Paxton's "Can't Help but Wonder Where I'm Bound." "It's the first annual Nanci Griffith Folk Festival at Carnegie Hall!" Ms.
Hester's cheerful declaration may have been meant as hyperbole, but it came close to the truth.
Celebrating the release of her new album of favorite folk songs, "Other Voices, Other Rooms" (Elektra),Ms.
Griffith welcomed musical legends and a few exceptional newcomers, orchestrating an evening on Thursday that will surely be remembered as a 1990's folk music landmark.
Carnegie Hall's genteel atmosphere suited Ms.
Griffith's tribute to her own genre.
In the 1960's, when Ms.
Griffith first heard Ms.
Hester's voice emanating across the Austin, Tex., radio waves, folk music had been claimed by college students and bohemians.
A glance at Ms.
Griffith's audience confirmed that the lovers of her simple wisdom were not working-class heroes (those folks prefer Billy Ray Cyrus), but sophisticated urbanites who treat Americana as an esthetic, not a personal, heritage.


Rangers Get Boos, And Not 2 Points
Some fans booed and jeered the Rangers as they left the ice tonight at Madison Square Garden, a reaction as understandable as it was unfair.
They had lost to the Chicago Blackhawks, 3-1, in a first-rate, rugged game that had almost anything an objective hockey fan would pay to see.
But it's hard for local fans to be objective when the home team is slumping and losing its grip on a Stanley Cup playoff berth.
It was the Rangers' second consecutive defeat and the fourth loss in their last five home games.


Corrections
Articles on Wednesday and in some editions on Thursday about Rupert Murdoch's efforts to repurchase The New York Post misstated the reason Mr.
Murdoch's company, the News Corporation, is a Post creditor.
The News Corporation is liable under The Post's multi-employer pension plan, which expires June 1.
The liability does not result from a newsprint sale, though The Post did once buy newsprint from another Murdoch newspaper.


A Business That Repairs Equipment Damaged in Disasters
In a society that often discards items too quickly, the Relectronic Service Corporation of Totowa is something of a rarity.
It repairs, cleans and restores, electronic and other equipment that was scheduled for the scrap heap after being damaged in fires, floods or other disasters.
Max Klepp, president of Relectronic since its founding 12 years ago, says the amount of resources being thrown away in today's technological world is a "disgrace."


Close Shave Belongs to Carolina, Not Cincinnati
The University of North Carolina advances to the Final 8. So what else is new?
No upsets here, but what a game it was.
Unimpressed by the top-seeded Tar Heels, the Arkansas Razorbacks gave North Carolina quite a fight.
But in the end, the Tar Heels didn't make mistakes and the Razorbacks did.
The result was an 80-74 North Carolina victory tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Tar Heels advanced to the Eastern Regional final against Cincinnati, a 71-54 winner over Virginia.
The final matches the No. 1 and No. 2 teams.





Classical Music in Review
Orchestra of St. Luke's Avery Fisher Hall
Roger Norrington gave his Sunday-afternoon concert with the Orchestra of St.
Luke's a quaint name: "Dr. Haydn's London Academy." The honorific referred to Haydn's honorary doctorate, conferred by Oxford in 1791; indeed, the concert ended with Symphony No. 92, which is nicknamed for the university.
The rest of the program was a grab bag of songs, a chamber piece, a march, a cantata and another symphony, all in the style of the concerts (or academies) over which Haydn presided during his London visits.
In both his program notes and his spoken comments, Mr.
Norrington hastened to add that the concert was by no means a re-creation of one of these sprawling London performances but merely a glimpse of 18th-century practice.
He deployed the violins antiphonally, and he split Symphony No. 99 in half, with a Cantata interposed between the Adagio and the Menuet.
And he encouraged the audience to applaud between movements (but not during them, as was also the practice of the time).
The audience cheerfully complied, and not without reason.


Two Nour Foundations
To the Editor:
Re "Islamic Art Collection Suffers Unfair Attack" by Nasser D. Khalili (letter, Feb. 27):


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about military resistance to President Clinton's proposals to allow homosexuals in the military misstated the date of a gay rally scheduled for Washington.
It is April 25, not April 23.


Random Shootings on Capital's Streets
Frightened and angry residents of two neighborhoods in this crime-ridden city have begun hanging warning posters and locking themselves in their homes at night after the police announced that someone armed with a shotgun had been cruising the streets in a car and randomly shooting pedestrians.
In the last month four people have been wounded, one fatally, in this way while taking casual evening walks near their homes, the police said Wednesday at a news conference called to alert residents to the attacks.


Inquiry Focuses on Bomb Suspect's Iterrogation
While in custody in Egypt, Mahmud Abohalima, a prime suspect in the World Trade Center bombing, gave the authorities information about the conspiracy that may help the investigation, Federal officials said yesterday.
They said the State Department, hoping to answer questions about possible foreign involvement in the attack, has sought a summary or transcript of Mr.
Abohalima's interrogation during the 10 days or so he was held before being turned over to American agents on Wednesday for a flight back to the United States.
But Mr.
Abohalima's lawyer said any information from his client had been extracted by torture and was unreliable.


Haiphong Journal; With Aid Gone, a Once-Bustling Port Turns Quiet
Vietnam's largest port, until a few years ago backed up with ships waiting to be unloaded and masters and shipping agents angry over costly delays, stands nearly idle.
Only three or four in the long row of berths are occupied; stacks of empty containers await cargoes that do not come or go.
"The port is a victim of the end of the Soviet Union and the other socialist states," Nguyen Van Nha, the deputy harbor master, said.
He was interviewed in the stillness of what was once a bustling flight of offices at dockside.


Mr. Perot, You're No Pollster
Ross Perot may be a great American and a great businessman, but as a pollster he is a failure.
His televised national referendum on NBC on Sunday was a textbook case of what not to do if you want to know what the nation thinks.
For years, professors will compare the results of Mr.
Perot's referendum on government reform to scientific polls so students can see what happens when loaded questions are asked of an unrepresentative group of Americans.
Some will likely call the results an "unscientific poll." That is an oxymoron.
Ignore those results: The referendum is just plain wrong.


Gay Groups Warn President Not to Retreat on Lifting Ban
Leaders of gay rights organizations warned White House officials at a meeting today that unless President Clinton better demonstrates his support for homosexuals in the military, a gay and lesbian march on Washington next month would turn into an embarrassing protest.
The meeting came as organizations of homosexuals that provided enthusiastic support for Mr.
Clinton in last year's campaign were threatening to withhold political and financial support from the Democratic Party.


South Africa's Unexploded Bombs
A repentant South Africa has become the first nation to ban the Bomb after building it.
The Government says it has destroyed all six of its atomic bombs -- and halted work on a seventh.
If that is an accurate account, the action could help keep all of Africa nuclear-free, a stated aim of the white minority Government in Pretoria.
South Africa says it dismantled the arms because it felt less menaced with the waning of the cold war.
But the white leadership was no doubt motivated as well by reluctance to let its nukes fall into the hands of a successor black government.
Either way, South Africa has provided a hopeful precedent for preventing the spread of nuclear arms as political and social structures change radically around the world.


Can Giants Make the Catch?
The Giants continued their quest yesterday to re-sign one wide receiver, Stephen Baker, and sign another, Mike Sherrard of the San Francisco 49ers.
Both are unrestricted free agents.
Sherrard has already met with Giants coaches at Giants Stadium, and Harry Hulmes, the assistant general manager, said he talked yesterday with Jeff Moorad, one of Sherrard's agents.
Hulmes said he could not tell if a signing was close.


At RJR, Two Heads Will Act as One
Within an hour of I.B.M.'s naming Louis V. Gerstner Jr. as its chief executive yesterday, RJR Nabisco Holdings, the giant consumer products company where Mr.
Gerstner had served in the same capacity, elevated two executive vice presidents to replace him, an unusual but not unique succession in Corporate America.
Lawrence R. Ricciardi, the company's general counsel, and Carl von der Heyden, the chief financial officer, will jointly operate as chief executives and chairmen from a newly created office of the chairman, presumably continuing the programs Mr.
Gerstner began in 1989 when he left American Express to join RJR after it was acquired in a $25 billion leveraged buyout led by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company -- the largest such buyout in history.
Continuity Is Stressed
While Mr.
Gerstner's successors will retain their current responsibilities, they said in a joint interview yesterday that they expected a seamless transition leading to separate lines of command with Mr. von der Heyden in charge of line operations and Mr.
Ricciardi directing staff activities.


Of 3 Arkansas Pals and a Raccoon Roast
One of the most important friendships in Washington today is the quiet alliance of three former Arkansas Governors who all ended up working on Pennsylvania Avenue: President Clinton, Senator David Pryor and Senator Dale Bumpers.
Theirs is a unique bond.
It was forged on the rubber-chitterlings circuit of Arkansas politics, it survived their once reckless pursuit of a roasted raccoon and it thrives today with Mr.
Bumpers and Mr.
Pryor serving as Mr.
Clinton's eyes and ears on the Senate floor.
That is, when the three Democrats are not in the White House living room tuning in Arkansas basketball games via the President's satellite dish.


Price Leads By 2 Shots As Course Plays Easy
Strafing a defenseless golf course as if he were manning one of the fighter jets he has always longed to fly, Nick Price continued his record pace today, taking a two-stroke lead after two rounds of The Players Championship.
Price shot a four-under-par 68 over a rain-softened Stadium Course at the TPC Sawgrass for a 36-hole total of 12-under-par 132.
It is the lowest halfway total ever shot in the 12 years this course has been host to the tournament, surpassing the 133 total posted by Steve Jones and Mark O'Meara in 1987.


Critic's Notebook; Even When Life Is Hard, It Can Resemble a Sitcom
If any doubts still exist that the line between reality and sitcoms is as porous as the Mexican-United States border, they should be laid to rest by two running or stumbling stories that have been occupying the local press and television news in recent weeks: the New York Post farce and the Woody Allen-Mia Farrow opera.
Like other upscale sitcoms, these entertainments are not just jokes.
The lives of some of the players have already been battered, and the outcomes will affect the jobs and reputations of others.
But sympathetic though one must be to the pains of the children in the Allen-Farrow dispute and the predicament of the working stiffs at The Post, the laughs keep coming; it's just like prime time.


INSIDE
Big U.N. Force for Somalia
The United Nations approved its most ambitious peacekeeping operation, voting to send some 30,000 soldiers and civilians to Somalia.
Page 3.
A Jew as German President?
German politicians and commentators are suggesting that the leader of the country's principal Jewish organization run for President.
Page 3.
School-Work Plan Rejected
New York's Board of Regents refused to adopt a proposal that would have required all high school students to work before they graduate.
Page 23.
Breaking Gridlock on Forests
Last fall President Clinton said it was possible to protect jobs and forests, and next week in Oregon he will be asked to prove it.
Page 6.


Classical Music in Review
Zeena Parkins  Avant-Garde Harpist  Roulette
Zeena Parkins, the avant-gardist who has reinvented the harp, was scheduled to present her electronically enhanced reconstruction of "La Mer" at Roulette in December, but the weather dictated otherwise.
On Monday night, she went ahead as planned, with Elizabeth Panzer also on harps, David Weinstein on electronic keyboards, Jim Staley on trombone, David Shea wielding turntables and Ikue Mori on drum machines.
Ms.
Parkins took off from "La Mer" more than she used it.
The synthesizer, trombone and harps set forth extended fragments of the Debussy composition, but the electronic element had a mind of its own.
What the players preserved was the work's give-and-take between spacious atmosphere and upheaval: its tidal motion.
Upheaval was Ms.
Mori and Mr.
Shea's territory; classical fragments contrapuntally slid over each other (Strauss's "Don Quixote," for example); percussive riffs were layered to create a rhythmic as well as harmonic impressionism.
By virtue of his sampling virtuosity and also sheer volume, Mr.
Shea became the star of the show: this was a concerto for turntables with Debussy obbligato.


U.N. WILL INCREASE TROOPS IN SOMALIA
The Security Council agreed today to set up the largest, most expensive and most ambitious peacekeeping operation it has ever undertaken when it voted to send some 30,000 soldiers and civilians to Somalia to complete the disarming of its warring factions, feed starving people, promote reconciliation and start rebuilding that African nation.
The new operation also marks the first time that the Secretary General of the United Nations has taken overall control of a peacekeeping force with specific orders to use all the force necessary to accomplish its mission under Chapter 7 of the United Nations Charter, which permits the Council to enforce its orders.


Ending Its Secrecy, White House Lists Health-Care Panel
After much criticism of the secrecy surrounding the work of his health policy team, President Clinton today abandoned his effort to conceal the names of more than 500 people who are developing his proposal to guarantee health insurance coverage for all Americans.
With the names of many of those people having already circulated around Washington, the White House acknowledged that its effort to keep the identities secret had failed, and it reluctantly issued a listing of all 511 staff members of the health-care task force.  [ The list appears on page 8. ]


C.A.A. to Help French Bank Make It in Show Business
Like many others in Hollywood, Credit Lyonnais, the giant French bank, has hired Michael Ovitz's powerful Creative Artists Agency.
But unlike those who want movie roles, Credit Lyonnais is seeking help managing its troubled $3 billion portfolio of entertainment and media loans.
It also wants the talent agency to explore investment possibilities.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in The Home Section on Thursday about the Havemeyer mansion referred incorrectly to Alice Cooney Frelinghuysen, an associate curator at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
She is related by marriage to the Havemeyer family, not to the Tiffany family.


I.B.M.'s New Leader; Task of Turning Around I.B.M. Is Given to an Industry Outsider
I.B.M. officially named Louis V. Gerstner Jr. as its chairman and chief executive yesterday, after a two-month search that led the troubled computer giant's board to conclude that it needs a risk-taking business strategist, like Mr.
Gerstner, not a seasoned technology expert.
By placing its uncertain future and corporate America's biggest challenge in the hands of Mr.
Gerstner, the chairman of RJR Nabisco Holdings and a computer industry outsider, I.B.M. has defined its course: to accelerate the evolution of a corporate empire into a loose confederation of more nimble, entrepreneurial businesses.


Preservation Panel Slams Two Deviant Windows Shut
FOR ROBERT Bernstein the boiling point came when he stood before the Landmarks Preservation Commission last month and heard there was nothing to discuss or negotiate, that he simply had to remove and replace the nonconforming windows in his kitchen.
That is when Mr.
Bernstein, the 70-year-old former chairman of Random House and the founder of Human Rights Watch, got good and mad and decided he was not going to take it anymore.


A Good Year So Far for Stock Categories
Stock funds are showing signs of the rally fueled by the new Administration in Washington -- of the laggards, three of the five stock fund categories will earn stocks' historic annual return of 10 percent by keeping up this pace through 1993.
The two best performers, real estate and financial services funds, continue to reap the benefit of falling interest rates and a still growing, albeit slowly, economy.
Gold, which has performed notoriously poorly lately, now reflects political turmoil in the former Soviet Union and supply problems, because that region is one of the biggest gold producers.
Pacific region funds show the strong influence of growth in China.


Fear and Anger as Mia Farrow Is Cross-Examined
Battle lines hardened and tempers quickened in the Woody Allen-Mia Farrow custody trial, on what may be remembered as the day of the broken legs.
Mr.
Allen's laawyer, Elkan Abramowitz, questioned Ms.
Farrow for a second day, sharpening his attack and picking up the pace.
Often cutting off her attempts to elaborate, he tried to portray her as eager to hit Mr.
Allen up for millions in a settlement agreement after hearing a report from her baby sitter that Mr.
Allen had abused the couple's adopted child, Dylan O'Sullivan Farrow.
He also pursued a line of questioning aimed at showing that she was determined to manipulate the outcome of any investigation of abuse, and to damage Mr.
Allen through strategic leaks to the news media.


CHRONICLE
"Should I be incredibly nervous or incredibly happy?" MARK SELIGER mused yesterday.
"This is my dream come true." He was referring to his being named chief photographer for both Rolling Stone and US magazine by Jann Wenner, chairman of Straight Arrow Publishers.
Mr.
Seliger is only the second chief photographer in the 25-year history of Rolling Stone, after Annie Leibovitz, who moved on to Vanity Fair in 1983.


Everybody Say 'AIDS,' Everybody Say 'Benefit'


A Perfectionist Is the Perfect Choice
JEFF Hostetler tugged at his cap, the new black one with R-A-I-D-E-R-S in raised silver letters across the front, and snapped his fingers.
"I realize that after nine years in the N.F.L. that nothing is permanent and nothing is forever," said Hostetler yesterday in his introductory news conference as a Raider, at the team's complex.
"Things can change just like that."


A Prudent Approach to Student Work
Should high school students be required to work as a condition of graduation?
New York State's Board of Regents has been considering this controversial issue for nearly two years.
There is much to recommend the idea, but with prudence the Regents are moving slowly.
The impulse to impose a work requirement has been driven, at least in part, by recent studies emphasizing the need to improve the skills of American workers.
Beyond basic literacy, employers require workers who know how to solve problems, master information systems, manage resources and work as part of a team.


Russian Reformer Picked As the Finance Minister
The young, pugnacious Russian Deputy Prime Minister named today as Finance Minister, Boris Grigoryevich Fyodorov, was brought into the Government only in December, after President Boris N. Yeltsin was forced to abandon the architect of his economic reforms, Yegor T. Gaidar.
Mr.
Fyodorov, 35 years old and fluent in English, has had considerable banking experience in the Soviet Union and in the West, where he worked for both the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the World Bank.
His inclusion in the Government of the new Prime Minister, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, was the best indication that Mr.
Gaidar's efforts at radical economic reform would not be abandoned.
Western countries and multilateral institutions were also relieved to have someone they knew so well at the heart of Russian economic policy.


Tirades and Sympathy
Why does someone remember a cabbie in New York City?
If you use a wheelchair, there is a bit of business involved in taking a cab.
The moments of loading and unloading often establish a personal connection.
In my life, cabbies distinguish themselves by being either rude and unhelpful or sympathetic and righteous.
Mahmud Abohalima was one of the latter.
Today, he is one of the suspects in the World Trade Center bombing.
When I saw the pictures in the newspapers, it was the freckles I remembered.
His schoolboy nose and reddish-blond hair made his tirades that much more memorable.
He had a squeaky, raspy voice.
He drove like a power tool carving Styrofoam.
He was just like most New York cabbies, but he was the one who stopped.


Homosexuals in the Military: What the President Said
This is the exchange at President Clinton's news conference on Tuesday regarding homosexuals in the military:
Q.
Mr.
President, you seem to be having some difficulty with the Pentagon.
When you went to the U.S.S.
Theodore Roosevelt, the sailors there were mocking you before your arrival even though you are the Commander in Chief.
The services have been undercutting your proposal for permitting gays to be in the military.
There's been no Pentagon creation of the task force that was supposed to be created.
The hearings are to start a week from now, and Congress has not gotten any advice from the Pentagon or from the services as to what to propose.
Do you have a problem, perhaps because of your lack of military service or perhaps because of issues such as gays in the military, in being effective in your role as Commander in Chief?
And what do you propose to do about it?
A.
No.
No, I don't have a problem being Commander in Chief.
You knew they -- you knew that a lot of the service officers disagreed with the position on gays in the military before I ever took office.
The Secretary of Defense has not been in the best of health.
I think he is either fully recovered now or on the verge of it.
And I asked him to give me a report on June the 15th.


A Venture for the Two Michaels
Michael R. Milken, one of the world's most infamous financiers, claims to have the backing of Michael Jackson, one of the world's most famous entertainers, to form an interactive educational television network, a spokeswoman for Mr.
Milken said today.
Whether the backing of Mr.
Jackson will be financial or creative remains unclear, and a spokesman for the singer said today that he could not comment on the arrangement because no deal had yet been reached.


Clinton Plans to Use Diplomacy to Pressure Serbs
President Clinton said today that the United States intended to rely for now on economic sanctions and diplomatic pressure to get the Bosnian Serbs to accept a proposed peace plan, even though Bosnia's Muslim President told him this morning that without some arms aid his country would not survive much longer.
Mr.
Clinton spoke to reporters after talks with the German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl.
Earlier in the day, the two leaders met with Bosnia's President, Alija Izetbegovic, who was also at the White House today for talks with Vice President Al Gore.


License Renewal Blues
To the Editor:
"Something Works" (Topics of The Times, March 15) describes getting a driver's license in 17 minutes in the Yonkers office of the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles.
The system may work in Yonkers, but not in Manhattan.
Last Oct. 20, I went to the Lower Manhattan office to renew my license.
I joined a huge line of people at 11:30 A.M.
I got my forms approved at 2:45 P.M.
I had waited long in the past, but this was the longest wait yet.
And the help and courteous treatment received in Yonkers was not on hand in Manhattan that day.
P.
L.
THOMAS New York, March 16, 1993


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the first public hearing before Hillary Rodham Clinton's health care panel, set for Monday, described the arrangements incompletely.
Witnesses representing organizations of doctors, hospitals, insurers and others will be given three minutes each to present their views, but will then be questioned in groups by the panel for up to 45 minutes.


Clinton, Planning Forest Conference, Hopes to Free Logjam in Northwest
When President Clinton sits down next week with the warring factions in the Pacific Northwest timber dispute, he will be trying to do something more than save a piece of original America larger than Massachusetts.
The April 2 forest summit conference here will be the Administration's biggest and perhaps most difficult attempt to make good on campaign assertions that it is possible to protect a rare natural resource without putting a lot of people out of work.
Voters in the Northwest, even in the timber counties, rejected Republican arguments last fall that the cost of environmentalism was too high.
Now, the victors are expected to deliver.


Classical Music in Review
American Composers Orchestra Carnegie Hall
Two older and starkly differing pieces were the points of interest at the American Composers Orchestra concert on Sunday afternoon.
Leo Ornstein's "Nocturne" from 1937 is a cinematic updating of the Impressionist tone poem.
Its use of winds, smooth waves of string writing and layered orchestrations go beyond Debussy's austerity and Ravel's lapidary cuteness, adding to them a certain openness and sentiment.
At the opposite end of the program was William Schuman's Ninth Symphony with its constant skirmishes between grim, sheetlike legato writing and the tiny frenetic phrases that agitate against them.
The clamorous finale leads to contemplation, but the rude interruptions never go away.
This work from 1969 remembers a World War II massacre in Rome and finds Schuman in his darkest mood.


A Business That Repairs Equipment Damaged in Disasters
In a society that often discards items too quickly, the Relectronic Service Corporation of Totowa is something of a rarity.
It repairs, cleans and restores, electronic and other equipment that was scheduled for the scrap heap after being damaged in fires, floods or other disasters.
Max Klepp, president of Relectronic since its founding 12 years ago, says the amount of resources being thrown away in today's technological world is a "disgrace."


Mason Puts Knicks In a Forgetful Mood
The Knicks did not have a full lineup tonight, but they had Anthony Mason.
They had Charles Oakley.
They had John Starks.
And the way those three played, they didn't need much help.
Scoring a career-high 30 points and grabbing 16 rebounds, Mason led New York to a critical 105-95 victory over the Los Angeles Lakers at the Forum.


Review/Film; Behind the Screens in a Chinese Restaurant
Setting his refreshingly candid "Combination Platter" in a Chinese restaurant, Tony Chan serves up many things that are not on the usual menu.
This film's events are seen through the eyes of Robert (Jeff Lau), an illegal immigrant from Hong Kong who works as a waiter in Queens.
Robert's desire for a green card gives the film its nominal impetus, but the real subject is the behind-the-scenes aspect of the restaurant's operation.
In the culture gap between occasionally rude American customers and deceptively dutiful Chinese workers, "Combination Platter" finds a rich and offbeat subject.
Whether it is following the fate of leftovers or glancing at the huge vat of MSG in the restaurant's basement, Mr.
Chan's film provides honest, often humorous glimpses of restaurant life.
Among the kitchen workers, who bicker playfully among themselves, a match between a Mandarin and a Cantonese is considered a mixed marriage.
Meanwhile, Robert and the other waiters are exposed to more radical differences as they deal with American customers, who miss an awful lot by not understanding Chinese.


Sun Sets on 3 From East In N.C.A.A. Tournament
Three of the five eastern teams were eliminated tonight from the National Collegiate Athletic Association's hockey tournament, with only Boston University and Maine remaining in the quarterfinal round.
Those two had first-round byes but will play here Saturday at the Centrum.
Northern Michigan, which beat Harvard, 3-2, in double overtime, will be B.U.'s opponent and Maine, No. 1 in the nation, will take on Minnesota.
The Golden Gophers defeated Clarkson, 3-2, in the second game of the Eastern Regional here while Brown lost to Minnesota-Duluth, 7-3, in the Western Regional at Detroit.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on the Media Business page on Monday about magazines aimed at Asian-American readers referred incompletely to the frequency of publication for one magazine, Transpacific.
The magazine, previously published every two months, now appears monthly.


Bridge
The semifinal stage of the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship began here this afternoon at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals, with two close battles in prospect.
In one match, Clifford Russell of Miami, , together with Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., Bjorn Fallenius of Manhattan and Mats Nilsland of Sweden, opposed Tony Kasday, Steve Sion, Billy Cohen, all of Las Vegas, Nev., Michael Seamon of Miami Beach and Ron Smith of Chicago.
After 16 deals Russell led Kasday by 31 imps.
In the other semifinal, Zia Mahmood and Michael Rosenberg, both of Manhattan, Chip Martel of Davis, Calif., Lew Stansby of Castro Valley, Calif., Hemant Lall of Houston and Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., opposed Howard Weinstein and Peter Nagy, both of Chicago, Dan Morse of Houston, John Sutherlin of Dallas, Tom Sanders of Nashville and Russ Arnold of Miami.
After 16 deals Zia led Weinstein by 16.


Good Time to Consider Retirement Contribution
THE April 15 tax deadline applies not only to filing returns and paying what is due to the Internal Revenue Service.
For some taxpayers it is also an opportunity to contribute to retirement plans, both for a current deduction and for long-term financial security.
"It is one of the very few sections of the law that allow post-Dec. 31 tax planning," said Peter Elinsky, a tax partner at KPMG Peat Marwick in Washington, referring to provisions covering individual retirement accounts, Keogh plans and simplified employee pension plans.
"I'm a big believer in them."


Bilingual Education Complicates Desegregation Suit in Hartford


A New Season for an Old Passion


A Work for Guitar In New York Premiere
The guitarist John Williams is to perform the New York premiere of "Nourlangie," a work for guitar, strings and percussion by the Australian composer Peter Sculthorpe, on Wednesday at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
The performance is part of a concert by the Australian Chamber Orchestra, conducted by Richard Tognetti.


Corrections
An article on March 4 about the World Trade Center explosion referred incorrectly to relocation discussions by one tenant, the Federal Home Loan Bank of New York.
The bank is considering a move from the center, but has made no decision.


Cease-Fire Is Reached in Bosnia, Says General Who Led the Way
The commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia said today that he had secured agreement on a cease-fire starting at noon on Sunday from the commanders of the Muslim, Croatian and Serbian forces fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The United Nations officer, Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon, said that on the basis of the cease-fire and other measures he had agreed to leave Srebrenica, a Muslim-held town in eastern Bosnia where he has spent much of the past three weeks in an effort to insure the safety of the Muslim population from advancing Serb forces.


U.S. Asks I.M.F. to Increase Aid To Russia and to Ease Conditions
The Clinton Administration, working to assemble a new aid package to help President Boris N. Yeltsin, has proposed that the International Monetary Fund greatly increase its assistance to Russia.
The Administration has also suggested that the I.M.F. ease some restrictions that blocked the delivery of much of the Western aid promised last year.


Construction Continues on Discovery Center in Central Park


And on Kohl's Agenda (or Was It Menu?)
It was a large moment in history: Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany, about 280 pounds, and President Clinton, hovering at last count somewhere above the 200 mark, meeting for the first time.
As the two great men sat posing for photographs in the Oval Office, they searched for a chitchat topic of mutual interest.


No Headline
"I've never been a person who plays it safe." -- LOUIS V. GERSTNER JR., who was named chief executive of I.B.M.  [ 45:5 ]


Review/Pop; Sade, a Minimalist With Maximum Effect
Soul music is so synonymous in many people's minds with performers like Aretha Franklin and Tina Turner, who let it all hang out, that quieter soul singers like Sade Adu are often dismissed as bland or anemic when the difference is more a matter of volume than of depth of expression.
Ms.
Adu, who opened a three-night engagement at the Paramount Theater on Monday evening leading her band Sade, is a genuine rarity in the world of pop-soul: a minimalist whose chosen musical turf is a fairly narrow stylistic area plucked from the past.


Sports of The Times; Last Cowboy Rides Again in Jersey
HOW familiar they seem, the Kentuckys and the Indianas, back on the brink of the Final Four.
Duke is absent, a temporary aberration, it would like to think.
There is precious little room for outsiders in the late stages of the national tournament, but there is one school, one "program," one coach, that always makes us feel as if spring has officially sprung.


Fiat Angered by Accusation of Slush Fund
Fiat S.p.A., Italy's biggest private company, reacted angrily today to accusations that it maintained an illegal slush fund and took part the country's widening corruption scandal.
Fiat headquarters in Turin issued a statement today in response to the news on Thursday that investigating magistrates had refused bail for two Fiat executives arrested in the scandal last month on the ground that they might tamper with evidence if freed.


Observer; Unmarried Doesn't Help
New York's most beloved unmarried couple were in court this week proving that unmarriage between consenting adults is not the paradise that the altar-shy may suppose.
Mia Farrow and Woody Allen, the quintessential modern New York couple, whose lives seemed so enviable for so long to so many, are now seen to be just like any embittered old married couple for whom it's all gone sour with age.


Memories of a Rough Winter Melt Away


A Costly Council Victory ($70 a Vote to Be Precise)
Andrew S. Eristoff, the Republican newly elected to the New York City Council, spent a record $343,711 -- or more than $70 a vote -- to win a special election last month on Manhattan's Upper East Side, campaign disclosure reports show.
The reports show that Mr.
Eristoff, a scion of the industrialist Henry Phipps, spent about $250,000 of his own money during the tight seven-way race to represent the Fourth District.


Reviews/Film Festival; A Girl Who Becomes a Boy, and Then a Woman
Srdjan Karanovic's "Virgina," said to be the last film to come out of a united Yugoslavia, is a grim tale of Serbian peasant life at the end of the 19th century, with particular reference to the status and nature of women.
The film will be shown in the New Directors/New Films series at the Museum of Modern Art tonight at 9 and tomorrow at noon.
"Better to be a rooster for one day than a hen all your life," Dostana, the exhausted farm wife, tells her child, who's called Stephen though actually a girl.
Stephen has her doubts, now that she's on the verge of womanhood.
The fourth daughter in a family without sons, she has been raised as a boy to save the family's reputation.


Miller Is Set To Introduce A Clear Beer
The Miller Brewing Company said yesterday that it would introduce a clear beer next week that was as filling as regular beer but as clear as water.
Miller will become the second major brewer to focus on growing consumer interest in translucent drinks.
Last fall, the Coors Brewing Company brought out Zima, a clear malt product said to have a slightly malty flavor that sets it apart from beer.


CHRONICLE
WYNONNA JUDD was in New York and New Jersey yesterday promoting eyeglass frames to help in the fight against hunger in the United States.
In September, the singer signed a licensing agreement with the Liberty Optical Manufacturing Company, based in Newark, to lend her name to a collection of eyeglass frames.
In turn, the company plans to donate $100,000 over the next two years to the Community Food Bank of New Jersey in Hillside, which distributes 40,000 pounds of food to 1,200 charities every morning.


One More for Clemens
The Boston Red Sox have extended the contract of their pitching ace, ROGER CLEMENS, for one year, through 1996.
General Manager LOU GORMAN said the club exercised an option in Clemens's contract, making the current deal a five-year package for the three-time American League Cy Young Award winner.


Herald Tribune Chief Is Named
Richard McClean, the deputy chief executive and chief operating officer of The Financial Times of London, will become the chief executive of The International Herald Tribune.
Katharine Graham and Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, co-chairmen of the international newspaper, announced the appointment in Paris.
Mr.
McClean, 55, is to succeed Lee W. Huebner, who has been publisher of The International Herald Tribune since 1979.
The newspaper, which is printed on three continents, is jointly owned by The New York Times Company and The Washington Post Company.


We Should Act in Bosnia for Humanity's Sake; A Callous Morality
To the Editor:
Re "There's No Oil in Bosnia" (Op-Ed, March 10) by Dimitri K. Simes:
What is surprising, apart from the appalling callousness of the article, is the egregiously erroneous conception of what morality is.
While Mr.
Simes may believe that the arguments for any engagement in the tragic Bosnian situation are "morally dubious" and that the United States has no "moral interest" in Bosnia, his presumption that America should not find a moral tragedy unfolding is sadly and gravely mistaken.
One must wonder what, if any, reasonable conception of morality he subscribes to.
It needs to be understood that what many Americans find outrageous about the situation is not merely due to emotionalism, but rather a clear sense that a large-scale affront to fundamental human rights, dignity and respect for life itself is taking place.


Police Officers Cleared In Upper West Side Death
Six police officers whose pursuit of a bank robber ended in his death and that of a femalehostage were cleared yesterday by a Manhattan grand jury.
The jury concluded that, in the face of gunfire, the officers' actions were justified.
The shootings stunned the Upper West Side neighborhood where they occurred and outraged the woman's relatives, who said the police failed to negotiate with the gunman.
It also led Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly to order a review of the Police Department's guidelines on hostage situations.


Peter Spina, 63, Dies; Vice President at Mobil
Peter A. Spina, vice president of public affairs for the Mobil Corporation at its headquarters in Fairfax, Va., died Wednesday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 63 and lived in Arlington, Va., and Bellmore, L.I.
He died of cancer, the company said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  RUSSIANS WORK ON A COMPROMISE
With the campaign to oust President Yeltsin collapsing, a special session of Russia's Congress of People's Deputies moved increasingly toward a compromise that would include new elections for President as well as the legislature.  1  MORE I.M.F.
AID TO RUSSIA SOUGHT
The Clinton Administration has proposed that the International Monetary Fund vastly increase its aid to Russia, to more than $10 billion a year, Western officials said.  1
Russia's pugnacious new Finance Minister is a fighter for reform.  5  CEASE-FIRE IN BOSNIA
The commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia secured agreement on a cease-fire starting at noon tomorrow from the commanders of the Muslim, Croatian and Serbian nationalist armies fighting the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.  1  U.S.
TO RELY ON PRESSURE ON SERBS
President Clinton said the United States intended to rely for now on economic sanctions and diplomatic pressure to get the Bosnian Serbs to accept a peace plan, even though Bosnia's Muslim President told him that without some arms aid his country would not long survive.  4
President Clinton and Chancellor Kohl find common ground: dinner.  4  THE PARADOX OF SANCTIONS
News Analysis: Sanctions imposed so far have ended up strengthening the Serbian leader, Slobodan Milosevic, and entrenching most Serbs in a dogged commitment to the war in Bosnia.  4  U.N.
TO SEND 30,000 TO SOMALIA
The United Nations Security Council agreed to set up the largest and most expensive peacekeeping operation it has ever undertaken, voting to send some 30,000 soldiers and civilians to Somalia.  3  A JEWISH PRESIDENT FOR GERMANY?
German politicians and commentators have begun suggesting that the leader of the country's principal Jewish organization, Ignatz Bubis, a Frankfurt real estate broker, run for President next year.  3  ENVOY IN BRITAIN TO BE RETAINED
In a move meant as a boost to the professional Foreign Service, Raymond G. H. Seitz, the career diplomat who is the American Ambassador to Britain, will be kept in the post, officials say.  3  VIETNAMESE PORT IN DECLINE
Haiphong Journal: Vietnam's largest port, until a few years ago backed up with ships waiting to be unloaded and masters and shipping agents angry over costly delays, now stands nearly idle.  2  National 6-9 HOMOSEXUALS WARN CLINTON
Advocates for homosexual rights warned that if President Clinton did not better demonstrate support for homosexuals in the military, a march on Washington next month would turn into an embarrassing protest.  1  THE ARKANSAS CONNECTION
Forged on the rubber-chitterlings circuit of Arkansas politics, the friendship of President Clinton, Senator David Pryor and Senator Dale Bumpers is among the most important alliances in Washington today.  1  SECRET IDENTITIES NO MORE
President Clinton abandoned his effort to conceal the names of more than 500 people charged with developing a new health-care policy for the nation.
The list, in full.  1  HOPING TO CLEAR-CUT A DISPUTE
The forest conference President Clinton is convening in Oregon will be the Administration's biggest and perhaps most difficult effort to show it is possible to protect a rare natural resource without putting a lot of people out of work.  6  PENTAGON PROPOSES WIDE CUTS
The Clinton Administration will propose a military budget of $263 billion for 1994, about $10 billion less than authorized in 1993, requiring wide cuts in troops and weapons systems, Pentagon officials said.  9  CARE ORDERED FOR HAITIANS
A Federal judge ordered the Administration to provide better medical care for the Haitian refugees with AIDS detained at the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.  9  I.B.M.
NAMES NEW CHIEF
I.B.M. officially named Louis V. Gerstner Jr. as its chief executive.
The former Nabisco executive must now accelerate I.B.M.'s evolution into a loose confederation of more nimble businesses.  1  RANDOM SHOTS IN WASHINGTON
Frightened residents of two Washington neighborhoods began locking themselves in their homes at night after the police said someone had been cruising the streets and randomly shooting pedestrians.  6  RULING ON WORKPLACE INJURIES
An administrative law judge issued a decision that significantly weakens the Government's ability to penalize companies whose workers develop repetitive stress injuries.  7  MORE SURPRISES IN OFFICERS' TRIAL
A highway patrol officer called by the defense in the trial of four Los Angeles police officers broke down in tears as she testified about the beating of Rodney King. 6  Metro Digest 23 HARTFORD'S FIGHT OVER GAMBLING
Louis Falco, choreographer.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  South Africa's unexploded bombs.
Prudent approach to student work.
No gay stockades, please.
Topics: Bus stop.
Letters  Russell Baker: Unmarried doesn't help.
Warren Mitofsky: Mr.
Perot, you're no pollster.
William J. Taylor: Cool off Korean tensions.
William E. Burrows: U.S. space grab.
John Hockenberry: Tirades and sympathy.


A Drawback to Serb Sanctions: They Don't Work
As the United States and its Western allies assess the possibility of tightening sanctions against Serbia in an effort to bring peace to Bosnia, they are confronted by a troubling paradox: The diplomatic measures taken up to now have ended up strengthening the Serbian leader, Slobodan Milosevic, and entrenching most Serbs in a dogged commitment to the war.
The signing on Thursday by Alija Izetbegovic, the leader of the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government, of a proposed international peace plan has left the Serbs as the only Bosnian faction that has not accepted it.
President Clinton has spoken of toughening trade sanctions against the Serbs, or lifting an arms embargo on the Bosnian Government forces, as a means to bring Serbian compliance.


'The Queen' on the Runway Again
In late June 1968, New York filmgoers had a clear choice.
They could watch John Wayne in "The Green Berets" or Sabrina, "the masterful mistress of ceremonies," presiding over the Miss All-America Camp Beauty Pageant in a documentary titled "The Queen." When cultural historians talk about the polarization of American society in the 1960's, this is the sort of thing that brings the point home.
"The Queen," which has been revived for a run through Thursday, caused a stir when it had its premiere.
It was America's first look at the subculture of drag, a dress rehearsal, so to speak, for "Paris Is Burning," the acclaimed 1991 documentary about the Harlem drag scene.


Farrow Says Daughter Became Distraught Over Allen's Relentless Attention
Mia Farrow testified yesterday that her 7-year-old daughter, Dylan, was so distraught over the relentless attention of her adoptive father, Woody Allen, that she frequently screamed, "Hide me! Hide me!" when he came to visit her, and twice locked herself in the bathroom to keep away from him.
In her second day of testimony in a custody trial in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, Ms.
Farrow portrayed Mr.
Allen as a father so obsessed he would "wrap himself around" the girl as they watched television, often ignoring his other children.
And she described the child as almost immobilized by the attention Mr.
Allen showered upon her.


First, Bring Troops Home From Europe
To the Editor:
Unfortunately, "A Guide for Pentagon Budget Cuts" (editorial, March 9), a seemingly comprehensive list of suggestions following a Congressional Budget Office report, does not cover a most glaring expense in the defense budget.
That is the astronomical cost of stationing 110,000 American service people and their dependents in Europe.
Although the numbers have been considerably reduced and we no longer pump as many billions of dollars a year into the German economy, we still donate huge amounts to Germany, which still has, despite all the difficulties attendant on absorbing the former East Germany, one of the leading economies in the world.


Judge Rejects U.S. Penalty For Repetitive Stress Injuries
An administrative law judge today significantly weakened the Government's ability to penalize companies whose workers develop repetitive stress injuries.
The judge, in Washington, threw out a fine imposed by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration because there is no Federal standard dealing with repetitive stress.


A Taster's Guide to Ale, Beer and Lager
To the Editor:
As president of a microbrewery in the shadow of Anheuser-Busch, the ultimate macrobrewery, I am writing to correct the following statement in "Miller, the Maker of Lite, Promotes a Heavier Ale" (Business Day, March 11): "Ale is made from the same ingredients as beer, but, because of differences in the brewing process, it has a slightly stronger, more bitter taste."
To say that ale is made from the same ingredients as beer is like saying that Chianti is made from the same ingredients as wine.
All ales are beers, just as all American lagers are beer.
Ales and lagers are types of beers, just as whites, reds and blushes are types of wines.


Treasuries In a Sharp Price Drop
The prices of Treasury bonds and notes plunged sharply yesterday, giving the strongest signal yet that the post-election rally in the bond market is over.
"I believe that we have seen the low in yields," said Robert D. Sbarra, a managing director who runs the trading desk at Carroll McEntee &amp; McGinley, a primary dealer in bonds.


No Gay Stockades, Please
Whether it was an off-the-cuff gaffe or a trial balloon doesn't much matter.
When President Clinton said he would consider a proposal to segregate homosexuals in the military, he entertained a foolish idea that would only foment the very hatreds it seeks to allay.
The President's waffling was rightly denounced by partisans on both sides of the controversy over whether gay men and women should be allowed to serve openly in the armed forces.
It's understandable that Mr.
Clinton would seek some way to escape the furor caused by his pledge to lift the ban on homosexuals.
But segregation -- by isolating gay soldiers in specified jobs or units or separate living quarters -- is both impractical and discriminatory.
The presumed value of such segregation is that it would reduce tensions between heterosexuals and homosexuals -- and relieve heterosexuals of the fear they might be viewed as sexual targets by members of their own sex.


Washington Signs With Seahawks And Waits
In less than a week, the Jets may have a very serious need to sign free-agent defensive end Reggie White.
That is because Seattle has tendered an offer sheet to the Jets' right defensive end, Marvin Washington, for a reported $3 million over three years.
The Pittsburgh Steelers also face a deadline next week.
That's because quarterback Neil O'Donnell signed an offer sheet yesterday with Tampa Bay for three years and $8.2 million, which would make him the highest-paid player in Buccaneer history.


Religion Notes
White House 'Ins'
Leaders of the nation's mainstream Protestant and Orthodox churches, virtual political exiles during the Reagan and Bush Administrations, returned to the White House this week for what they later described as a warm and friendly meeting with President Clinton.
The National Council of Churches, the umbrella group that arranged the meeting, had not had this kind of direct access to the White House since the Presidency of Jimmy Carter.
During the two intervening Republican administrations, representatives of the religious right, like the Rev.
Jerry Falwell and the Rev.
Pat Robertson, were far more likely to have the ear of the man in the Oval Office.


Raised Eyebrows in Silicon Valley
Silicon Valley's technologists are puzzling over how and whether a man like Louis V. Gerstner Jr. can parachute in and work a cultural transformation at the world's largest computer company.
The judgment here among the digerati, the professionals who have devoted their lives and careers to computers, is that the challenge facing I.B.M. has precious little to do with the financial turnaround that Wall Street is demanding.
What is really required, Silicon Valley executives say, is to remake a vast marketing organization into a technology-driven enterprise that can constantly reinvent itself.


New Oil-Skimming Ship Prepares for Next Spill
Four years and one day after the Exxon Valdez dumped 11 million gallons of oil into Prince William Sound in Alaska, the Pacific Responder steamed into position four miles off Sea Bright, N.J., unfurled its 1,300 feet of bright yellow rubber boom and lowered its 2,000-barrel-an-hour skimmer.
There was no oil in the choppy water; this was only a drill, the largest test so far of a nationwide network for oil-spill cleanup that is supposed to go into service this summer.
The drill began at 5 A.M.
Wednesday with a hypothetical collision 10 miles south-southeast of Ambrose light between a ship and a barge carrying 30,000 gallons of heavy fuel oil.
By that night, the drill planners said, the first tar balls would have been washing up on the beach.


I.B.M.'S NEW LEADER: Man in the News: I.B.M.'s New Leader; Overachiever Devoted to Change: Louis Vincent Gerstner Jr.
Louis Vincent Gerstner Jr. has been a no-nonsense overachiever since his high school days, according to friends and former colleagues, the sort of person who in both his personal and professional life seems to have set goals and rarely strayed from them.
Brilliant and steely, he is highly respected as a superb executive in the management-strategist mold that one might expect from a person who is a product of both the Harvard Business School and McKinsey &amp; Company, the blue-chip consulting firm.


Integration Is Issue of Language and Geography
The growth of Hartford's Puerto Rican population and the need to provide bilingual education for its children may be the ultimate complications in a landmark desegregation lawsuit that seeks to link the city's schools with suburban ones.
Almost half of Hartford's 25,400 schoolchildren are Puerto Rican, and in some elementary schools almost half the pupils sit in bilingual classes, where they are taught mathematics, science and other subjects in Spanish while they learn English.


Classical Music in Review
Music From Japan Festival  Asia Society
Japanese new music used to reach the West by way of so-called representative figures: more often than not, composers who mirrored Western rather than Eastern ideas.
Through recordings, and also projects like the annual Music From Japan festival, Western listeners have recently been getting a deeper picture.
This year's festival, which took place at the Asia Society last weekend, included a percussion recital by Sumire Yoshihara; a program devoted to the sangen, a three-string Japanese instrument vaguely resembling the banjo; a concert of compositions by Akira Miyoshi, and a tribute to John Cage, who imitated Japanese music and then influenced it in turn.
I attended the first two events.


Review/Theater; The Pride and the Pain Of a Man Burned by Racism
Matt Robinson's project in his new play, "The Confessions of Stepin Fetchit," is to recover history and provoke reflection.
Judging from the audience reaction during a discussion period after each performance, he succeeds; some people appear really exasperated.
Mr.
Robinson, a veteran writer and producer of "Sesame Street" and "The Cosby Show," is shrewd and economical in his one-act presentation of Lincoln Perry, the creator of the shiftless black comic character of 1930's films who was at first enormously popular and later, under assault from civil rights advocates, reviled.
Mr.
Robinson knew Perry in the last 20 years of his life, and he lets Perry tell his own story, bringing out amid a lot of laughter the intelligence, pride and sense of injury that gave the best Stepin Fetchit movie scenes their bite.


He'll Take Manhattan, A New Contract, Too
Two weeks have passed since Jim Abbott announced publicly that he wanted to stay with the Yankees beyond this year and possibly finish his career in New York.
But the club has still not begun negotiations with the pitcher and his agent.
Abbott said he was too consumed with baseball to be overly concerned about the situation.
Besides, George Steinbrenner will probably orchestrate final contract talks with Abbott and the owner has been back on the job for less than a month.
He has been too busy just being George, such as appearing on David Letterman's show Thursday.


New York City Faces Hanging Together or Hanging Separately
To the Editor:
Dismissing my proposal to give the boroughs more control of local services as a step backward into balkanization, as Joyce Purnick does in her March 6 Editorial Notebook, demonstrates cynical disregard for problems and concerns of average New Yorkers and ignorance of the inefficiencies of our $29 billion centralized post-Charter-reform government.
The course I propose is being followed in the corporate sector as centralized bureaucracies like I.B.M., General Motors and American Express are dismantled for more responsive structures that put the customer's needs before the bureaucrat's.
President Clinton similarly has put Vice President Gore in charge of an effort to streamline Government agencies to make them more responsive to people's needs.


The Courier Route: Fly for Less (But Leave Your Luggage at Home)
Last Summer, for a trip to England for his daughter Molly's graduation from Oxford, Howard Clark of Maitland, Fla., cut his airfare in half by flying as a courier.
Mr.
Clark had joined the International Association of Air Travel Couriers, an organization in Lake Worth, Fla., that helps match travelers with air express shipping companies needing couriers.
In exchange for paying for about half of the passenger's fare, shipping companies use a courier's luggage allotment to transport goods quickly, avoiding the comparitively slow process of freight shipment.
Here's how Mr.
Clark, his wife June and a daughter, Krysten, flew round trip to London for about $300 each.


Review/Dance; Couples on an Assortment of Quests
Dance Theater of Harlem pulled out the dramatic stops on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater, and the audience loved it.
The new program opened on a relatively quiet note with Glen Tetley's "Dialogues," a work that celebrates the sleek stretch of ballet bodies and the way the image suggests a kind of frozen flight.
It is a look made famous by Mr.
Tetley, and it reveals yet another facet of the Harlem dancers.
But "Dialogues" is not the best, most focused example of the style.
The ballet starts out on a high, almost summarizing note with a pas de deux danced by Christina Johnson and Eddie J. Shellman that is all stretch, soft lifts and floating turns, with moments in which the dancers seem drawn into the ground.
Sometimes pell-mell, sometimes still, the choreography introduces the ballet's second lead couple in an almost lapping way, now seen, now disappeared in a fluid skein of dance.


Nets, Petrovic Still Absent, Stall as Only 2 Cylinders Fire
The reality of Drazen Petrovic's absence hit the Nets big time tonight.
Without the injured shooting guard and his 28-point average against the Heat, the Nets became a two-man offensive team and thus a wire-to-wire victim of the Heat, 110-100, before 15,008 at Miami Arena.


Aaaand They're Off! Two More Candidates From Arkansas
Five weeks before the Kentucky Derby, the Loblolly Stable of Arkansas will attack on two fronts today in an attempt to take charge of the blurred class of 3-year-old thoroughbreds when it starts the favorites in two major prep races, the Jim Beam Stakes and the Rebel.
Tom Bohannan, who saddled Pine Bluff last year for his victories in the Rebel and the Preakness, will open the attack by sending out Prairie Bayou in a field of 10 colts in the $600,000 Jim Beam at Turfway Park near Cincinnati.
Then he will start Dalhart in a field of eight in the $125,000 Rebel Stakes at Oaklawn Park in Hot Springs, Ark.
Both horses are among the leading candidates in the wide-open campaign for the Derby on May 1.


Reuben Fine, American Chess Giant, Dead at 79
Reuben Fine, one of this country's greatest chess geniuses, a psychologist and the author of many books about chess and psychology, died last night at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 79 and lived in Manhattan. .
The cause was pneumonia that developed after a stroke, said his son, Benjamin.


Isaac Stern in Newark
Isaac Stern is to play violin sonatas by Mozart, Beethoven and Franck in a recital at 3 P.M. tomorrow in Symphony Hall in Newark.
The violinist is to be accompanied by Robert McDonald.
The concert, a 70th-anniversary benefit for the orchestra, will be followed by a dinner at the Newark Museum.
Concert tickets are $20 to $65; tickets that include the dinner are $350.
Information: (201) 624-8203.


Judge Orders Better Care for Haitians With AIDS
A Federal judge ordered the Clinton Administration yesterday to provide better medical care to the Haitian refugees with AIDS who are being held at the naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, either at the refugee camp itself or by evacuating them within 10 days.
The order puts the Clinton Administration in the awkward position of choosing between protecting the refugees' human rights and setting a politically unpopular precedent.
It forces President Clinton, who had proposed allowing the immigrants who tested positive for H.I.V. to enter the country, to deal again with the issue that backfired on him when Congress opposed the proposal.


Indiana Gets Lovelier Second Time Around
The pattern has developed just often enough in some of Indiana's finest basketball seasons that the people wearing cream and crimson in this town are clinging to the past for comfort.
Indiana (31-3) will meet Kansas (28-6) Saturday evening at The Arena for the Midwest Regional championship.
Indiana's first defeat this season was a 74-69 loss to Kansas Dec. 5.


History Calls Events at Wounded Knee a Battle
To the Editor:
William Kunstler attempts to rewrite history in "What Took Place at Wounded Knee" (letter, March 10).
The Battle of Wounded Knee took place in December 1890 and involved some 350 Indians.
Reputable sources place the number of Indian dead at 140 to 180, not 300.
This was a battle and not a massacre, in which 39 United States cavalrymen were wounded and about half as many killed.
The Battle of Wounded Knee was initiated when the Indians, supposedly surrendering to the troops, tried to conceal weapons among their blankets and other possessions.
As the cavalrymen were searching them for this contraband, the Indians' medicine man exhorted them to commence firing on the troops, telling them that his magic would protect them from the soldiers' bullets.


Business Digest
I.B.M.'s New Leader
I.B.M. officially named Louis V. Gerstner Jr. as its chairman and chief executive.
The former Nabisco executive must now accelerate I.B.M.'s evolution into a more nimble business.  [ Page 1. ]
Louis Gerstner is a no-nonsense overachiever who sets goals and rarely strays from them.
Man in the News.  [ 45. ]


Highway Officer Gives Tearful Testimony in Beating Case
A highway patrol officer, whose baton-swinging demonstration captivated jurors in last year's state trial of four police officers charged in the beating of Rodney G. King, broke down in tears today as she testified about a series of baton blows to Mr.
King's head.
"I saw the blood come out of the right side of his cheek," the officer, Melanie Singer, testified in the four officers' Federal trial on civil rights charges.
"I heard the driver scream. The driver then clasps both hands into his face as Officer Powell delivers another power swing."


Child-Abuse Conviction Of Woman Is Overturned
A New Jersey appeals court yesterday overturned the conviction of Margaret Kelly Michaels, who was accused of sexually abusing 19 children at a day-care center in Maplewood, and who was sentenced to 47 years in prison after a celebrated trial in 1988.
A three-judge panel ruled that Ms.
Michaels had been denied a fair trial when she was convicted on 115 counts of sexual abuse of the 3- to 5-year-old children in her care, said Robert Seidenstein, a spokesman for the state court system.


Alvin M. Binder, 63, a Lawyer Who Aided Jews Against Klan
Alvin M. Binder, a lawyer who fought Ku Klux Klan attacks on Jews in Mississippi and defended the man convicted of the serial murders of children in Atlanta, died yesterday at a hospital in Jackson, Miss., where he lived.
He was 63.
The cause was cardiac arrest and complications of diabetes, his family said.


RUSSIAN CONGRESS HINTS COMPROMISE ON NEW ELECTIONS
With the campaign to oust President Boris N. Yeltsin collapsing, a specially summoned Congress of People's Deputies moved today toward a compromise that would include new elections both for President and the legislature.
After two weeks of brutal maneuvering and clashes, nerves and tempers were taut, and the Kremlin rang with some of the bitterest invective yet in the drawn-out power struggle.


Did Coach Hit Players?
The longtime St.
Leo Coach, NORM KAYE, resigned after members of his team complained that he physically and mentally abused players, The Tampa Tribune reported yesterday.
Seven players told the newspaper that Kaye, 62, slapped the face of junior JOEY BRAUER on the first day of practice this season, and six players said sophomore DAVID MITCHELL was kicked in the stomach a month later.


Louis Falco, a Creator of Chic Dances, Dies at 50
Louis Falco, a former principal dancer with the Jose Limon Dance Company and an internationally known modern-dance choreographer, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 50.
The cause was AIDS, said Alan Sener, a personal assistant and former principal dancer in Mr.
Falco's company.


We Should Act in Bosnia for Humanity's Sake
To the Editor:
In "There's No Oil in Bosnia" (Op-Ed, March 10), Dimitri Simes admonishes the United States not to get involved in Bosnia because it is of no geopolitical importance to us.
The neighboring column by Anna Quindlen ("Gynocide") recounts in horrific details Serbian atrocities and tells us "it's about time to reconsider American military invervention."


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERIHOST PROPERTIES INC., Des Plaines, Ill., said it plans to renovate its 144-room Holiday Inn hotel in northwest Milwaukee this spring.
UNITED MISSOURI BANCSHARES INC., Kansas City, Mo., completed its previously disclosed acquisition of Farmers Bancshares of Abilene Inc.
UNUM CORP., Portland, Me., and Colonial Companies, Inc.
Columbia, S.C., announced they had completed their merger.


Negative Trends Dampen IBM Japan's Profit
In a sign that it can no longer escape the problems afflicting its parent company, IBM Japan said today that its net income tumbled 45 percent in 1992, its third consecutive decline.
Pretax earnings, hurt by a special restructuring charge, plunged 90 percent.
The Japanese subsidiary, which accounts for about a sixth of the revenues of the International Business Machines Corporation, has long been one of the company's biggest money makers.
Even now, it is not suffering the losses and sweeping employment cutbacks that I.B.M. is experiencing in the United States and Europe.


Q.&amp; A.
Bonds at Discount
If bonds are purchased at a discount, is this discount amortizable as tax-free interest, with no profit due at maturity?
ALICE GARELIK, North Bergen, N.J.
Municipal bonds purchased at an original issue discount have a built-in gain if the bond is held until maturity.
"The accrual is calculated at what the Internal Revenue Service refers to as the constant interest method," said Martin W. Harper, senior partner of Harper Associates, a Brooklyn accounting firm.
If the bond is sold for more than this assumed amount, a tax is due.


Casino Backers Raise the Ante In Connecticut
As a debate over casino gambling intensifies in the Connecticut Legislature, casino operators have begun one of the most sophisticated and expensive efforts ever undertaken in this state to win friends and influence the people who count.
Mirage Resorts, which has offered to build two casinos, in Bridgeport and Hartford, spent more than $92,000 last month alone on lobbying, public relations fees, expenses and entertainment, the largest one-month lobbying tab in recent history, if not ever, according to the State Ethics Commission.
An Advertising Barrage
That does not count the $382,000 the company committed for what it called an initial television advertising barrage (by Hal Riney, the high-priced and mellow-voiced creator of ads for Gallo Wines and of Ronald Reagan's "Morning in America" campaign) or the even subtler efforts and arguments that are harder to categorize.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.05
3.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.89
4.01
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.03
2.99
4.14
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.76
5.65
7.22
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.94
6.85
7.94
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.88
7.80
8.88
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.03
6.00
6.77
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Television; For Immigrants of Today, A Welcome or a Crackdown
This edition of "The Brokaw Report" makes an earnest attempt to present a balanced view of the impact on the United States of the surge of new immigrants, legal and illegal.
An hour is too short for much more than a sketch of so many-sided a subject, but it does get across the tension between the old ideal of America as a welcoming port for the needy and the increasing pressure to crack down on illegal aliens and restrict legal immigration, too.
Tom Brokaw finds examples of newcomers making it American-style in Chicago, where Koreans and Russians are generating new life in run-down neighborhoods.
The glimpse of Washington Heights, with its thousands of Dominicans, is less bright; the too-familiar ingredients are poverty, welfare, violence and drugs.
And in Storm Lake, Iowa, residents express hostility to recently arrived Laotians who have taken low-paid jobs in the town's big meat-packing plant.
To old-time Iowans it seems like exploitation and union-busting; to the newcomers, it is a step up.


Review/Dance; Mahler In Motion: (Surprise!) A Romp
The air crackled with excitement on Thursday night at a benefit gala for Dance Theater of Harlem at the New York State Theater.
To start, a judiciously chosen program showed the dancers at their best.
The company looks right at home on the large and formal State Theater stage, as expansive, regal and joyous as if it had been performing there forever.
To top it all off, there was the gracious Jessye Norman, glittering and glowing from the stage as she sang the score for Michael Smuin's "Songs of Mahler."
The Smuin work, set to music from "Des Knaben Wunderhorn" and "Songs of a Wayfarer," is unusual in the Mahler ballet repertory.
There are hints of the melancholy and fatalism that the composer seems to inspire in choreographers.
But Mr.
Smuin has created a playful, lyrically romantic romp that, drawing on the song texts for its moods, demands a high standard of academic dancing, unfailing clarity and a sensitivity to dramatic texture.
The work also uses most of the company's stars and many of its most promising newer performers.


Michigan and Temple in West Final
Chris Webber trash-talked to his own team tonight.
With fewer than 10 minutes remaining in a tight game against George Washington, Webber glared at the other members of Michigan's Fab 5 and announced, "Come on. We're playing like some girls."
It was no pick-me-up.
The No. 1-seeded Wolverines could not shoo away the No. 12 seeded Colonials until the final minute and won narrowly, 72-64.


Rijo Knows One Thing: He'll Be Staying Put
JOSE RIJO could not say how much richer he will become under his next contract, because there is no agreement yet on the numbers.
He could not say how much longer the contract would keep him in Cincinnati, because that number has not been decided, either.
All the right-handed starter could say yesterday was that his agreement in principle on a multiyear contract will give him exactly what he wants, even if he is not sure exactly what it will be.


Overcoming the Irritations of Romance
When a battle-of-the-sexes comedy has one combatant complaining that the other never caps the toothpaste tube, there's bound to be a shortage of new thinking.
That's the trouble with "The Opposite Sex," which means to present a series of droll dating tips but mostly falls flat.
That the movie's full title ("The Opposite Sex and How to Live With Them") is ungrammatical doesn't help at all.
As written by Noah Stern and directed by Matthew Meshekoff, the film tries to take a breezy look at the courtship of David (Arye Gross) and Carrie (Courteney Cox).
Egged on by their acerbic best friends (Kevin Pollak and Julie Brown), these two go through the usual motions, like meeting cute and breaking up, in somewhat dated fashion.
To keep itself afloat at all, the film relies on a series of gimmicks and interruptions that occasionally bring it close to Woody Allen territory.
"The Opposite Sex" is in deep trouble whenever it steps into the shadow of "Annie Hall."


Results Plus
GOLF Albus Leads Seniors Jim Albus of Oyster Bay, L.I., sank eight birdie putts, five on the back nine, to post a six-under-par 66 yesterday and grab a two-shot lead after the first round of the Senior PGA Doug Sanders Kingwood Celebrity Classic in Kingwood, Tex.
Albus, a tournament winner five weeks ago in Tampa, Fla., had a 32 on the back nine and didn't have a putt of more than 10 feet for his entire round. (AP) HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL Transit Tech Is Beaten The Cullinan twins, John (20 points) and Pat (10), combined for 30 points, 10 in the fourth quarter, to rally St.
Joseph's Collegiate Institute of Buffalo to a 62-48 victory over East New York Transit Tech of Brooklyn yesterday in the New York State Federation of Secondary Schools Class B semifinals at the Civic Center in Glens Falls.
It was the 21st straight victory for the Marauders (25-2), who trailed by as many as 11 points twice in the third quarter but outscored Transit, 24-4, in the final period.
Andre Riviera's 16 points was high for Transit (22-4), the B champion of the Public Schools Athletic League in New York City.
Norwich of Chenango County (28-0), the state Public High Schools Athletic Association champion made, it a clean sweep of New York City teams in the other Class B semifinal by eliminating Fieldston of Riverdale, 69-47, which was representing the Alliance of Independent Schools.
In the most onesided game of the day, St.
Raymond of the Bronx, the C.H.S.S.A. champion, assured itself of another shot at Walton of the Bronx, the P.S.A.L. champion, in tonight's championship game by taking a 41-25 halftime lead against Hempstead of Long Island and coasting to a 77-46 victory in the Class A semifinal.
Tyler Brown led all scorers with 16 points for St.
Raymond (22-6).
Hempstead finished 23-2.
SWIMMING Burgess Sets Records The Olympic silver medalist, Greg Burgess of Florida, set American and National Collegiate Athletic Association records for the second time in as many nights as he won the 400-yard individual medley last night at the 70th N.C.A.A. swimming and diving championships in Indianapolis.
Burgess, who lowered the American and N.C.A.A. record in the 200 medley race Thursday, won the longer medley event in 3 minutes 41.54 seconds to lower the mark of 3:42.23 set by David Wharton of Southern Cal.
Burgess, who won his silver medal in Barcelona, Spain, in the 200-meter medley, led from start to finish and was on a record pace all the way.
Meanwhile, top-ranked Stanford was well on its way to claiming a second consecutive team title.
The Cardinal head into today's seven final events with 385 points.
Michigan was second at 254 despite having its 200 medley relay team disqualified during the morning preliminaries. (AP) BOWLING Arnold Qualifies Dave Arnold won his final match last night to grab the leading qualifier spot at the $150,000 Long Island Open in Sayville.
Arnold and Mike Aulby battled closely before Arnold won, 258-202, in the final match to take the first spot with a 10,415 pinfall.
Arnold of Gilbert, Ariz., will need to win only one game in today's stepladder finals to capture his first Professional Bowlers Association title.
Aulby, an Indianapolis native who won his 21st title earlier this year in Las Vegas, Nev., finished with a pinfall of 10,347. (AP) SKIING Two Extend Streaks Katja Seizinger of Germany and Kjetil Andre Aamodt of Norway extended their winning streaks yesterday in Are, Sweden, and sent the battles for the Alpine skiing World Cup titles down to the final two races.
Seizinger, winning her second straight race, vaulted past Anita Wachter of Austria to take the lead in the women's overall standing by 14 points.
In the process, she added the super-giant slalom World Cup crown to the downhill title she won earlier.
Aamodt stretched his winning streak to three by taking the men's super-giant slalom, cutting Marc Girardelli's once commanding lead to 152 points.
Aamodt also won the super-G crown, his first World Cup title.
With two races left in the four-month World Cup season, Girardelli, Austrian-born but competing for Luxembourg, should have enough of a cushion to earn a record fifth overall World Cup title.
He has 1,319 points to Aamodt's 1,167. (AP)


Mutual Funds for Sale In Junk Mail and Ads?
IN the brave new world of mutual funds that the Securities and Exchange Commission envisions, investors will find solicitations for funds stuffed in their mailboxes along with other junk mail, and buying shares could be as easy as clipping a coupon from the daily newspaper.
Right now, investors can purchase shares only after receiving a prospectus, a legal document that describes the risks and costs of a fund.
But last week the S.E.C. proposed that an advertisement in a newspaper or magazine, or contained in a mailing, could serve as the prospectus, with a coupon with which investors could mail in investments.


Laughter Is in Air. 3-Pointers Are, Too.
The news here from the Southeast Regional is that Kentucky is simply having a wonderful time and that the Wildcats look just marvelous, too.
Kentuckians by the thousands have taken over the streets.
Jamal Mashburn has seized the moment.
And the Wildcats have the Final Four almost in their grasp.
For those potential recruits watching on television in urban centers and on back country roads across the country, Rick Pitino has a special message just for you.


We Should Act in Bosnia for Humanity's Sake; Contentious Borders
To the Editor:
Much that Dmitri K. Simes states in "There's No Oil in Bosnia" (Op-Ed, March 10) is disturbing.
But I would like to point out one fallacious argument that crops up repeatedly in Serbian justifications for behavior in the wars in the former Yugoslavia.
Mr.
Simes states that the internal borders of Yugoslavia were "set by Tito's Communist regime and based neither on history nor on current demography." This is half-true -- demography renders the borders contentious.
But the borders that were forced down the throats of the Serbs after World War II were those separating Vojvodina and Kosovo from Serbia as autonomous provinces, and that separating Macedonia from Serbia as a republic.


Work Plan For Students Is Rejected
New York State's Board of Regents refused today to adopt a proposal that would have required all high school students to work before they graduate, saying that the plan was too vague and raised too many questions.
But the Regents left the door open, voting to allow the Commissioner of Education to continue to study the idea and create pilot programs that would integrate students' academic lessons with work experience as soon as next fall.


Holed-Up Auto Maker Wins A Skirmish in Ouster Fight
The embattled founder of a company that makes exotic cars won a temporary victory today when a judge refused to bar him from the factory, where he barricaded himself Monday.
Gerald A. Wiegert, founder of the Vector Aeromotive Corporation, had been asked to resign by the board amid accusations of financial mismanagement.
Instead, he changed the locks on Vector's buildings and locked himself inside.


An Elgar Rarity
Dino Anagnost is to conduct the Metropolitan Singers/Greek Choral Society in a performance of Elgar's rarely heard oratorio "The Kingdom," at 7:30 tonight at the Greek Orthodox Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity, 319 East 74th Street, Manhattan.
The oratorio's text is derived from the Old Testament, the Gospels and the Apocrypha.
Anna Patrick Singer (soprano), Susan Shafer (mezzo-soprano), Mark Rehnstrom (tenor) and Thomas Woodman (baritone) are soloists.
Tickets are $25 to $125.
Information: (212) 704-2100.


Hoffenberg's Flagship in Chapter 11
The Towers Financial Corporation, flagship of Steven Hoffenberg's troubled empire, filed for bankruptcy court protection yesterday, a day after similar filings by the company's five bond-selling subsidiaries.
In documents filed in bankruptcy court in Manhattan, Towers said that it had $251.7 million in assets and $271.6 million in liabilities.
Its list of creditors includes an inch-thick roster of noteholders, including small-business pension funds, medical-office pension plans, church endowment funds, individual and family trusts, and health-care institutions.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY FISCAL 'TRIAGE' ORDERED AT POST
With a host of bills falling due this weekend and cash running out, The New York Post was ordered by a bankruptcy judge to engage in "financial triage," covering its most urgent needs while postponing others to next week, when the ailing, drifting newspaper could find temporary stability in a bid by a former owner, Rupert Murdoch.
Page 25.


Judge Orders Cash-Strapped Post to Pay Urgent Bills and Delay Others
With a host of bills falling due this weekend and cash running out, The New York Post was ordered by a bankruptcy judge yesterday to engage in "financial triage," covering its most urgent needs while postponing others to next week, when the ailing, drifting newspaper may find more stability in a bid by a former owner, Rupert Murdoch.
Apparently exploring a prospective change at the helm of the embattled Post, Mr.
Murdoch and Abraham Hirschfeld, the current publisher, met for three hours last night at Mr.
Murdoch's midtown office.
Mr.
Hirschfeld emerged with a look of relief, but said nothing as he stepped into a chauffeur-driven limousine.


Envoy's Appointment Seen as Bid To Boost Foreign Service Morale
In a move meant as a boost to the professional Foreign Service, Raymond G. H. Seitz, the career diplomat who is the American Ambassador to Britain, will be kept in the post, State Department officials say.
The London posting has been a traditional payoff for political benefactors of a newly elected President, but the Clinton Administration, reacting to lobbying from British officials and a desire to demonstrate to the career Foreign Service that one of its own can be assigned to a high-prestige post, have decided to retain Mr.
Seitz.


Topics of The Times; President Weizman, Redux
For three reasons, the election of Ezer Weizman as Israel's seventh President is welcome and interesting news.
There is first the familial fact that his uncle was Chaim Weizmann (who spelled his name with two n's), the great Zionist and the first President of Israel -- a state he helped bring into being by persuading Britain, in the Balfour Declaration, to promise Jews a homeland.
Second is the political fact that the Israeli Parliament voted 66 to 53 for this man who advocates bolder approaches to peace with the Arabs, including direct negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
His choice can only bolster Israeli moderates amid a discouraging impasse in Middle East peace talks.
Although the office is mostly ceremonial, Mr.
Weizman -- a former pilot and Defense Minister who helped fashion the Camp David accords with Egypt -- can speak with special credibility for a generous Zionist vision that views Palestinians not as permanent enemies but as potential friends.


Germany Considers Jew as President
German politicians and commentators have begun suggesting that the leader of the country's principal Jewish organization, Ignatz Bubis, a Frankfurt real estate broker, run for President in next year's election.
President Richard von Weizsacker, 72, is not eligible for re-election, and leading political parties have failed to agree on a successor.
The post is largely ceremonial, but in recent years Mr. von Weizsacker has turned it into a pulpit from which he has denounced bigotry and racial violence.


Topics of The Times; Bus Stop
A scene from the theater of cruelty, played out on a Seventh Avenue bus in Manhattan one evening this week:
"I'll tell you what that smell is," a woman sitting up front shouted to a woman who was sitting in back.
"It's body odor -- b.o. -- pure and simple."


If Looks Could Sing
NICK SCOTTI was born with great looks and a good voice.
His debut album, "Nick Scotti" (Reprise), hit record stores last week.
It sounds, well, O.K.: R &amp; B pop, easy on the ears, with lots of retro references.
But how it sounds is not really the point.


England's Man of the Moment Takes Refuge Deep in the Past
The man of the moment in English music is John Tavener, whose "Protecting Veil" caused a riot of enthusiasm at its premiere in 1989 and has been flying off record-store shelves since Virgin Classics released it last year.
How has a composer with a medieval name fashioned wildly popular music from the rites of Eastern Orthodox Christianity?
American listeners will have a chance to find out when "The Protecting Veil" is performed in Boston on Wednesday and at Carnegie Hall on Friday evening, with the strings of the New England Conservatory Orchestra conducted by Michael Tilson Thomas.
Steven Isserlis, the winner of the conservatory's newly established Piatigor sky Artist Award for younger cellists, will play the solo part.
Mr.
Tavener's career (not to be confused with that of the English Renaissance composer John Taverner) is a strange one.
Now 49, he began as a populist experimenter, writing in a highly eclectic idiom that synthesized medieval elements with electronic timbres.
His first major work, a dramatic cantata entitled "The Whale," created a stir when it appeared in 1968; his opera "Therese" (1976) controversially intertwined the contemporaneous lives of the sainted nun Therese and the profane poet Rimbaud.
Mr.
Tavener traveled in stylish circles, having attracted the attention of the Beatles and signed on to their short-lived Apple record label.


INSIDE
Accord on Somalia
The 15 factions that have been fighting for control of Somalia agreed on a plan for disarming and for forming a transitional government to run the country.
Page 15.
Giving Black Soldier His Due
No black soldier in World War II has been awarded the Medal of Honor.
Comrades say Sgt.
Ruben Rivers, who fought wounded until he was killed, should be the first.
Page 18.
Aides Who Are Truly Junior
Much has been made of President Clinton's youth, but dozens of his junior aides haven't reached their 24th birthday.
Some even call their boss the "the icon of hope." Page 22.
Winter's Lingering Chill
From the salt-damaged evergreens to depleted municipal and personal bank accounts, the effects of this winter in the New York region will linger well beyond the thaw.
Page 29.


Knicks Provide Awful Role Model
To the Sports Editor:
I have been an ardent Knicks fan since 1958.
I basked in the glory years and suffered loyally through the mediocre years.
Now, with the team seemingly on the verge of glory, it is impossible to root for them.
Instead of basking, I want to burrow into a hole.


'Tommy' and His Father Reach Broadway
It's star time.
At a party for the forthcoming Broadway production of the Who's rock opera "Tommy," performers and friends are half-dancing in the basement of the West Bank Cafe while the show's leads sing "Pinball Wizard" and "I'm Free." Sitting in with the band is a middle-aged man with the short hair and bony careworn face of a penitent in a Hieronymous Bosch painting, strumming an acoustic guitar.
When he steps forward to sing "Save It for Later" by the English Beat, his voice is a choirboy tenor, and as the song revs up he suddenly fixes the audience with a stare from his earnest blue eyes.
The song's chorus repeats "Don't let me down" perhaps a dozen times, and he is soon singing the line with baleful sincerity, turning the phrase into a command and a plea to those who will perform "Tommy," his 1969 magnum opus.
Once again, Pete Townshend had made a catchy pop song yield wrenching honesty.


To Aid U.S. Schools, a Simple Spending Model
In an effort to help the nation's financially ailing public school systems, the United States Chamber of Commerce has developed a new way of tracking spending to help school districts make the most of their money.
In a study released this month, the chamber's Center for Workforce Preparation and Quality Education examined the financial records of eight school districts and organized their expenditures using a simple spending model.
Many of the districts are using the study's findings to redirect money spent on management and administration to classroom instruction and other services that directly benefit students.


Better Fish to Fry
Fish cakes, like meat loaf, are objects of an unstated, if not embarrassed, affection.
To be served a fish cake is to be offered a glimpse of the recent past; they're usually made from leftover fish, extended with potatoes, bread crumbs or vegetables.
A fish cake shows a cook's ingenuity, and therefore becomes an intimate portrait, if a sometimes homely one.
To make a fish cake is to make do.
Its embellishment, the proportion of fish to extenders and the finesse with which the flaked fish or seafood is patted together and fried tell a lot about a cook.
But a fish cake is as much a cultural statement as an idiosyncratic one.
The cod cakes of New England, the crab cakes of the Chesapeake, the salmon cakes fashioned in the Pacific Northwest are thumb prints of their locales.
So are the crawfish cakes of New Orleans and the brandade de morue of southern France.


A Matter Of Privacy
The latest debate about the way Social Security numbers are used to invade privacy is focusing on reports that the Clinton Administration is considering using the numbers to simplify paperwork under a new health insurance system.
Experts on privacy issues say such a plan could also simplify efforts by companies to drown sick people in sales pitches.
But now a Federal court decision could change the tone of the debate.
The Court of Appeals in Richmond ruled last week that Virginia elections officials can no longer require prospective voters to divulge their Social Security numbers, and cannot publish such information.
"The harm that can be inflicted from the disclosure of a Social Security number to an unscrupulous individual is alarming and potentially financially ruinous," the court said.


Corrections
An art review last Sunday about the exhibition "American Stories" at the State University in Old Westbury misstated the gallery's hours.
The gallery is open daily (including Saturdays), from 1 to 5 P.M., except Fridays and Sundays.


Clinton Plan -- Small Businesses Smile
FROM the way he talks, President Clinton wants to be Johnny Appleseed for the nation's small businesses.
Sow a few tax credits here, sprinkle on some new incentives there and, presto, within a few months small businesses will grow from coast to coast, producing a cornucopia of new jobs.
Some of the President's seeds have already sprouted, as some businesses have rushed to take advantage of the proposed incentives even before Congress approves many of the plan's details -- as is widely expected.
After four years of lackluster growth, they are eager to move ahead, caught in the surge of confidence brought by the plan.


Waiting for a Breeze


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MY UNFORGETTABLE SEASON 1970 By Red Holtzman and Leonard Lewin.
Tor/Tom Doherty, $21.95.


Home Again On the Avenue
Randolph Duke, who closed his clothing design business in December after he lost the support of his Japanese backer, C. Itoh, has found a new home on Seventh Avenue.
CMT Enterprises Inc., which produces private-label lines for department stores, announced on Friday that it had signed a deal to manufacture and market designs by Mr.
Duke.


Friends Like Russia Make Diplomacy a Mess
AS President Clinton struggles to have an impact on events in Bosnia, Haiti and Russia, it is clear how much American foreign policy has changed in just the past two years.
While Mr.
Clinton's predecessors usually had the luxury of dealing with clearly defined conflicts between states, Mr.
Clinton has the burden of trying to deal with the international spillover of conflicts within states.
This has created the paradoxical situation in which the United States has never been more powerful, in standing astride the world without another superpower competitor, and has never seemed more powerless in trying to influence internal events inside countries, with a Treasury short of cash, a Pentagon short of will and a public that can't sort out the good guys from the bad guys without a scorecard.
No wonder that American foreign policy under Mr.
Clinton has so far been largely symbolic gestures in places like Haiti, Bosnia and the Middle East.
The President is at least trying in all of these places, but his efforts so far only underscore how many foreign problems today are beyond diplomacy, or at least the conventional practice of it.
Many days it seems that the unfolding dramas in Bosnia, Russia, Haiti and Somalia are better raw material for a poet's lament than a diplomat's labor, the stuff for a Keats, not a Kissinger.


For Oscar, It's Become a New Game Entirely
A small Oscar-related epiphany can currently be witnessed on Broadway, where Stephen Rea, a best-actor nominee this year, is appearing in "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me." Mr.
Rea plays one of three hostages locked in a Beirut jail cell, and movies are a topic of conversation.
To keep themselves from going mad, they make up various film scenarios and even joke about what might win an Academy Award.
Much of the kidding is about Sir Richard Attenborough in general and his Oscar-winning "Gandhi" in particular.
"Gandhi," Mr.
Rea's character observes, seems to go on for more time than he and his cellmates have spent in prison.
In this exchange, however indirectly, the new and old orders of Hollywood collide.
Neither this Irish actor nor Mr.
Attenborough can be thought of as a Hollywood insider, but anyone singled out for academy honors represents some aspect of the film-making establishment's taste.
And that taste is changing dramatically.
Six nominations for "The Crying Game," the small and very idiosyncratic film in which Mr.
Rea stars, indicate that the big, windy productions in which Mr.
Attenborough specializes (this year's being "Chaplin") will no longer be acclaimed automatically as high cinematic art.


A Yank in Yokohama
JAPAN THROUGH AMERICAN EYES
The Journal of Francis Hall, Kanagawa and Yokohama, 1859-1866.
Edited by F. G. Notehelfer.
Illustrated. 652 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. $49.50.


Andrew Colao and Jennifer Nelsen
Dolores J. Nelsen of Lombard, Ill., has announced the engagement of her daughter Jennifer Kay Nelsen to Andrew Joseph Colao, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony F. Colao of Cliffside Park, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Nelsen, 25, is a law clerk for Judge H. Lee Sarokin of Federal District Court in Newark.
She graduated magna cum laude from Smith College and received her law degree from the University of Virginia.
She is also a daughter of the late Reese Mitchell Nelsen.
Her mother is a travel consultant at Oak Brook (Ill.) Travel Inc.


Refinancings Balloon as the Rates Slide
A WAVE of refinancings and new mortgage applications have swamped lenders in recent weeks as interest rates have slid to record lows.
"It's pandemonium," said Ellen Feldschreiber, a partner with the Manhattan Mortgage Company.
"We have people who are refinancing who refinanced last year, and even six months ago."


Sports of The Times; Battling Siki Finally on His Way Back Home
HE was boxing's first African world champion, a Senegalese who in 1922 defied a "fix" in winning the light-heavyweight title from Georges Carpentier and walked the boulevards of Paris with a lion cub on a leash.
Three years later, in the darkness before dawn on Dec. 15, 1925, around the corner from his dim apartment in Hell's Kitchen on the West Side of Manhattan, he was found dead at age 28, with two bullets from a .38 in his back.
His body was sprawled on the West 41st Street sidewalk near Ninth Avenue, where the Port Authority Bus Terminal is now.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 13 about hats made by Kangol Headwear Ltd. misidentified the company's founder, dated the founding of the company incorrectly and referred incorrectly to the family that took it over.
The company was founded in the 1920's, not in 1938, by Jacques (Jack) Spreiregen.
Mr.
Spreiregen's nephews Sylvan and Joseph Meisner took over the business.
The errors were pointed out in a letter dated Feb. 28 from Dr.
Steven A. Sparr of New York, a distant relative of Jacques Spreiregen, and the facts were confirmed on March 12 in a fax from Kangol, which supplied the original information.


Teach Your Children And Hope They Listen
Hal McRae isn't the first father to have his son ignore or refuse to listen to his advice, but when it affects the son's job performance and, in turn, the father's, the result can be disastrous.
Brian McRae, who plays center field for the team his father manages, the Kansas City Royals, suffered a setback in his offensive development last year, his second complete season in the major leagues.
He didn't reach .200 until two months into the season, and he wound up hitting .223, a precipitous 38-point drop from the previous season.
The younger McRae's failure contributed to the Royals' disappointing 72-90 record.


Corrections
A picture caption on March 14 with an article about Tabitha Soren misidentified the studio where she was taping a segment for MTV.
It was at the National Video Center in New York.
MTV leases the studio; it does not own one.


Taking Skybus
To the Editor: Over the Christmas holiday my wife and I had several experiences with Skybus, assessed in your Practical Traveler column (Nov. 22), that might interest your readers.
We were scheduled to fly out of Newark at 8 P.M. on Dec. 24.
We arrived at the airport at 6:45 P.M. and had to wait in a line of over 100 people to check in our luggage.
We did not finish this until 8:15.
Our flight took off at midnight.
On board, they ran out of food to sell two rows behind us, and over two-thirds of those on board were not able to purchase food.
We arrived in Fort Lauderdale at 2:30 A.M. -- unfortunately, the same cannot be said of our luggage.
We were told that it would be on the next flight, scheduled to arrive at 5:30 A.M.
When I tried to call the airline later to find out the status of the incoming flight, I got a recording saying the office was open from 7:30 A.M. through 10 P.M.
This means that anyone waiting to meet a passenger on a Skybus flight that takes off after 10 cannot possibly find out the status of that flight.


Auto Racing Isn't Nasty
To the Sports Editor:
There you go again: dumping on the most popular spectator sport in the United States.
George Vecsey wrote ("Violence, Violence, Everywhere," The Times, Feb. 14): "People go to auto races just to see the crashes . . . ogle each other and drink beer . . . when it's not football season."


Sites for Four Eyes -- Buying Eye Frames
A standard movie ploy is for the ugly, geeky duckling to take off the glasses, muss up the hair and suddenly become this swan -- or Superman.
But what is it exactly that intrigued anyone about the geek or geek ess in the first place?
It's the mystery concealed behind those frames -- which is what makes eyeglasses very sexy.
And when you consider that the only other element on the face you can change without outpatient status is your hair, and that cosmetics for men are about as likely to achieve across-the-board popularity as "K.D. Lang Sings Songs of Ireland," men ought to greet the prospect of wearing glasses as exultantly as they would a cure for acne.
It's contacts that are boring: You don't wind up any better off than when you couldn't see what you looked like, and the lenses in designer colors are to laugh, unless you want to be taken for Nastassia Kinski's brother in "Cat People."
"Glasses afford spontaneity," says Gai Gherardi, co-owner of L.A.
Eyeworks, the company that pioneered the notion that eyewear is as much about fashion as it is about optics.
"They offer the possibility of a multitude of changes in your persona; they're a great accessory, a great prop. Contacts are rigid. They're no fun. You can't flip them on, flip them up, toy with them, finger them, bite them or twirl them. You may see better in them, but you can't look better in them. Glasses do both."


Pamela Walker, Todd Peters
June wedding plans have been announced for Pamela Susan Walker and John Todd Peters.
Miss Walker is a daughter of Susan Walker of Rye, N.Y., and Peter Walker of Bedford Hills, N.Y.
Mr.
Peters is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Peters of Greenwich, Conn.
The prospective bride, 26, is a sales representative at the Magazine Marketing Group, which sells advertising space for magazines, in San Francisco.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is a director of McKinsey &amp; Company, a management consulting concern, in New York.


POSTINGS: New City Handbook; Update on Tenants Rights
It may not exactly be Danielle Steele, but a new handbook published by the New York City Commission on Human Rights could become a best-seller in its own way.
The volume is called "Tenants' Rights and How to Protect Them"; it has been written and edited by tenant organizers and housing advocates, and it includes such chapters as "Your Rights as a Tenant," "Rent Control and Rent Stabilization," "Harassment," "Organizing a Tenants Association," "Actions to Reach Your Goal" and, reflecting current trends, "A Co-Op Conversion Primer."


Keep Foreign Terrorism Foreign
The latest arrests in New York and the Middle East in connection with the World Trade Center bombing add a bit more focus to the conspiracy that produced the worst terrorist attack in American history.
Much still remains to be learned about the conspirators' motives and possible foreign involvement, though now investigators believe the five individuals arrested are members of a group called Liberation Army Fifth Battalion, which has threatened further terrorist acts aimed at reversing U.S. policies throughout the Middle East.
The arrests also intensify interest in their spiritual mentor, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman.
As well, they underscore the urgency of monitoring known terrorists' movements and tightening visa and deportation procedures accordingly.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
ON YOUR MARK
For the 24th year the combination Scarsdale 15K and 4-Mile Runs and the Abe Simon Memorial 15K Run will step off today at 1:30 P.M. from Scarsdale High School on Wayside Lane, weaving through Greenacres and Fox Meadow back to the school parking lot.


Waterbury Symphony Offers Pops
SATURDAY evening's season finale for the Waterbury Symphony at Kennedy Auditorium should be a cheery affair since the pops program, which begins at 8:15, lists such sure-fire favorites as Bizet's "Carmen" Suite and Enesco's Romanian Rhapsody No. 1.
In addition, Richard Lalli will appear as soloist in several of Aaron Copland's "Old American Songs," and Gary Chapman will add piano riffs to Gershwin theater pieces.
There will be an undertone of regret, however, since the evening also marks Frank Brieff's retirement as music director after 17 years at the helm.
"We view his leaving with great sadness" said the orchestra's administrative director, Carol Gilbert.
"The music won't stop for him, since he'll continue playing the viola in various chamber concerts here, but both the players and our audiences will miss him a lot. The maestro made an incredible difference in the level of musicianship in the Symphony, and he was wonderfully supportive to the community as well."


A Familiar Partnership


The Way We Were


Correction
An article on Feb. 28 about pioneer sites in Missouri misstated the distance navigated in the 19th century between St.
Louis and St.
Joseph on the Missouri River.
It is 525 miles.
A listing of Kansas City hotels with the article misstated the location of Country Club Plaza, where the Ritz-Carlton and Raphael hotels are situated.
It is four miles south of downtown.
A reader's letter dated March 8 pointed out the errors.


The Tale of the Tape and Other Laments
TIME again to write some wrongs.
In this sample, the readers seem particularly curious about safety, doodads and design.
Dear Sir,
For many years, I have wished that car tape players also had taping capability.
Why don't they?


Cutting Edge


Margaret Ault, Andrew Jens
Margaret Amber Ault, a daughter of Mrs.
Sheldon Anisman of Fort Worth and Isaac Ault of San Angelo, Tex., was married yesterday to Andrew Akin Jens, the son of Drs.
Wayne and Dorothy Jens of Seneca, S.C.
The Rev.
Linda McDermott, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the Robert Carr Chapel in Forth Worth.
Mrs.
Jens, 25, is a billing assistant at the New York law firm of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby &amp; MacRae.
She graduated from Texas Christian University.
Her father owns the Ault Ranch in San Angelo.
Her mother, Karen Anisman, is a history teacher at R. L. Paschal High School in Fort Worth.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Mr.
Anisman of Fort Worth and Maggie Ault of San Angelo.


Public &amp; Private; Take Her With You
Trashing Hillary Rodham Clinton's reconstituted name has been all the rage since her husband took office and she took off as a power player in Washington.
The standard gripe is that the First Woman is a monogram chameleon, tailoring what she's called to suit what she wants.
As a young lawyer and newlywed she was Hillary Rodham, her given name.
When that was perceived as bad for her husband's burgeoning career, she transmogrified into Mrs.
Bill Clinton.
During the campaign she was simply Hillary Clinton.
And afterward, when the world was presumably a safer place for strong-willed women, she became Hillary Rodham Clinton.


Olympic Treatment For Norway's Past
WITH the next Winter Olympics coming two years earlier than usual, a new batch of Olympic coins is also in the offing.
From now on, the Winter and Summer Games will alternate every two years, instead of being held the same year every four years.
In 1994, the Winter Olympics will be held in Lillehammer, Norway, and the Norwegian mint recently unveiled two series of coins in its commemorative series.
A third series will be presented later this year.


Students Help Students Through Conflicts
THE two high school juniors, acting as mediators, sat facing their two fellow students, each of whom was accompanied by a "parent."
"Before we start," a mediator whose name tag read Janice said, "let's go over the ground rules. There will be no screaming, no name calling, no pointing and no physical contact. Everything you say will be kept strictly confidential."


Lauren Kasell and Lawrence Weiss
Lauren Renee Kasell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Kasell of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Dr.
Lawrence Jay Weiss, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold D. Weiss of Oceanside, L.I.
Rabbi Arnold Turetsky performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Weiss, 23, graduated from Tulane University and is a master's degree candidate in elementary education at Hofstra University.
Her father is a first vice president and a securities broker at Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
Her mother, Paula Kasell, teaches kindergarten at Public School 160 in the Bronx.


Marlins Add 2 Pitchers
Rather than begin the season with only two starters who won a major league game last year, the Florida Marlins acquired two veteran pitchers yesterday.
First, they picked up veteran left-hander CHRIS HAMMOND from Cincinnati for utility infielder GARY SCOTT and a player to be named.
Two hours later, the Marlins bought the contract of right-hander LUIS AQUINO from Kansas City.
Both pitchers are 27.
Hammond, 7-10 with a 4.21 earned run average in 28 games with Cincinnati last year, will take his place in the rotation alongside JACK ARMSTRONG and 45-year-old CHARLIE HOUGH.
Aquino, who was 3-8 with a 4.52 e.r.a. in 15 games for the Royals last year, can start or relieve. (AP)


Knocked-Out Russian Boxer, His Dream Now Dead, Fights for His Life
The script for "Rocky" would have had to be revised for Sergei Artemiev, the 24-year-old Russian lightweight contender, lying in a hospital here for the last week after having undergone a four-and-a-half-hour operation for a blood clot on the surface of his brain.
He was the blond, bad guy in the black trunks from the Evil Empire who became the good guy and a crowd favorite.
Artemiev was one of the first Russians to turn professional, and had come to America three years ago dreaming of the kind of fame and fortune that would have been impossible at home.
But last Sunday he was carried out of the ring on a stretcher following a fight against Carl Griffith in the arena of the Trump Taj Mahal.


Corrections
An obituary in late editions yesterday about Reuben Fine, a chess champion, psychologist and author, misidentified his wife, omitted a stepson and misstated the number of times he was married.
His wife is Marcia Fine and his stepson is Harry De Mell of Roslyn Harbor, L.I.
Mr.
Fine had four previous marriages that ended in divorce. (The obituary is reprinted today on page 38 for readers of editions that did not carry it.)


SURFACING
NAMES --
Chantal/Chantelle:
With main characters from two acclaimed movies, "Just Another Girl on the IRT" and "Passion Fish," called, respectively, Chantal and Chantelle, the name (however you spell it) is enjoying a revival.
Of course, it never left the fashion industry, where the leading modeling agencies always seem to have a Chantal/Chantelle around -- as if there were a quota.
WORDS --
Infoslam:
This white-collar slam dunk is a Machiavellian move to overwhelm, if not humiliate, another through the sheer force of accumulated data and facts.
PARTIES --
Health club/night club:
The pressing question is whether to work out or just work it when one of New York's trendy health clubs (like Equinox or the David Barton Gym, above) moonlights as a party scene.


Melinda Hackett and Walter Hutchins
Mrs.
Russell W. Munson and Montague H. Hackett Jr., both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Melinda Hackett, to Walter J. Hutchins, a son of Mary Hutchins of Norwich, Vt., and William S. Hutchins of Bedford, Pa.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hackett, 31, is a painter in New York.
She graduated from Hobart and William Smith College.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother, Linda Munson, is a photographer in New York.
The prospective bride's stepfather, Mr.
Munson, is a consulting editor for Flying magazine, in New York.


A la Carte; It's Spring, and It's Time for Changes
SPRING signals change, rebirth and renewal.
This year that is as true for Long Island restaurants as it is for its flowers and greenery.
Among the new restaurants, chefs and menus are these:
*A husband-and-wife team of Italian chefs from Tokyo has arrived on the Island.
One will help to open a restaurant in Woodmere, and the other will take over the kitchen of a renamed and revived Huntington eating place.


They'll Withstand Almost Anything to Enjoy Their Game
FOR the chance to shout one five-letter word, Long Island bingo players have sat through fires, labor pains and even murder.
"I was playing in a game in Jamaica," Sharon D., a bingo player from Farmingville, recalled.
"A man walks up to the table and shoots the guy next to me. One minute he's playing. The next minute he's dead. The police came in and said, 'Nobody move.' So we continued the game."


Teaching Grass-Roots Leaders How to Win Over City Hall
IT was 2 A.M. when Julie Concepcion was awakened by the familiar cacophony of the intersection of Thomas Street and Pennsylvania Avenue in Newark.
Youngsters in stolen cars revved their engines as they spun about on two wheels -- until the inevitable crash.
For Mrs.
Concepcion, a founder of the St.
Columba Neighborhood Club in a mainly Hispanic section of the city, that awakening last summer was a call to action.
Over the years her attention has been riveted on what happens on the four corners of that intersection -- St.
Columba Roman Catholic Church, the church's grammar school, a well-kept neighborhood park and a litter-strewn fenced lot.


It's a Tradition: Russia's Politics Of Fear and Favor
BEHIND the bluster and brinkmanship of the Russian political struggle that burned hot but inconclusively last week, behind its fundamental vulgarity and lack of propriety, is a brutal understanding of power bred through centuries of despotism and servility to both czar and commissar.
Power is not something to be shared; a white flag is a sign to attack; compromise is only a lull in the fight.


'Byron': Thomson Adrift Without Stein
"Lord Byron," first performed in 1972 at the Juilliard School in New York, was Virgil Thomson's third and last opera.
It has labored under various clouds since its inception -- even before, one might argue.
But whatever its worth and reputation, it can at last be heard complete in a conscientious performance, by James Bolle and his Monadnock Music Festival in New Hampshire, recorded in concert by Koch International Classics in 1991 (3-7124-2Y6; two CD's).
The first cloud with which Thomson and his librettist, the poet Jack Larson, had to contend was the cult fervor surrounding Thomson's first two operas.
Both "Four Saints in Three Acts" (1934) and "The Mother of Us All" (1947) had librettos by Gertrude Stein.
"The Mother of Us All," about the life of the suffragette Susan B. Anthony, is a more straightforward narrative than "Four Saints," with its surreal depictions of saints at celestial play.
But both breathe with the childlike joy of Stein's verse, a joy to which Thomson's cannily innocent blend of folk songs, waltzes, brass bands, vaudeville ditties and proto-Minimalist abstraction seem ideally matched.


Special K's: Kansas and Kentucky in Final 4
The Kansas Jayhawks used their superior inside strength and deeper bench for an 83-77 victory over the Indiana Hoosiers in the Midwest Regional championship game this evening at the Arena.
The Jayhawks (29-6) will make the 10th Final Four appearance in school history, and the fourth in eight tournaments, when they meet North Carolina or Cincinnati next Saturday at the Louisiana Superdome.


An Elegant Sushi Bar for New Canaan
PLUM TREE is the first Japanese restaurant to open in New Canaan.
And what a restaurant it is!
As guests descend a flight of stairs they are greeted with banners of samurai warriors.
Upon entering Plum Tree one realizes immediately it is no under-capitalized hole-in-the-wall ethnic eatery.
An entryway with mirror, murals and Japanese screens leads into a spacious dining room, made to seem even more so by the beige wall and carpet tones, the natural wood tables, chairs and sushi bar.
Along one long wall is a bright-colored mural that resembles a blow-up of a serene, ukiyo-e woodblock scene of Japanese life, with kimonoed ladies taking tea on a wide terrace facing a lake.


Traci Richardson, Terrance Jackson
Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Richardson of Teaneck, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Traci Lynn Richardson, to Terrance Jackson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren Jackson of Hartsdale, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Richardson is a divisional sales representative for Queens and the Bronx for Ortho Pharmaceuticals.
She graduated from Howard University.
Her father is a vice president of the Schieffelin &amp; Somerset Company, a beverage importing company in New York.
Her mother, Gertrude Richardson, retired as special-education teacher at Hawthorne Elementary School in Teaneck.


Healthful Tips for Passover Favorites
AS difficult as it may be to monitor fat and cholesterol most of the year, at Passover, the holiday that celebrates the deliverance of the Jews from Egypt, and which begins at sundown April 5, it becomes a Sisyphean task.
Starting with a traditional seder dinner, a ritual feast that ushers in the holiday, the observance continues for eight days and involves consuming no foods that contain a leavening other than eggs.
Not only are eggs used in huge quantities to make feathery sponge cakes for the holiday dinners but they are also essential in preparing some other traditional dishes.
The ground fish used for gefilte fish is held together with beaten egg and matzoh meal.
Eggs are essential in making good chopped liver.


California Environmentalists Cut a Deal, Hope for the Best
FOR years environmentalists have fought to save endangered animals and plants with almost religious fervor, waging a war against the forces of nature, developers and governments in which compromise was scorned but victory usually elusive.
Now they have begun to make pacts with the devil, and many of them are not sure it will work.
The latest Faustian pact came Thursday when major environmental leaders stepped onto a podium in Washington and shook hands with their devil, the big land developers of Southern California, the folks who -- if they could -- would turn almost every last acre of scrub between Los Angeles and the Mexican border into manicured tracts of fake Spanish-style suburban homes.
The matchmaker was Bruce Babbitt, the new Interior Secretary, a former Governor of Arizona and a respected environmentalist himself but a politician who knows the value of compromise.


Eye on the Prize, Foot in the Mouth
Frank Capra, whose "It Happened One Night" swept the major Academy Awards for 1934, thought the Oscars were a great public relations gimmick, "the most wonderful thing that has ever been thought of for advertising."
Marlene Dietrich, who was never nominated, scoffed that "the awarding of Oscars is one of the greatest frauds of the century." She held a special contempt for what she called "the Deathbed Award," in which the academy makes up for decades of neglect by giving an honorary Oscar at the last possible minute.
When you get one of those, she said, "that's how you know you're dying." (Tasteless, but true. Last year's honorary lifetime award winner, Satyajit Ray, actually accepted from the hospital bed where he died just three weeks later.)


Conversations/Fred Kent; One Who Would Like to See Most Architects Hit the Road
LIKE plenty of other people enthusiastic over President Clinton's ideas for rebuilding America's infrastructure, Fred Kent spends a lot of time thinking about how to remake roads, parks and streetscapes.
His thoughts, though, run counter to familiar notions.
Fresh blacktop be damned.
Show Fred Kent a sleek highway cutting through a neighborhood and his ideas run this way: add parallel parking, throw up a stop sign or two, don't worry so much about fixing potholes -- in other words, slow things down.


Ice in the Belly
Abie Schwartz, a reigning philosopher-king among Minnesota ice fishermen, wasn't flattered last month when a man he gruffly refers to as "your typical Hollywood smoothie" asked him to serve as an adviser on a big-budget movie about to be shot on a frozen lake near Minneapolis.
The Warner Bros. film, "Grumpy Old Men," stars Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau as two hard-boiled lifelong enemies who finally discover the meaning of life -- and each other -- while pursuing the peculiar pleasure of yanking fish out of 10-inch holes cut through two-foot-thick Minnesota lake ice.
The movie's advance scout had found the right expert in the 79-year-old winter angler.
Over the decades, Mr.
Schwartz's prowess on the ice with the sawed-off fishing pole known as the jiggle stick has earned him the nickname Mavin among bait-store owners and fishing-page editors across Minnesota.
Now, Mr.
Schwartz was being asked to provide both technical help and several dozen real-life winter fishermen to work as extras in the ice hamlet being built for "Grumpy Old Men" on location at Lake Rebecca.


Great Neck Ponders Pasta Plethora
"WHAT do you want me to do with this?" a landlord from Great Neck Plaza shouted at a meeting last month of the Village Board of Trustees, as he waved a new 10-year lease with the Pasta Warehouse.
If approved, the Pasta Warehouse be the fourth pasta restaurant to open in the village in two years.
Another food-related applicant is the Bagelry, a bagel store and delicatessen that plans to open within a two-block radius of five shops selling similar products.
Among them is Magic Bagels, which opened less than six months ago.


Tech Notes; Voting by Telephone
New Mexico voters may soon be able to reach out and elect someone.
Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque, known for its development of weapons and laser technologies, is working on a system that would allow people to vote by telephone.
If all goes well, the system will get a test run in three New Mexico counties -- including the largest, Bernalillo -- during the 1994 primaries and general election.
Mary Green, the project director for the labs, said the idea came about when she and her colleagues were discussing how they rarely found time to vote.
Applying the technology that they have used to secure high-risk data at nuclear weapons facilities, the White House, F.B.I. and C.I.A. headquarters and American embassies, Sandia scientists designed a system for telephone voting.


For Shame!
To the Editor:
I am not an uneducated or uninformed person.
I read ferociously, have a bachelor of arts degree from Wake Forest University and did graduate work at the University of Southern California.
I listen to Rush Limbaugh daily, as do many of my friends.
He is like a breath of fresh air.


Bomb in Downtown Cairo Kills One and Injures 7
A police officer was killed and seven people were seriously wounded today in a bomb explosion near a crowded square in central Cairo that the police attributed to Islamic militants.
The explosion, the third in central Cairo in the last month, came as members of a bomb squad were inspecting the device, which had been planted in the Civil Defense Authority building.
The building houses not only civil defense offices, but also a police club.


Letting Loose as Spring Settles In


5 Pieces of Europe's Past Return to Life: France; A vast new exhibition space as the Louvre renovates
On its amazing journey from medieval fortress to grand royal palace and finally to one of the world's superstructures of culture, there is no stopping the Louvre.
France's foremost national art gallery is undergoing the most thorough overhaul in its history, and architects and workers have been moving through wings and basements like an occupying force.
The main facades, dating from the 16th through the 19th centuries, have been largely scrubbed clean and restored over the past two years.
Workers have removed grime and repaired cracks and chips in dozens of mythological figures, the nymphs and animals that are set in bas-relief along the courtyard walls.
Inside, craftsmen have nearly finished work on the 18th- and 19th-century ceilings and repaired the first floor's overhead reliefs and paintings.
But above all, to prepare for 39 new rooms added to the Louvre's exhibition space, workshops here and at Versailles have restored more than 100 paintings and over 300 frames, many of which had spent much of their lives in storage for lack of room.
The relining, stretching and cleaning have taken more than four years.
Some exceptionally large works, like Jean Restout's "Pentecost" (7.78 by 4.65 meters, or 25.5 by 15.2 feet) have taken almost three years on their own.


Nestled In Leaves And Berries
The scene is a subway station.
A lovely woman in a flower-print dress, perhaps carrying a small suitcase, gazes intently down the platform.


Leslie P. Clovis, Stephen Webster
David C. Clovis of Clarksburg, W. Va., has announced the engagement of his daughter Leslie Porter Clovis to Stephen Babcock Webster, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James G. Webster 3d of Englewood, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Clovis, 26, is also a daughter of the late Judith Bunn Clovis.
The bride-to-be graduated from Denison University, as did her fiance, and received a master's degree in history from Northeastern University.
She is an assistant teacher of the fourth grade at the New Canaan (Conn.) Country School.
Her father is a lawyer with the firm of Steptoe &amp; Johnson in Clarksburg.
She is a stepdaughter of Katherine Clovis of Clarksburg.


Gold Buttons Mob Paris
In Paris, women who invest in expensive designer clothes have found an answer to the quandary over short or long skirt lengths.
They've settled on Chanel trousers -- cut loose or slim -- with a row of signature gold buttons decorating the outer seams.
Dozens of women, wearing the same Karl Lagerfeld design, apparently made the decision that long daytime hems are modern, provided they're on trousers.
They were often worn with Chanel jackets.


Technology; Monitoring Blood Pressure Without Skipping a Heartbeat
PHYSICIANS consider accurate monitoring of patients' blood pressures essential -- after all, high blood pressure is a silent killer that stalks people during their daily lives, and low blood pressure is a threat in hospital operating rooms and intensive-care units.
But all of the common blood pressure monitoring technologies used today, while highly accurate, have either limitations or associated complications.
Now, blood pressure monitors are being developed for use in hospitals that manufacturers, physicians and analysts say closely match the accuracy and utility of established technologies while avoiding their pitfalls.
In addition, portable monitors that record patients' blood pressures continuously during daily activities are also on the drawing board.


With Rescue Costs Growing, U.S. Considers Billing the Rescued
As more Americans challenge themselves by scaling soaring peaks and hiking through parks, an increasing number wind up having to be rescued, which can be a costly process for the Federal Government.
Now Federal officials are considering proposals to make some adventurers pay for their rescues.
The proposals are being developed by the National Park Service at a time Federal and state officials alike are dealing with expensive rescues.
Earlier this month, rescue workers made an extensive air and ground search to find 115 high school students and other hikers stranded by a blizzard in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
And last month in Aspen, Colo., a four-day effort was required to rescue five cross-country skiers who became separated in blinding snow.


Anna M. Verdi, John MacIntosh
Mr. and Mrs.
Jean Verdi of Maplewood, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Anna Maria Verdi, to John Whitlam MacIntosh, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert MacIntosh of Toronto.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Verdi, 25, is a teacher at St.
Ann's School in Brooklyn Heights.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University.
Her father, now retired, was the executive chef at the Baltusrol Golf Club in Springfield, N.J.


Macy's, Chaus and Finkelstein
To the Editor:
Regarding "A Survivor for Seventh Ave." (March 7) about Josephine Chaus and her women's clothing business, Bernard Chaus Inc., founded by her husband: As described in the article, it is true that one of the Chaus horses threw my wife.


Man Sought as Member of Drug Cartel Is Arrested
A former Colombian police lieutenant, who fled his homeland to avoid murder, kidnapping and drug-trafficking charges and is believed to be a high-ranking member of the Medellin drug cartel, has been arrested on Staten Island, Federal officals said yesterday.
The man, Pedro Fernando Chunza-Plaza, 31, of 108 Bard Avenue on Staten Island, was arrested at his home at 8:35 P.M. on Friday, said Rosemary LaGuardia, a spokeswoman for the New York office of the Immigration and Naturalization Service.


Comrades and Family Fighting to Honor a Hero
The photograph, pulled out of a yellowed envelope by Anese Rivers Woodfork, is of a lean young man in military khaki.
He has a long face, an assertive jaw and in his eyes the faraway look of a youth who expects to live forever.
"I was 13 when Ruben went away," Mrs.
Woodfork said of the young man in the photograph, her older brother Ruben Rivers.
He left their home in Oklahoma and went off to war almost exactly 50 years ago, dying in a fierce tank battle with the Germans in eastern France.


5 Pieces of Europe's Past Return to Life: Sweden; Final touches are being made to a restored 1628 warship
On Aug. 10, 1628, the Vasa, the world's largest warship, set off from Stockholm on its maiden voyage.
Several hundred yards into the harbor the Swedish vessel capsized, victim of a design flaw that left it top-heavy and unbalanced.
More than 300 years later, in 1961, the remains of the 226-foot-long wooden ship were raised from the harbor and a laborious process of reconstruction begun.
In recent months the renovation has entered its final phase, reattaching the Vasa's masts and re-creating a portion of its rigging.


The Architecture of Those Called Homeless
Pepe Otero's place evolved slowly, as so many building projects do.
It began as a rudimentary shell made from skids, the wood platforms used for delivery of heavy goods that have become the makeshift building blocks of the street.
Time passed.
And in a grim symbol of the seeming permanence of his situation, Mr.
Otero's shell grew.


When Thoughts Turn to the Tasks Ahead
SPRING had a tough time getting here this year.
But it has arrived and gardeners now have major cleanup tasks ahead of them.
For a while it seemed as though spring were coming along in its usual tranquil way.
Many of the bulbs started to push up before the snowstorm hit.
Many were in full bloom, while others were showing off their lovely floral petals.


Nicholls, Lemieux and 18 Others, Too
Although the Devils were encouraged by the return of Bernie Nicholls and Claude Lemieux, two of their most potent offensive weapons, it was team defense that made the difference in a 5-2 triumph over Washington this afternoon at the Capital Centre.
With defensemen Scott Stevens, Slava Fetisov and Bruce Driver leading the way, the Devils formed an almost impenetrable wall in front of Craig Billington.
The Devils allowed only 21 shots and the only blemish was two goals by Washington's Kelly Miller.


EX-PREMIER FACES INQUIRY ON MAFIA
Giulio Andreotti, seven times Prime Minister and a major force in postwar Italian politics, announced today that he was under official investigation for alleged association with the Mafia.
If proven, it would mean that the mob had protection at the highest level in the land.
The announcement by the 74-year-old Christian Democrat was the latest and most devastating broadside against Italy's political elite since, in a separate inquiry, magistrates began investigating a huge bribery and corruption scandal last year that has disgraced much of the nation's hierarchy.


Asia Society Installs New Exhibit of Sculptures From India


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
DELIBERATE INDIFFERENCE A Story of Murder and Racial Injustice.
By Howard Swindle.
Viking, $22.50.


Workers Need Place in the Economic Sun Again
To the Editor:
Re "A New Deal for Labor" (Op-Ed, March 10) by Richard Freeman and Joel Rogers, a proposal to modify Federal labor law:
Two-thirds of our economy is based on consumer spending, but the real wages of most consumers -- nonsupervisory workers -- have been falling for 20 years.
This is a principal cause of the slowdown in long-run economic growth and of the anemic recovery we are experiencing.


Patients in Pain Find Relief, Not Addiction, in Narcotics
In 1984 doctors told Patricia Paul, who suffers from a painful nerve condition called reflex sympathetic dystrophy, that she would need round-the-clock home care for the rest of her life and that she should forget about working ever again.
Since then, she has returned to college, graduated magna cum laude, reared a teen-aged son and now runs an award-winning job-training program for handicapped people in New Jersey.
She attributes her remarkable turnaround to medical treatment that would have been unthinkable a decade ago: At her doctor's suggestion, she has taken large doses of narcotics, in pill form, every three hours for the last nine years.


THE CAMPUS CRIME WAVE
As a student at Brown University, I read Matthews's article with great interest.
Rather than think we're immortal, this "walking security risk" knows his generation is often used as a target.
In addition to being the target of a new wave of violent crime on campuses, we are now the target of Matthews's blame-the-victim characterization of us as bored, underworked, naive Club Med vacationers who engage in "wild drinking and unprotected sex" every night.
What will be the next attacks against us?
MARSHALL MILLER
Providence, R.I.


Amy J. Harmon, Caleb Southworth
Amy Jill Harmon, the daughter of Barbara G. Harmon and Stephen F. Harmon, both of New York, was married last evening to Caleb John Southworth, a son of Drs.
William and Darlene Southworth of Ashland, Ore.
Rabbi Miriam Ancis officiated at the Manhattan Penthouse, a catering hall in New York.
Ms.
Harmon, who is 24, is keeping her name.
She is a business reporter for The Los Angeles Times in Los Angeles.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Parker Chapin Flattau &amp; Klimpl.
Her mother is a speech pathologist and the owner of Speakwell, an education center specializing in foreign-accent reduction in New York.


Twin Towers Restaurant Set To Open Soon
The managers of Windows on the World, on the 107th floor of Tower One of the World Trade Center, say they plan to reopen the restaurant the week of April 19, as part of the Port Authority's push to get the tenants of the bombed twin towers back in place by late April.
"It's just a matter of getting access to the tower," according to Tony Rutigliano, a spokesman for Hilton International, which runs the restaurant through a subsidiary called Inhilco.
The restaurant itself suffered only smoke damage around the vents, he said.


Data Bank/March 28, 1993


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Bogota  $110,000
24 Maplewood Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old colonial, enclosed front porch, 1-car garage, full basement; taxes $3,045.
Edison  $143,000
96 Pheasant Run  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old condominium town house; finished basement, patio, monthly maintenance $105; taxes $2,432.
Hillsdale  $300,000
22 Crest Road  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, over 51-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,100.
Metuchen  $129,900
204 Columbia Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 65-year-old colonial; new kitchen, 1-car garage, full finished basement; taxes $2,796.
Jackson  $168,500
34 Linda Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; c/ a, basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,748.
Pennsauken  $112,000
6175 Rogers Road  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 100-year-old duplex; new kichen, new baths, full basement; $1,693.
OTHER AREAS Albertson, L.I.  $220,000
74 McKinley Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 43-year-old center-hall colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, Florida room, finished basement; taxes $4,000.
Simsbury, Conn.  $120,000
5 Hazelmeadow Place  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 80-year-old colonial; period details, walk-in pantry, brick patio; taxes $1,994.
Eastchester, N.Y.  $232,000
11 Willow Circle  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 60-year-old town house; front porch, fireplace, dining room, unfinished basement; taxes $8,112.


With 'Leolo,' It Is Better to Feel Than to Understand
Although his new movie, "Leolo," seems resolutely focused on bodily functions, Jean-Claude Lauzon insists he wasn't really trying to shock anyone.
"Some people think I sat there and made a list of the worst possible things I could show, but that's not true," says the 39-year-old French-Canadian director.
"If you come out of the film and only remember the more outrageous scenes, you're in bad shape."
Reviewing "Leolo" during the New York Film Festival last fall, Janet Maslin wrote in The Times: "The film maker's taste for the scatological may send some viewers heading for the exits." But, she added, the film's emphasis on the body's nether parts "is linked to a remarkable delicacy -- and to a pure, fearless sense of purpose that raises 'Leolo' far out of the ordinary."


Nomi Dalfen, Daniel Silverman
Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Dalfen of Beverly Hills, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter Nomi Dalfen to Daniel Silverman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Silverman of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Dalfen, 23, is an executive assistant at Charles Wolf &amp; Sons, a diamond importer and distributor in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Yeshiva University.
Her father is a business consultant based in Los Angeles.


No Spitting -- A Concise Guide to Life
5 Things Men Should Never Go Out Smelling Like *
The five cartons of cigarettes everyone around you smoked last night *
Patchouli oil


Sally M. Fuchs, Roy David Howie
David C. Fuchs of New York has announced the engagement of his daughter Sally Mander Fuchs to Roy David Howie, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Howie of Huntington Bay, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Fuchs, 27, is an elementary school art teacher in the Baldwin, L.I., school system.
She graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design and received a master's degree in art education from the C. W. Post Center.
Her father, now retired, was a senior vice president of CBS Inc. in New York.
She is also a daughter of the late Audrey Barrett Fuchs.


When Thoughts Turn to the Tasks Ahead
SPRING had a tough time getting here this year.
But it has arrived and gardeners now have major cleanup tasks ahead of them.
For a while it seemed as though spring were coming along in its usual tranquil way.
Many of the bulbs started to push up before the snowstorm hit.
Many were in full bloom, while others were showing off their lovely floral petals.


A Harvest of Treasures From the Field of Dreams
The Louisville Slugger bats have been wiped clean and the hand-stitched balls rubbed up for the opening on Thursday of "The Sports Show" at the American Primitive Gallery in SoHo.
Baseball folk art and artifacts account for half the 300 items exhibited; the rest relate to softball, football, hockey, fishing and boxing.
Timed to coincide with the onset of baseball fever, an ailment that strikes collectors each spring when "play ball" begins to resound in parks across the land, the show (at 596 Broadway, through May 8) is rich in nostalgia-laden objects.
Hand-wrought toys, sculpture, paintings, a chair, a quilt and a rug are shown alongside machine-made sports equipment, much of it transformed by age and wear into arresting-looking articles.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Albertson  $220,000
74 McKinley Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 43-year-old center-hall colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, Florida room, finished basement; taxes $4,000.
Levittown  $138,000
193 Saddle Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, den; taxes $4,000.
Mineola  $170,000
236 Arlington Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 39-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $2,800.
New Hyde Park  $210,000
29 Tottenham Place  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, 1-car garage, patio; taxes $3,400.
Sea Cliff  $312,000
125 Main Avenue  8-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 85-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, study, two porches, attic, fireplace; taxes $4,500.
Westbury  $125,000
28 College Lane  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 45-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, laundry room; taxes $3,500.
OTHER AREAS Simsbury, Conn.  $120,000
5 Hazelmeadow Place  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 80-year-old colonial; period details, walk-in pantry, brick patio; taxes $1,994.
Eastchester, N.Y.  $232,000
11 Willow Circle  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 60-year-old town house; front porch, fireplace, dining room, unfinished basement; taxes $8,112.
Hillsdale, N.J.  $300,000
22 Crest Road  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, over 51-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,100.


LETTER EXPLAINED MOTIVE IN BOMBING, OFFICIALS NOW SAY
Law-enforcement officials said yesterday that the suspects in the World Trade Center bombing mailed a letter around the time of the attack claiming responsibility and attributing the action to deep resentment against United States policy in the Middle East.
The officials said they had determined late last week that the letter from a group calling itself the Liberation Army Fifth Battalion was authentic and that it provided the first insight into what might have prompted the attack.
A Warning
The letter, mailed to The New York Times and turned over to the authorities, warned of additional actions against American civilian and military targets, including what they described as "Nuclear targets." Such attacks, they said, would be forthcoming unless the United States met a series of demands, including an end to diplomatic relations with Israel and an end to interfering "with any of the Middle East countries interior affairs."


Producing a Picture From Ancient Film
WHAT do you do with an octogenarian roll of unexposed orthochromatic Kodak No. 101 NC (for noncurl) black-and-white film?
Most photographers, believing that processing was hopeless, might have thrown away the film, whose expiration date passed while William Howard Taft was President.
But not Jason Schneider, editor in chief of Popular Photography magazine.


'Mothers': Lives With Crisis After Crisis
"IF you've ever had a mother, been a mother or known a mother (and who hasn't?), you won't want to miss . . . 'Mothers.' "
Regional theaters tend to avoid advertising copy as treacly as that.
Still, the Crossroads Theater Company's blurb sets the tone for the piece that Kathleen McGhee-Anderson turned out on commission from Bill Cosby.


Murdoch II: As Good as the Original?
SCREAMING HEADLINES!
Wingo!
Twenty pages on the capture of "Son of Sam." Even "slabshots" -- Page 1 photographs of dead celebrities, including Steve McQueen and John Lennon, on the autopsy table.
They were the hallmarks of the Rupert Murdoch era at The New York Post -- make that, perhaps, the first Murdoch era at The Post -- 1977 to 1988.


Kansans Know One Gun From Another
To the Editor:
In "The N.R.A., Wounded" (editorial, March 15) you say that the New Jersey "assault weapon" law restricts "military style guns that have no legitimate civilian purpose and are favored by drug gangs and other organized criminals." A March 16 news article quotes a New Jersey state senator saying, "only three kinds of people need assault weapons: cop-killers, drug dealers and terrorists" (some editions).


Q and A
Wine Tours of France
Q.
Do you know of companies that run tours of the wine regions of France? -- Thomas E. Smith, Bloomfield Hills, Mich.


CLEARING THE AIR
There I was, drinking herbal tea and reading a refreshing New York Times Magazine article called "Clearing the Air," by Rona Berg (March 7), on an eco-friendly salon with "the fresh, clean scent of the 90's in the air," when an unfamiliar, unwelcome odor invaded my space and my nose began to itch.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE PATRIARCH: The Rise and Fall of the Bingham Dynasty, by Susan E. Tifft and Alex S. Jones. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $14.) Susan E. Tifft, a former Time magazine editor, collaborated with her husband, Alex S. Jones, a former New York Times reporter, on this saga of journalism's Kentucky barons.
The book shows how the Binghams forged a new, liberal tradition for the Louisville press, only to lose all that they had built through family tragedy and bitter feuding.
"Others have told this story previously, but with nothing like this richness of appalling detail," Richard Kluger said here in 1991.
BEYOND THE CURVE, by Kobo Abe.
Translated by Juliet Winters Carpenter. (Kodansha International, $8.) In this Japanese author's first collection of short fiction to be published in English, haunting, surreal situations continually endanger the characters' sense of self.
One man is threatened with metamorphosis into a plant; another, not a man at all but a Martian, risks being committed to a mental hospital because he is, to all appearances, a human being.
In 1991 our reviewer, Marian Ury, praised the "many attractions" of these "ingenious stories." Kodansha International has also reissued Mr.
Abe's novel THE RUINED MAP, translated by E. Dale Saunders ($13), in which a detective's own identity is inexorably lost to that of his quarry, a missing husband.
It is "a compelling tour de force that seems to have been built lovingly, word by word, sentence by sentence, by a master jeweler of polished prose," Shane Stevens said here in 1969.


A la Carte; It's Spring, and It's Time for Changes
SPRING signals change, rebirth and renewal.
This year that is as true for Long Island restaurants as it is for its flowers and greenery.
Among the new restaurants, chefs and menus are these:
*A husband-and-wife team of Italian chefs from Tokyo has arrived on the Island.
One will help to open a restaurant in Woodmere, and the other will take over the kitchen of a renamed and revived Huntington eating place.


Emotional Tributes For a Dying Friend
BERNARD SLADE'S "Tribute" at the Centre Stage at Molloy College in Rockville Centre through next Sunday is about a father and son who need to come to terms with each other before the father dies of cancer.
The story is presented as if friends of the father, Scottie Templeton, had got together to give the dying man a theatrical tribute on what will most likely be his final birthday.
This structure allows the playwright to expand on aspects of the main character as friends extol the merits of being Scottie's friend.
As in any tribute or memorial service, emotions are displayed like flags, while laughter and tears alternate like day and night.


A SENSE OF PLACE
AT lunch most days he stops his truck at the top of the block.
It's a private spot, up there on the crest, looking down on the roofs and branches.
He eats, he thinks, he lets himself drift . . . he's angling offshore for sea bass and blues, he's stalking some elk in the Rockies.
On the floor of the truck are long trays of mail -- the rest of his circuit, U.S.
Postal Route 4356 -- waiting, waiting to be delivered.
No matter, he won't be late.
The blues are almost hooked now, and the elk have appeared in the meadow.


Watch for Van Slyke To Play Opening Day
ANDY VAN SLYKE is progressing well from arthroscopic knee surgery and should be in the Pittsburgh Pirates' opening-day lineup, trainer KENT BIGGERSTAFF said yesterday.
Van Slyke took batting and fielding practice with the rest of the Pirates yesterday for the first time since his March 13 operation to remove a dime-sized piece of cartilage from his right knee.
Van Slyke, a five-time Gold Glove center fielder, has been working out daily on weight and conditioning machines and hitting in batting cages. (AP)


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Feb. new-home sales, thousands
561
590
Feb. personal income, percent change
0.3
0.4
Tuesday
Feb. personal spending, percent change
0.3
0.4
March consumer confidence, percent
68.5
66.5
Wednesday
Feb. leading indicators, percent change
0.1
0.4
Feb. factory orders, percent change
-1.3
1.5
Thursday
Feb. construction spending, percent change
-1.3
0.5
March purchasing managers' index
55.8
55.2
Friday
March nonfarm payrolls, thousands
365
115
March unemployment rate
7.0
7.0
Thursday: Department store sales figures released  Bundesbank meeting


Player to Get Benefits
In a decision that could have wide-ranging repercussions for college athletics, the Texas Workers' Compensation Commission has ruled that a scholarship football player is a university employee and as such is entitled to full employee benefits for injuries received while playing his sport.
Although the ruling applies only to KENT WALDREP, a Texas Christian University player who was paralyzed in a game against Alabama in Birmingham in 1974, it could have a major impact on college sports if it withstands an expected appeal.


Healthful Tips for Passover Favorites
AS difficult as it may be to monitor fat and cholesterol most of the year, at Passover, the holiday that celebrates the deliverance of the Jews from Egypt, and which begins at sundown April 5, it becomes a Sisyphean task.
Starting with a traditional seder dinner, a ritual feast that ushers in the holiday, the observance continues for eight days and involves consuming no foods that contain a leavening other than eggs.
Not only are eggs used in huge quantities to make feathery sponge cakes for the holiday dinners but they are also essential in preparing some other traditional dishes.
The ground fish used for gefilte fish is held together with beaten egg and matzoh meal.
Eggs are essential in making good chopped liver.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 28 about methods used by colleges to recruit academically talented black students referred imprecisely to the approaches received by Mia Mends, a senior at Bellaire High School in Houston.
Ms.
Mends has received letters from colleges urging her to apply, but no financial offers or recruiting inducements.
The article also misstated her father's occupation.
He is unemployed while in graduate school; he is not an accountant. (A letter from the family about these points, dated March 5, was delayed in reaching the editors.)


Nassau Newcomer at Head of the Class
IF the thought of yet another casual pasta restaurant engenders nothing but yawns, head for Caffe Angelica.
The newcomer in Garden City Park is everything the others want to be.
It has sparkling good looks, snappy service and sensational food.
It would be even better if customers could be assured of reservations.
At present none is accepted.
Passers-by on Jericho Turnpike catch only glimpses of this stunner through its walls of tiny-paned French doors.
Inside are terra-cotta tile floors, polished granite tables, comfortable cafe chairs and interesting wall sconces.


Barbara Horton, Jon R. O'Connor
June wedding plans have been announced for Barbara Ann Horton, a staff education director for a nonprofit organization in Greenfield, N.H., and Jon Richard O'Connor, an export consultant in Dublin, N.H.
Ms.
Horton is the director of continuing education for Crotched Mountain, which runs rehabilitation and educational programs for physically handicapped children and adults.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.


Placido Domingo Performs in Hartford
MAYBE it was the camel the Connecticut Opera's director, George D. Osborne, rode through the streets of Hartford to promote a production of "Aida." Or perhaps it was the pie-throwing contest Mr.
Osborne devised to find someone to hit Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. in the face during the Governor's operatic debut in "The Barber of Seville."
But Mr.
Osborne -- who twice succeeded in getting Luciano Pavarotti to perform with the Connecticut Opera -- has finally lured the superstar tenor Placido Domingo to the 11,000-seat Hartford Civic Center this Friday.


Victoria Falls
To the Editor: The article about Victoria Falls brought back memories of it just 14 months ago.
It's worth the trip from anywhere and fortunately anyone who is on safari in Botswana or Zimbabwe will probably be routed through it.
I was also reminded of thefrustration of needing $10 for departure at the airport.
In our case, they insisted on a $10 bill, which was run through a counterfeit detector.


The Kid's Good


Foreign Affairs; Japan, Or So It Seems
From the aggressiveness of businessmen here, you'd never guess that Japanese politicians and officials have few competitors in the art of being laid-back and hardly worrying about anything, or so it seems.
North Korea, no friend of Tokyo, is building a nuclear bomb.
China, Japan's historical nemesis, is booming and will revolutionize Asia's strategic landscape.
Russia, a major counterweight to Beijing, is imploding, adding to the specter of a future Chinese colossus.
And the Clinton Administration is beating Tokyo over the head about reducing its trade surplus with the U.S. and donating billions in new aid to the Russians.


It Gets Worse: Now Patrick Is Sidelined
James Patrick's injury wasn't as freakish as Brian Leetch's and it might not be as serious.
But, for the moment, it hurts the Rangers almost as much.
Patrick can't play for at least 7 to 10 days, the Rangers announced yesterday, because he has a herniated disk in his lower back.
It gives him pain and takes away strength in his legs.
The condition, discovered yesterday in a magnetic resonance imaging exam, will cause Patrick to miss tonight's game against the Quebec Nordiques at Madison Square Garden and probably next Friday's home game against the Islanders.


Revolution Redux?
"MY mother and father always taught me to fight. It was very clear that there was injustice throughout the world, and you had to struggle against it."
Maceo Cleaver, 23, was talking about revolution, commitment and his parents, the former Black Panthers Eldridge and Kathleen Cleaver.


Sculptor of Dreams
Designs created by Charles James, exemplified by the curvaceous gown, in an exhibition at the Fashion Institute of Technology, March 22


The Executive Computer; Newest Netware Challenges Customers -- and Its Creator
NOVELL INC.'s long-awaited Netware 4.0 operating system software, which will be available in a few days, is an ambitious attempt to keep up with its customers as they move to bigger and broader networks.
It is also an essential element of Novell's efforts to ward off the Microsoft Corporation's forthcoming Windows NT operating system, which is expected to be introduced later this spring.


Loblolly Stable Wins a Derby Double
The Loblolly Farm of Arkansas swept a doubleheader on the road to the Kentucky Derby yesterday when Prairie Bayou won the $600,000 Jim Beam Stakes at Turfway Park and Dalhart won the $125,000 Rebel Stakes at Oaklawn.
The sweep gave Loblolly a commanding position in a division that has lacked a leader, or even a solid favorite.
This time, the farm had the favorites and they performed.
Each horse will probably race once more before the Derby, most likely in the Arkansas Derby at Oaklawn or the Wood Memorial in New York, both scheduled for April 17, exactly two weeks before the 119th Run for the Roses at Churchill Downs.


Hilary French and Wayne Edelman
May wedding plans have been announced for Hilary Dines French and Wayne Mark Edelman.
Miss French, 27, is a coordinator of social events for the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Colden Florance of Washington and John R. French of Greenwich, Conn.
Her father is a lawyer at the Greenwich law firm of Cummings &amp; Lockwood.
Her mother is a fine-arts appraiser and antiques dealer in Washington.
Miss French is a stepdaughter of Colden Florance of Washington and of Leigh French of Greenwich.


Streetscapes: The Eltinge/Empire Theater; A Film Restores a Bit of 42d Street -- in Faux Decay
ONLY Arnold Schwarzenegger could have done it.
The hopeful have been waiting two, ten, even fifty years for the restoration of 42d Street theaters, without result.
But the star's new movie, "The Last Action Hero," has muscled the cheap plastic and crummy signs off the 1912 Empire Theater, at 236 West 42d Street.


Snowy Hills Have Melted Into Spring
By mid-morning, Heriberto Lopez knew today was, well, special.
People were tapping him on the shoulder, or honking their horns and demanding bunches of the $2-a-piece yellow crocuses he was selling as if they had never seen them before.
"They're saying, 'Where'd you get those?' 'What are they?' " said Mr.
Lopez in amazement, standing at the downtown corner where he usually has to block traffic to unload cellophane-wrapped rosebuds.


Around and Around These Free Agents Go
After four weeks of pro football's historic venture into unrestricted free agency, some of the numbers are amazing.
Journeymen who made $200,000 or so a year are finding new teams to pay them millions.
The merry-go-round of quarterbacks arriving and departing may never stop.
But the biggest bucks of all await Reggie White when the Philadelphia Eagles' defensive end finally chooses a suitor.


MARCH 21-27: Ambassador to France; An Expert at Politics Who Changed the Rules
In nominating an ambassador to France last week, President Clinton opted for a serious political operator -- Pamela Harriman, whose life has spanned a world of changes in the role of women.
Born into the British aristocracy 73 years ago, she came of age when a woman's mere friendship with the rich and powerful was enough to mark her a social success.
But she forged friendships into political clout, building a long-standing network of rich and powerful friends on both sides of the Atlantic.


Missteps in Waco: A Raid Re-examined/A special report.; U.S. Agents Say Fatal Flaws Doomed Raid on Waco Cult
Several Federal agents involved in the violent raid on a heavily armed cult in Texas dispute official descriptions of the operation as well planned, likening it instead to the Charge of the Light Brigade, laden with missteps, miscalculations and unheeded warnings that could have averted bloodshed.
Contradicting the official version of events, four of the agents involved in the raid and in a review of its aftermath said that supervisors had realized even before they began their assault that they had lost any element of surprise but went ahead anyway.
A Sketchy Defense
As the costliest and deadliest operation in the history of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms enters its second month, the agency leaders who planned it insist that they did nothing wrong, that the operation was betrayed by a telephone call at the last minute, resulting in an ambush.
But the agency has provided only sketchy details of what happened, why the raid was even tried and why it was carried out when it was.


Paying by the Bag For Garbage Pickup
In a recent article about pay-per-bag garbage collection ("Per-Bag Garbage System Creeps Along"), it was suggested that some Mendham Township residents are not participating because they find it burdensome to determine the weight of their garbage.
That may be a rationale put forth by some, including the unsuccessful bidder for garbage collecting, Waste Management, but to me it does not make sense.
When we instituted this program last year, residents eagerly took advantage of it for several reasons.
First, it eliminates the need to use Waste Management and pay its fee of $396 a year, which is not tax deductible.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Thomas Gifford's PRAETORIAN (Bantam, $22.50) looks back to the grim days of World War II when Rommel was taking over North Africa and the Allies were reeling.
The story centers on Rodger Godwin, an American newspaper correspondent who was in Paris during the glory days of the 1920's.
We learn how he got into the newspaper business.
We become acquainted with people he interviewed, among them a German officer named Erwin Rommel and a legendary British officer who rode alongside Lawrence of Arabia.
We follow Godwin to England, where his reports during the blitz turn him into an Edward R. Murrow type.


Making the Easy Military Cuts
In unveiling its proposed military budget for 1994, the Pentagon has adopted a holding pattern.
The $263 billion spending request announced by Defense Secretary Les Aspin today did not cancel any major arms programs.
Nor does it require any fundamental restructuring.
Many spending cuts in the proposed budget have been achieved by accelerating reductions that the Bush Administration had planned for later years.


Mississippi Campaign Reflects the Rights Struggle
The special election here next week to fill a vacant Congressional seat has attracted a bevy of Democratic candidates who seem to symbolize the stages and philosophies of three decades of black political evolution in Mississippi.
But three white candidates are also in the eight-way race, and they are emblematic of both the longstanding racial tension within the state's Democratic Party and of the vigorous Republican Party, which has wrested important elected offices away from the Democrats in the last decade.


CLEARING THE AIR
There I was, drinking herbal tea and reading a refreshing New York Times Magazine article called "Clearing the Air," by Rona Berg (March 7), on an eco-friendly salon with "the fresh, clean scent of the 90's in the air," when an unfamiliar, unwelcome odor invaded my space and my nose began to itch.


The Way A.L.P.A. Sees It
To the Editor:
In response to "Those Overpaid Pilots . . . And the Overpaid Union Officials" (Letters, March 7), the main reason that airline unions oppose foreign airlines operating in United States domestic markets can be summed up in two words: unfair competition.
The unfairness comes from foreign government subsidies and protections with which United States carriers cannot compete.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE ORANGE BOOK
Written and illustrated by Richard McGuire.
Unpaged.
New York: Children's Universe/Rizzoli International Publications. $14.95. (Ages 3 to 6)
TIGERS
By Roland Edwards.
Illustrated by Judith Riches.
Unpaged.
New York: Tambourine Books/William Morrow &amp; Company. $15. (Ages 3 and up)


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LAWRENCE AND THE WOMEN The Intimate Life of D. H. Lawrence.
By Elaine Feinstein.
HarperCollins, $27.50.


TV Industry Scrambles for Studio Space
UNTIL January, you could get to Sesame Street by way of Ninth Avenue in Manhattan.
Come July, however, Sesame Street will be found intersecting 34th Avenue in Astoria, Queens.
Having outgrown Unitel Video's Studio 55, at Ninth Avenue and 55th Street, the Children's Television Workshop, which produces "Sesame Street," started searching in 1991 for new space in Manhattan.
They needed at least 12,000 square feet, said Marjorie Kalins, the group vice president of production, and clearance of 23 feet to the lights, since the sets must be high enough off the floor to allow the Muppet puppeteers to work standing up.


Big Brother Isn't Watching, but Foote Is
Had he been anyplace but in a dugout that night, Barry Foote might have been ordered to seek counseling of some sort.
Job stress had clearly claimed another victim.
There were odd whistles, inexplicable hand claps, words without apparent coherence.
His title was manager.
Foote's behavior was weird, to say the least.
Forget counseling.
Foote's behavior could have got him arrested.
The whistles, the claps, the monosyllables, were codes.
The information being transmitted from the dugout to the plate was the identity of the next pitch.
The night's theft was the 1984 Florida State League championship.


Corrections
An article yesterday about The New York Post's financial struggles described Abraham Hirschfeld's efforts to acquire the newspaper incorrectly in one passage in some copies.
It was Steven Hoffenberg, not Mr.
Hirschfeld, whose attempt to buy the paper was thwarted by a battle with the Securities and Exchange Commission over his business practices.


Friends Like Russia Make Diplomacy a Mess
AS President Clinton struggles to have an impact on events in Bosnia, Haiti and Russia, it is clear how much American foreign policy has changed in just the past two years.
While Mr.
Clinton's predecessors usually had the luxury of dealing with clearly defined conflicts between states, Mr.
Clinton has the burden of trying to deal with the international spillover of conflicts within states.
This has created the paradoxical situation in which the United States has never been more powerful, in standing astride the world without another superpower competitor, and has never seemed more powerless in trying to influence internal events inside countries, with a Treasury short of cash, a Pentagon short of will and a public that can't sort out the good guys from the bad guys without a scorecard.
No wonder that American foreign policy under Mr.
Clinton has so far been largely symbolic gestures in places like Haiti, Bosnia and the Middle East.
The President is at least trying in all of these places, but his efforts so far only underscore how many foreign problems today are beyond diplomacy, or at least the conventional practice of it.
Many days it seems that the unfolding dramas in Bosnia, Russia, Haiti and Somalia are better raw material for a poet's lament than a diplomat's labor, the stuff for a Keats, not a Kissinger.


Corrections
An article on March 14 about the proposed energy tax misidentified the school at which Alfred Marcus is a professor, and because of an editing error, a correction in this space last Sunday located it incorrectly.
It is the Carlson School of Management, not Carleton College.
And it is at the University of Minnesota, not the University of Wisconsin.


'They Were the Bravest, Most Committed Americans I Know'
To the Editor:
In covering the tragic armed conflict between the Federal Government and the Branch Davidians at Waco, Tex., wire services have identified the cult as "a splinter group of the Seventh Day Adventist Church." Since the mass media also use David Koresh to preach their own gospel against "religious zealots," some might suspect the Seventh Day Adventists of a similar cultic trend.


After the CD Long Box, It's Back to the Future
This week, the recording industry will stop making those long, ecologically wasteful cardboard CD boxes and switch to packages barely larger than the disk.
Long boxes, introduced with the CD 10 years ago, were meant to protect the fragile plastic jewel boxes within and then be thrown away, but they caused an uproar with environmentalists.
The new containers, which came about as a result of a consensus within the industry, are made of a sturdier cardboard or plastic, or even metal.
The new packaging may provide a visual payoff for consumers as well.
Making use of graphics on expandable containers and heavy, embossed paper, the designs could rival those elaborate 12-by-12-inch LP covers of old.
A recent example of the possibilities is Paul Simon's "Rhythm of the Saints" CD; with a cover affecting kente cloth, the box echoes the world-beat music inside.


TWO EASY PIECES -- BUYING A SUIT
YOU'D PROBABLY RATHER MOW THE LAWN, SIT through your niece's third-grade dance recital or have your wisdom tooth cut out with an Exacto knife.
But unless you've developed technology gleaned from an episode of "Nova" that the rest of us missed, new suits won't find their way into your closet unescorted.
You'd love to send somebody else to get them, the same way you get your underwear (that only half your shorts fit is merely a coincidence).
Unfortunately, you have to go out and buy them yourself, so get moving.
No whining that you don't know how.
There's a new world out there.
Here's a plan for dressing as if you're part of it.
1.
Rather than embark on your usual aimless search for the Harris tweed grail, first decide what you're buying a suit for.
Business travel?
Then the estimable qualities are weightlessness and the ability to lose wrinkles simply by being hung for 10 minutes in a steamy bathroom. (Forget about the suit. Wouldn't
you
like to shake out that way?) Want a suit you can wear year-round? Don't forget that corduroy tends to retain beach sand. Hoping to look more together on vacation than your kids think possible? Now we're talking an unconstructed jacket with at least three buttons and maybe a floppy pants leg that complements a sandal. Knowing a suit's purpose will narrow your field of vision and shorten your reenactment of the Diaspora.


Gay Rights Hurt by Lack of Uniform Protections
Jon Lozano, a gay man from Troy, was stunned last December when his boss at a McDonald's restaurant took him aside during a lunch break and told him, according to Mr.
Lozano, that "he had to let me go because of my sexual preference."
But Mr.
Lozano was even more amazed when he was told by both his lawyer and a state official that he had no legal recourse.
They explained that New York does not have a statewide gay rights law and that Troy's local ordinance protects only public employees.


Clothes for the Lands of Make-Believe
ACTORS, it seems, can never get enough of dressing up.
On West 46th Street, directly across from the Imperial Theater, where "Les Miserables" is in its sixth year, is Nicolina, a women's clothing store that sells the stuff of make-believe.
In other words, everyday clothes for Broadway actresses.
"They all come in here -- the women from 'Guys and Dolls,' 'Les Mis,' 'Crazy for You,' " said Nicole Gabrielle, a co-owner.
Faith Prince, the Tony Award-winning star of "Guys and Dolls," is a regular, she said.
"One night it was 10 to 8, and she was still here trying on clothes."


Loulouloulou's Jeansjeans
Sometimes inspiration strikes just once.
Two new jeans ads -- one for the Gap and one for Ferretti -- feature Loulou de la Falaise, the longtime assistant to Yves Saint Laurent, in strikingly similar outfits: black jeans, a black shirt, a large ring and suede high-heel oxfords.
Both ads were photographed by Steven Meisel and styled by Lori Goldstein, a contributing editor at Allure magazine.


Asthma Kills
In the end, it took Mike Ivey, 20, only a few minutes to die.
Though he'd had asthma since the age of 11, Ivey was an energetic, active young man.
He attended Catholic University in Washington on an academic scholarship and played varsity football while also holding down a full-time job and helping raise his 2-year-old daughter.
But when he was rushed to the emergency room last fall, gasping for air like a man drowning, Ivey was already doomed.
Two weeks earlier, he had begun using his inhaler more frequently to open up his bronchial airways and breathe more easily.
Apparently he didn't realize that his increasing need for the inhaler meant something deadly was happening to his lungs.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 28, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
6
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
61
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
50
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
4
36
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
5
2
WILDEST HEARTS, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) A businesswoman's proposal of a marriage of convenience to a rich man has stormy romantic consequences.
6
8
BYGONES, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A dinner party reveals family strains and love.
7 *
10
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
8
4
SILENT PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) Lieut.
Lucas Davenport on the trail of an escaped serial killer.
9 *
14
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman's death leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
10
4
THE FIRST WIVES CLUB, by Olivia Goldsmith. (Pocket, $5.99.) Three women conspire to get even with the men who divorced them for younger wives.
11
3
ON THE PULSE OF MORNING, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $5.) The poem read at President Clinton's inauguration.
12
1
ACTS OF FAITH, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $6.99.) The tales of three Brooklyn natives, one of whom rises high in the Roman Catholic hierarchy, two who break with their Jewish heritage.
13 *
4
UNTAMED, by Elizabeth Lowell. (Avon, $5.99.) A young woman's romance, in 12th-century Britain, with a man returning from the Crusades.
14
26
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a farming family.
15
6
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is still threatened by aliens.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
5
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) The autobiography of the retired commander of a Navy counterterrorist unit.
2
6
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
3
490
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
4 *
97
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
5
2
DOUBLE CROSS, by Sam Giancana and Chuck Giancana. (Warner, $5.99.) Two relatives of the late Sam Giancana recall his life in the Mafia.
6
11
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
7 *
25
ALIVE, by Piers Paul Read. (Avon, $5.99.) How some of the members of a rugby team survived a plane crash in the Andes in 1972.
8
13
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
9
7
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life during the past two decades that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
10
7
HILLARY CLINTON: The Inside Story, by Judith Warner. (Signet, $4.99.) A biography of the First Lady.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
127
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
110
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
85
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
10
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
5
4
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1993 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Aviation Training Near La Guardia
There is a baccalaureate program in aeronautics at the College of Aeronautics adjoining La Guardia Airport in Queens on Long Island  [ "Colleges Fight Over Aviation Center," March 7 ] .
Jobs in civil aviation, until recently that county's economic dynamo, have been plummeting since the late 80's, like those in military aviation and aerospace, which enriched Nassau and Suffolk.
Did we need all those new law and business schools, either?
It appears the Empire State has no compass and no clothes!
BRUCE ROSEN Forest Hills


Wall Street; Going Gaga Over High-Tech I.P.O.'s
UTTER the words "information sciences" within earshot of an institutional investor and you can set off a chain reaction of drooling, tics and pulling out of checkbooks.
The big players can't get enough of the stocks of small companies in the software and computer businesses, and proof of their insatiable appetites is in the levitating initial public offering market.


Hartford Whalers' Goal: To Become Connecticut's Team, or Else
SINCE moving to Hartford during the 1974-75 season, officials of the Hartford Whalers hockey club have made it a point to stress that the Whalers are the only major league sports team in Connecticut.
And in recent years, as attendance has steadily declined, some club officials have said that although the Whalers carry a Hartford geographical designation, they are, in effect, "Connecticut's team" and worthy of fan support throughout the state.
In truth, hockey fans in most of the state have shown little or no allegiance to the Whalers.
Fans in Fairfield and New Haven Counties, for example, tend to root for the New York Rangers, while most hockey fans in the eastern part of the state follow the Boston Bruins.


Goya's Hair-Raising Images
ALDOUS HUXLEY was himself middle-aged when he imagined an Anthology of Later Works.
To be included, an artist had to have been a master who lived "without ever ceasing to learn of life," and, in the novelist's view, not all masters had achieved this.
Wordsworth, for example, spent his last 50 years preserving "an almost unbroken record of dullness," and "Peter Pan-like," Haydn "continued to write the same sort of thing he had written 20, 30 and 40 years before."


Emmet Building
To the Editor:
Last Aug. 30, an article about the Emmet Building at 95 Madison Avenue headed "Overcoming the Fear of Terra Cotta" described Thomas Addis Emmet, its developer, as the great nephew of Robert Emmet, the Irish patriot.
He was also the grandson of Thomas Addis Emmet, Robert's older brother, the secretary of the Society of United Irishmen.
This organization, which launched the rebellion of 1798, had depended on the help of the French.


Right-Size Tool Makes the Job of Drilling Easier
AN electric drill is essential for home repair.
It may even be more useful than a hammer or a saw.
Choosing a drill to buy is not too difficult.
The model should be reversible, for retrieving screws, and it should have trigger-controlled variable speeds.
A drill's size is characterized by the capacity of its jaws, or chuck.
A drill having a chuck capacity of three-eighths of an inch is the most versatile for home repairs and general carpentry.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
116.55
116.00
132.97
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6340
1.6365
1.6405
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2444
1.2471
1.1888
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4865
1.4890
1.7445
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Gold
$332.25
$331.50
$342.20
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


IN SHORT: FICTION
AMERICAN STAR A Love Story. By Jackie Collins. Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.


In Giving Cash, Builders Rated Japan's Politicians
In a vivid demonstration of the hierarchy of Japanese influence-peddling, newly disclosed documents show that Japan's biggest construction companies distributed tens of thousands of dollars to the country's leading politicians, including Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa and three of his predecessors.
The documents indicate that the money was distributed according to a finely tuned assessment of how much sway each official held in the awarding of public contracts.


Lisa M. Tillman, David Frankfurter
Lisa Michelle Tillman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Tillman of New York, was married yesterday evening to Dr.
David Frankfurter, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
George M. Frankfurter of Baton Rouge, La.
Rabbi Joel Goor officiated at the National Arts Club in New York.
Mrs.
Frankfurter, 26, is a writer and television producer in New York.
She graduated with honors from New York University.


Flying Florida, In 40's Style
Though licensing problems had stalled Vintage Air Tours after its inaugural flight in December, the new airline is now offering day trips from Orlando to Key West, Fla., on two renovated World War II-era Douglas DC-3 aircraft.
There are four round trips a week, and the 90-minute trip is filled with memorabilia.
Stewardesses, wearing period uniforms and seamed stockings, distribute old issues of Life and the Saturday Evening Post.
They serve champagne, juice or soft drinks while chatting about the war and other "current events" from nearly 50 years ago.
Because DC-3's fly lower than jets the cabins are not pressurized and fresh air from vents ventilates the cabin.
Passengers can get a view through a picture window in the floor.
The day trip includes round-trip fare and a full day's excursion in Key West.
Passengers take a tour of the island by trolley and eat lunch at the Pier House Resort.
They then can choose between sightseeing or sailing and snorkeling before they join the sunset celebration on the docks, a Key West tradition, and fly back to Orlando.


Workers Need Place in the Economic Sun Again; The Company Store
To the Editor:
The prescription of Richard B. Freeman and Joel Rogers for saving the labor movement (Op-Ed, March 10) would wind up killing it.
They advocate that Federal law banning company unions be modified to permit employers to set up so-called "employee participation committees," which would "not engage in traditional collective bargaining over wages, hours and benefits," but "would have enforceable rights to information and consultation with management over labor policies."


On Language; Vetter Vets 'Vet'
As a practicing veterinarian many years ago," writes Douglas F. McBride of Washingtonville, N.Y., "I was occasionally called to
vet
a horse. I was accustomed to being called by the noun
vet
, but the use of the word as a verb to describe what I was doing was infrequent."
Hoo-boy, have times changed. Now the verb
to vet
means "to search for weaknesses or flaws"; the noun
vet
continues to mean "animal doctor," but the noun for the person who does the vetting preparatory to clearance of a nominee for public office or candidate for any job is a
vetter
.


Deferred Payment On J.U.A. Claims
Re: "Making Hay of Insurance Settlements," March 7:
It's an obligation rather than a conflict to inform a client holding onto a J.U.A. deferred payment claim of the possibility of selling that claim at a discounted price.
It would be asking too much to require a contingency-retainer client, typically a person without much in the way of disposable income, to retain and pay for a second lawyer to review a decision to sell a J.U.A.-deferred claim.


Russian Concierge
To the Editor: The Practical Traveler column "Making the Most of a Concierge" (Feb. 21) reminded me of the concierge on our floor in the Hotel Waldorf, St.
Petersburg, Russia, in 1979, whose only function, we thought, was to hold our passports when we were out and to smile kindly upon our departures and arrivals.
To our surprise, when we returned from a day of sightseeing she told one of the women in our group that she had found her pantyhose in the wastepaper basket and had tied them to the woman's suitcase.
The concierge added that pantyhose in Russia at that time were $10 a pair, and even torn ones should not be discarded.


Team's Reorganizing May Be Done in Court
A furor involving the American Contract Bridge League's directors, some top-ranked players, poisoning and large sums of money has been a focus of attention here in the Spring National Championships, which end today.
It all began in Indianapolis 16 months ago, when the Reisinger Board-a-Match Team Championship was won by a group of professionals led and sponsored by Cliff Russell: Sam Lev, David Berkowitz, Larry Cohen, Marty Bergen and Bjorn Fallenius.
None has ever won a world title, the pinnacle of a bridge career.


THE CAMPUS CRIME WAVE
Matthews states that "after 10 P.M. the campus, with its wild drinking and unprotected sex, is almost entirely adultless." Perhaps she doesn't know that Americans decided 18 was the age of majority.
Virtually everyone on the campus is an adult with adult rights.
College administrators cannot have the same powers to control conduct that high-school administrators have.
JUDITH OWENS
Brick, N.J.


Question No. 1 in the City Council President Race; Why Would Anyone Want the Job of Mostly Sitting Around Waiting to Break a Tie?
Seven months before the election of the next City Council President, about a dozen people, from a comedian to an ex-convict, are hungrily eyeing the office.
But, as many of them acknowledge, the most intriguing question about the race may be not who will run, but why.
"It is frustrating to run for a job when the first thing out of people's mouths is, 'Why would you want to do
that
?' " said Donald M. Halperin, a State Senator from Brooklyn.


George Washington's Laborers
To the Editor:
Near the end of her review of two books about George Washington, "For King and Country" and "Patriarch" (Feb. 14), Joyce Appleby wrote, "It is still nice to learn . . . that more people labored at Mount Vernon in the 1790's than in the Government's executive branch."


Modernism and Morality In the South Bronx
Come 1998, a gleaming new police academy building will streak through the center of the South Bronx like a marathon runner dashing toward the ribbon.
The academy's architects have designed a modern athletic thoroughbred of a building.
With a sleek, translucent facade of steel and glass, curving as it rounds the bend at East 153d Street just off the Grand Concourse, the design looks every inch a champion, and indeed it is one.
Last December, the design won a competition for the most important new public building to go forward during the Dinkins administration.
A lot is riding on this project.
With a budget of $230 million, the Police Academy is an important civic symbol, a sign that even in hard times, New York can build major public works.
Now housed in crowded quarters on East 20th Street in Manhattan, the academy will be relocated to the South Bronx in an effort to erase the borough's image as a metaphor for urban decline.
Not least, at a time when law and order promises to become a major issue in the approaching mayoral campaign, this project offers a conspicuous show of support for the city's law enforcement officers.
It also offers an opportunity of overpowering importance: a chance to rethink the critical place of law enforcement in American cities today.
This is what lifts the project out of the realm of local news and into a national spotlight.


In the Region: Connecticut; Recent Sales
Bloomfield, Conn.  $115,000
240 Woodland Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 47-year-old Cape Cod; screened porch, new roof, oversized living room, 0.75 acre; taxes $2,395.
Burlington, Conn.  $137,750
16 Knollwood Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old cape cod; h/w floors, patio, 0.5 acre; taxes $1,889.
Simsbury, Conn.  $120,000
5 Hazelmeadow Place  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 80-year-old colonial; period details, walk-in pantry, brick patio; 80- by 83-foot lot; taxes $1,994.
Cortlandt, N.Y.  $260,000
413 Half Moon Bay  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 5-year-old condominium; foyer, den, breakfast room, fireplace, deck; common charges $355; taxes $5,635.
Eastchester, N.Y.  $232,000
11 Willow Circle  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 60-year-old town house; front porch, fireplace, dining room, unfinished basement; taxes $8,112.
White Plains, N.Y.  $244,750
34 Bryant Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 71-year-old colonial; enclosed porch, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,774.
OTHER AREAS Sea Cliff, L.I.  $312,000
125 Main Avenue  8-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 85-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, study, two porches, attic, fireplace; taxes $4,500.
Westbury, L.I.  $125,000
28 College Lane  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 45-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, laundry room; taxes $3,500.
Hillsdale, N.J.  $300,000
22 Crest Road  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, over 51-year-old colonial; fireplace, 2-car garage, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,100.


A Ballroom Is for Dancing
Cartier Panther Ball, for Kips Bay Boys and Girls Club, March 20.


Along the Way of the White Clouds


A Spring Gala
Dance Theater of Harlem benefit, Lincoln Center, March 25.


Melissa Epley, Brennan Warble
Mr. and Mrs.
Marion J. Epley 3d of Millbrook, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Melissa Jane Epley to Brennan John Warble, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence T. Warble of Bronxville, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Epley, 25, is an exercise physiologist at Allen &amp; Company, an investment banking company in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University, as did her fiance, and received a master's degree in applied physiology and nutrition from Columbia University.
Her father, now retired, was a senior partner in White &amp; Case, the law firm, in New York.


2 Men Sentenced In 'Windows Trial'
Two men reputed to be high-ranking Mafia figures were sentenced to long prison terms Friday for extortion and conspiracy.
They were convicted in a major trial over accusations of mob control of the window-installation industry in New York City.
Benedetto Aloi, 58 years old, said to be a top figure in the Colombo crime family, was given 16 years and 8 months, and Venero Mangano, 71, described as a leader of the Genovese family, received 15 years and 8 months when they were sentenced late Friday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
Each man was also fined $100,000.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Men's Fashions Magazine Part 2


Violating Our Puritan Soul
To the Editor:
I don't know if anyone is still afraid of Virginia Woolf, but it is amply clear from the scurrilous little exercise in abuse that passes as Walter Kendrick's review of "The Devil at Large" (Feb. 14) that Mr.
Kendrick is still afraid of Erica Jong.
Or is it just the liberated female eroticism for which her writing has come to stand that robs him of his critical judgment?
Indeed, he seems so incensed by Ms.
Jong's claim that she may have violated America's Puritan soul as a woman even more than Henry Miller did as a man that he can't be bothered to examine its plausibility -- a plausibility, ironically enough, to which Mr.
Kendrick's own vitriolic review lends support.


Married Names Carry Old Ownership Stigma
To the Editor:
Your March 18 article on married women who keep their own name or take their husband's gives reasons of sentiment and practicality for doing so, but omits philosophical objections.


No Headline
Sometimes I feel like an ambassador of rock-and-roll in a country that has no rhythm.
OLEG G. RUMYANTSEV, seeking a compromise in the Russian Congress of People's Deputies.  [ 6:6. ]


Chaney Looks Just Horrible, He Feels Worse, but Loves It
John Chaney's larynx is so overused, his voice is alternately hoarse and soprano.
But not even the din of a large Kingdome crowd can drown him out.
Late Friday night against Vanderbilt here, the knot on Chaney's tie was loosened to midchest, the pants around his waist needed hitching or a tighter belt and his Temple Owls were skittishly ahead, 62-59, with 14.1 seconds left.


Market Timers Deserve Better Than a 'C'
To the Editor:
Regarding "Mediocrity and the Market Timers" (Wall Street, March 7), while the difference in annual returns between the top-rated Telephone Switch Newsletter and the Wilshire 5000 may seem small, 16.4 percent versus 15.2 percent, an initial investment of $10,000 grew to $66,740 after 12 1/2 years under the T.S.N. program at a compound growth rate of 16.4 percent per year.


Mark Tender and Melissa Dunst
Melissa Susan Dunst, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence D. Dunst of New York, was married last evening to Mark Tender, the son of M. Matthew and Millicent Tender of New York.
Rabbi David Posner performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Mrs.
Tender, 26, is an assistant producer of ABC's "Good Morning America" program in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of LCF&amp;L, an advertising agency in New York.
Her mother, Diane Dunst, is the president of Diane Dunst Promotion Inc., a promotions agency in New York.


Lynn Friedberg and Jeffrey Citron
Lynn Robin Friedberg, the daughter of Judie Friedberg-Chessin of Old Westbury, L.I., and the late Marvin C. Friedberg, was married yesterday evening to Jeffrey Marc Citron, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Citron of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Daniel Fogel officiated at the Garden City (L.I.) Hotel.
Mrs.
Citron, 29, graduated from Boston University, from which she also received a master's degree in reading.
She is a reading specialist at Intermediate School 61 in Rego Park, Queens.
She is the stepdaughter of Dr.
Herbert Chessin of Old Westbury.


Commercial Property: Design/Build; Pros and Cons of an Under-One-Roof Architects Firm
DESIGN/BUILD.
It's jargon for a one-stop-shopping approach to architectural services, one in which the same firm designs an office and then builds it.
The list of pros is long.
When the architect and construction contractor work for the same firm, they can ram a project through in record time, ordering parts and furniture literally as fast as the designs come off the drawing board.
Neither can waffle out of responsibility for a problem by blaming the other.
And a designer and builder working together from the first are more likely to devise a realistic budget.


On Sunday; In Comparison, Just Another Happy Couple
SHE said she wanted a more conventional relationship, and that he told her that marriage was "just a piece of paper." He said that he likes the city, she likes the country; he likes to sleep with the air-conditioner on and she likes to sleep with it off.
She said she was not sure where the relationship was going and he said it was "kind of established" that they would never marry.
It was the world of he said-she said according to Woody Allen and Mia Farrow as they sifted through the debris of their relationship in a grungy lower Manhattan courtroom this past week.
The occasion was a hearing to determine custody of their biological son and two adopted children.
Lawyers and housewives and movie fans stood in line for hours for a seat in Room 341, with its harsh lights and peeling brown walls, as the two doll-sized stars took the stand.


A Failure To Communicate
To the Editor:
I agree with Ms.
James that "Falling Down" jerks the audience around.
It doesn't successfully convey the angst people feel toward the world around them, and in some ways resembles a "Die Hard" film played backward, appealing to the blind rage we feel at the slow decline that we perceive in our way of life.


Nancy Lalin, Spencer Hart
Nancy Lalin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hill M. Lalin of Highland Park, N.J., was married last evening to Spencer Hart, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Hart of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Bennett F. Miller performed the ceremony at the Hotel Westbury in New York.


5 Pieces of Europe's Past Return to Life: Russia; At a Moscow gallery, an overhaul stopped and restarted
Given Russia's economic chaos, it is something of a miracle that virtually all of its major cultural landmarks are still relatively intact.
One of the most famous, however, the Tretyakov Gallery, nearly fell victim to perestroika.
The Tretyakovka, tucked into a lovely side street in the old merchants' neighborhood across the Moscow River from the Kremlin, houses one of Russia's two great collections of Russian icons and paintings (the other is in the Russian Museum in St. Petersburg).


G.O.P. Loses Car, Blames Liberalism
The best politicians, it is said, find ways to turn adversity into advantage.
So when the official car of New York State's Republican Party was stolen in Albany one night this week, the party's chairman, William D. Powers, seized the opportunity.
He blamed the Democrats.
"The liberal, revolving door lenient sentencing policies supported by Mario Cuomo and his cronies have resulted in an epidemic of car thefts in our state," Mr.
Powers said in a news release announcing the crime.
"It's only a matter of time before it hits home on all of us."


Innerwear as Outerwear
I THOUGHT it was going to be about the history of underwear.
So did a lot of other people.
The title, "Infra-Apparel," didn't help much, one way or the other.
Since Jan. 4, when Richard Martin and Harold Koda took over as the curators of the Costume Institute at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the rumors had been flying.
Their first show,
everybody
knew, would be something sexy about underwear.
But the minute I turned up at the galleries last week, I could see it was not about corsets.
Too many dresses on the mannequins.
Too little underwear.
Actually, I was a bit disappointed, for some years ago, when girdles and bras were still a necessary part of most women's wardrobes, I put in time as a corset editor.
I fancy myself something of an expert.


Stony Brook Rallies To Restore Arts Theater
IT was not the usual way to heighten cultural awareness.
But the president of the State University at Stony Brook, Dr.
John H. Marburger 3d, conceded that the Staller Center for the Arts at the college had received more positive publicity from a flood on Feb. 21 than from any single performance.


Caroline Ellen and Rick Temerian
CAROLINE ELLEN and Rick Temerian's wedding on the afternoon of March 19 was as simple, nonchalant and charming as a kiss blown across the room.
They were married in Room 300 of the New York State Supreme Court Building on Centre Street in downtown Manhattan, a large courtroom with wall murals, Art Deco lamps and carved wooden benches.
One of the first guests to arrive, Richard Winick, said, "Is this where Rick is getting sentenced?"


Business Diary/March 21-26
COMPANIES I.B.M. Forsakes Techies for a Cookie King


Cats' Plan: Short and to the Point
Dean Smith tried his best today to downplay North Carolina's size advantage over Cincinnati.
"But Cincinnati is a big team, too," Smith said, which is like Gulliver saying the Lilliputians have one heck of a vertical leap.
Don't buy it, and few have, especially the Bearcats.
They see the size of North Carolina's backcourt and know their work is cut out for them.
The Tar Heels have one of the best combinations of size and speed in college basketball.
After all, they have Eric Montross, a 7-foot center who clogs the lane, blocks shots, rebounds well and can score, too.
That just about covers everything.


It's Got a Beat and You Can Surrender to It
THE Government is a lousy disk jockey -- the kind that makes you want to lower the volume, change stations or simply get out.
But to paraphrase the Talking Heads' "Life During Wartime," it ain't no party and it ain't no disco: it's the Government trying to make people come out with their hands over their ears.
In the 1989 battle to arrest Manuel Noriega in Panama and in the current standoff with the cult leader David Koresh in Waco, Tex., music has been part of the assault.
During the Persian Gulf War, troops blasted heavy-metal rock across the border of Kuwait.
When the Government has a captive audience , the tunes are definitely not designed to soothe the savage breast.
Call it siege-rock.


Many Faiths Join Effort to Address Social Ills
DESPITE the bitter winds and icy cold that buffeted White Plains on March 18, those who stood outside the Coachman Hotel were unswerving in their efforts to draw attention to the plight of homeless families living inside.
With a racially and ethnically diverse group of demonstrators, who represented such institutions as Grace Episcopal Church, St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church, the Jewish Community Center and the White Plains Interfaith Housing Coalition, among others, the scene carried strong overtones of 1960's protests.
Yet the organizational strategy behind the demonstration reflected a new breed of activism at work in the county, an activism that brings together interfaith groups for social change.


Melinda Hackett and Walter Hutchins
Mrs.
Russell W. Munson and Montague H. Hackett Jr., both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Melinda Hackett, to Walter J. Hutchins, a son of Mary Hutchins of Norwich, Vt., and William S. Hutchins of Bedford, Pa.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hackett, 31, is a painter in New York.
She graduated from Hobart and William Smith College.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother, Linda Munson, is a photographer in New York.
The prospective bride's stepfather, Mr.
Munson, is a consulting editor for Flying magazine, in New York.


Manager's Profile; G. Kenneth Heebner
Fund: CGM Mutual, balanced, $549 million in assets.  Born: Sept. 27, 1940; Philadelphia


Gun Amnesty Program For County Residents
MOUNT VERNON will be paying $50 for handguns and $75 for rifles next month in a one-week "no-questions-asked" gun turn-in experiment financed by assets seized from criminals.
The gun amnesty, a program that is being used more and more in cities across the country in an effort to reduce the severity of street violence, will extend over a six-day period starting April 12 at two sites in Mount Vernon.


Heavy Turnout in Bridgeport for a Casino's 'Job Fair'
Hundreds of unemployed workers flocked to an all-day "job fair" in Connecticut's largest and poorest city today to find out about a campaign by Mirage Resorts, which is trying to gain support to build casinos in Bridgeport and Hartford.
More than 1,000 people entered the Cardinal Sheehan Center on Main Street within the first hour, and more than 5,000 were expected by the end of the day.


Betting That the Fix Is In In Japan
TO believers in free markets, the idea that a government can manipulate a huge stock market is abhorrent.
But this year the Japanese Government seems to have succeeded in doing just that.
With Japanese stocks spurting, foreign money managers are being forced to decide whether the rally is real.
More and more are deciding they had better get on board, lest a recovery in the Japanese economy begin without them.
The bulls note that Japan's money supply grew last month, for the first time since August, and believe that the long bear market, in which the Nikkei 225 average fell 63 percent from its peak at the end of 1989, is finally over.


Deferred Payment On J.U.A. Claims
Re: "Making Hay of Insurance Settlements," March 7:
It's an obligation rather than a conflict to inform a client holding onto a J.U.A. deferred payment claim of the possibility of selling that claim at a discounted price.
It would be asking too much to require a contingency-retainer client, typically a person without much in the way of disposable income, to retain and pay for a second lawyer to review a decision to sell a J.U.A.-deferred claim.


A Stirring in the Art Market
NAME: Jason Rubell.
AGE: 24.


For The Post, Fifty Pages Are Critical
After months of whistling past the graveyard, The New York Post appeared yesterday to be moving toward a modicum of stability, at least for the next two months, as Rupert Murdoch began circulating copies of a plan to take over the bankrupt newspaper from Abraham Hirschfeld as early as tomorrow.
The prospect of life again under Mr.
Murdoch, the owner of an international empire of publications and broadcast outlets, came as a welcome relief to the employees, managers and creditors of The Post, which has so little cash that it could not pay many bills due this weekend.


At Work; A Feminist and the Art of Persuasion
FOR more than 40 years, Felice Schwartz has been championing causes.
She has fought for civil rights, for the expansion of women's employment opportunities and, most recently, for humanizing the culture of the American corporation.
She is known -- and sometimes criticized -- for speaking in the language of corporate America, the language most likely, in her view, to inspire change.
On Tuesday night, Catalyst, the research and advocacy organization she founded in 1962, will throw a dinner to honor companies that have heeded her messages, companies with female-friendly policies.
The organization will also honor Ms.
Schwartz, who will retire in May.
As she ponders retirement -- an impending life change she appears to regard as liberation into different but not necessarily fewer activities -- Ms.
Schwartz insists it is not a source of frustration that she will almost certainly be remembered most for what she did not do.
She did not, she reiterated in an interview last week, craft the infamous phrase "mommy track," nor did she invent the idea of a lower-pressure, second-tier track for professional women to follow if they planned to have children or, indeed, just a life away from work.


It's Lyrical on Seventh Avenue
The atmosphere is tense this week and the adrenaline high, as New York's major designers present their collections for fall -- fashion's make-or-break season.
Hemlines are down.
Waistlines are inching up.
The silhouette is often composed of layers of cloud-weight fabric that redefine the body in new proportions.
Other shapes are starkly simple, clinging to the figure or floating sinuously away.
Colors are somber yet radiate with depth.
Fabrics like velvet, knit, leather, tweed, jersey, georgette and sheer wool are sensual to the touch.
Hats snuggle down, while boots muffle up.
Accessories are dramatic by dint of their scarcity.
And the mood is romantic.
But soulful, not frivolous.


In Like Finn


Wildcats Crunch Florida State
The complex persona of Robert Montgomery Knight had concealed the inevitable truth.
The day before the Midwest Regional final against Kansas, the coach of the Indiana Hoosiers had presented hints of the scenario that would end the season of one of his finest teams.
He had all but predicted the future.
Not with his goofy soundbite sightgag, transforming a water glass into a crystal ball to seek the future of Damon Bailey.
But with a detailed breakdown of the elements of the game, itemizing the factors that would form a 83-77 Kansas victory today, sending the Jayhawks to the Final Four and the Hoosiers home.


Out in the Hinterlands, Moscow's Din Is Muted
When people in Moscow raise the specter of the breakup of Russia, they talk about places like Bashkortostan, an oil-rich region in the southern Ural Mountains where contempt for the once-heavy hand of the Kremlin is open and withering.
Ask political leaders here whether the feud between President Boris N. Yeltsin and his rivals in the Congress of People's Deputies has thrown the power of the "center" into gridlock, and they ask, with only a hint of disingenuousness: What central authority?


Close Final for Vanderbilt Bridge Tourney
The final of the American Contract Bridge League's Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championships began here this afternoon between teams led by Cliff Russell of Miami, Fla., and Howard Weinstein of Chicago.
Both teams had surged strongly Friday night to win their semifinal matches.
At the midpoint this evening, with 32 deals played out of 64, Weinstein led Russell by a bare 2 international match points.


For Hard Times, Masters of Many Skills
AS job cuts increase, remaining workers are constantly being prodded to work harder and smarter, and the need for additional skills becomes critical, said E. Hart Rasmussen, director of executive programs at Polytechnic's graduate center in Hawthorne.
"Today, employees have to be able to wear more than one hat," said Mr.
Rasmussen, adding that 38 students, "one of the largest classes ever," are enrolled in Polytechnic's executive master's programs.


Muslim Militants Share Afghan Link
One year after Muslim rebels ousted the Communist Government in Afghanistan, the long Afghanistan war reverberates throughout the Islamic world as veterans of the conflict take up arms to try to topple governments in Algeria, Egypt and other Arab countries.
Indeed, Mahmud Abohalima, one of the men accused of involvement in the World Trade Center bombing in New York, is said to have gone to Afghanistan to fight with antigovernment rebels for months at a time.


Saberhagen Gets Busy in Flash
Two days after he signed a contract extension that puts him among baseball's best-paid pitchers, Bret Saberhagen began paying dividends to the Mets.
It's only spring and these are only exhibition games, but Saberhagen threw six scoreless innings, gave up one hit, struck out five and did not walk a batter in a 4-0 split-squad victory over the Oakland Athletics today at the Superdome in New Orleans.


Yes, We Have No Tomatoes, Yet
IT'S time to start those scrumptious heat-loving tomatoes indoors, if you want some varieties a bit more unusual than Big Boy or Early Girl (both favorites of mine).
It's really not that difficult to start plants indoors, as the accompanying tips show, especially if you control yourself and plant just a few seeds.
But "few" is not a word in most gardeners' vocabularies, especially when they start talking tomatoes.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Optioned Jason Bere, pitcher, to Nashville of the American Association.


Prison Burdens Go Unresolved In Budget Pact
Straining to pass the state budget before a Thursday deadline, lawmakers said today they had reached agreement on a criminal justice plan and could move on to the more difficult issues of transportation, Medicaid and school aid.
But the lawmakers failed to settle the most pressing problem facing the state's overburdened prison system: how to deal with more than 2,000 prisoners who have been moved from single beds to bunk beds in dormitory-style rooms.


5 Pieces of Europe's Past Return to Life: Spain; A medieval monastery is getting a new role in Barcelona
Tucked into the foothills overlooking Barcelona since the early 14th century, the Gothic Monastery of Pedralbes has long been considered a gem of medieval architecture, yet only in 1983 were its magnificent cloisters opened to the public.
Now, thanks to a $9 million restoration completed just in time for last year's Summer Olympic Games, the monastery is also to become an important part of Barcelona's intense cultural life.
If all goes according to plan, by this summer 80 paintings and 8 sculptures belonging to the renowned Thyssen-Bornemisza Collection will be on permanent view in what for centuries was the monastery's dormitory.
The Pedralbes itself can still be visited, though parts are sealed off to respect the privacy of a dozen or so remaining nuns.
Other sections have also been closed pending further restoration.
But between 10 A.M. and 2 P.M. daily, for an entrance fee of about $2.50, visitors can pray in its Gothic church, enjoy the peace of its cloisters, look at religious art in a small museum or peek into nuns' cells dating back centuries.
One tiny chapel preserves frescoes painted in 1346, 20 years after the monastery was founded by Elisenda de Montcada, widow of King Jaume II of Aragon.


King Grabs Share of the Lead
For the first two rounds, the Nabisco Dinah Shore belonged to the L.P.G.A.
Tour's ever-expanding legion of international players.
Today, the veteran Betsy King restaked America's claim.
King, the 37-year-old player from Reading, Pa., used hot putting to carve out a five-under 67 over the Mission Hills Country Club Old Course, the best round in the tournament.
She passed 17 players -- 9 of them non-Americans -- to grab a share of the lead in the tour's first major championship of the season.


The Subject Is Charles
To the Editor:
In her review of "Loss of Eden" and "The Names of the Mountains" (March 7), Ellen Chesler wrote that Anne Morrow Lindbergh has "chosen A. Scott Berg as her authorized biographer." That is not accurate.
Mrs.
Lindbergh has granted me unrestricted access to her papers, as well as those of Charles A. Lindbergh, so that I can write
his
biography.
She is, of course, an essential part of that story; but he is my subject.
A.
SCOTT BERG Los Angeles


CUOMO WANTS CAP ON DOCTORS' FEES, PRIVATE AND PUBLIC
As part of a blueprint for major change in New York's health care system, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed today that the state be given authority to set payment rates for all physicians, just as it now does for hospitals.
That was one of several proposals made today that Mr.
Cuomo said were necessary to control soaring health care costs and to improve access to primary care -- preventive and basic family medicine.


UP AND COMING: Sadie Benning; A Video Artist Who Talks Through a Keyhole
Sadie Benning is barely old enough to vote, but her artistic career is doing just fine.
The youngest person ever to be included in a Whitney Biennial, the 19-year-old Ms.
Benning is becoming famous for her singular, offhand way with videotape, on which she has captured the unfolding of her own adolescence.
"It Wasn't Love," her tape at the current Biennial, is a cryptic, romantic tale of a flirtation between two women.
It all started about four years ago when she was 15 and received a toy video camera for Christmas from her father, the experimental film maker James Benning, himself a veteran of five biennials.
A week later, after a harrowing New Year's Eve (a friend was hit by a car and there was a shooting in her Milwaukee neighborhood), Ms.
Benning found herself home alone and needing to talk.
She turned to the camera, liking the fact that "it didn't judge me -- it just sat there and recorded what I said." She started spending a lot of time in her room, not writing in a diary or musing before the mirror the way many adolescents do, but using the camera as a kind of diary-mirror.


I.R.S. Has Implemented Taxpayers Bill of Rights
I would like to clarify statements attributed to me in the interview for the Westchester Q&amp;A of March 7 in which I was quoted as saying that funds have never been allocated to implement the Taxpayers Bill of Rights.
By the end of 1991, the Internal Revenue Service did implement all 21 provisions of the bill.
I would also like to say that since the bill's passage, the Internal Revenue Service's notices have generally become clearer and easier to understand.
In addition, there has been an increase in the quantity and quality of information available to the taxpayer from the Internal Revenue Service.


An Almost-Secret Garden in L.A.
WITHIN a stone's throw of Sunset Boulevard in Hollywood is one of the most attractive and least known private gardens in the United States, a stylish mixture of Italianate architecture and formal landscape design, with a jungle of rare tropical and subtropical plants and trees.
Designed around a Mediterranean-style palazzo that rises above a steep terraced hillside, the 6.2-acre garden is a testament to the taste and fine esthetic judgment of Virginia Robinson Dryden, a native of St.
Louis who moved to Beverly Hills in 1903, bringing her gift of understatement to a neighborhood where glitter and glamour were already the norm.


Marc A. Ness and Jennifer Rothkopf
Barbara and Arthur Rothkopf of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Rothkopf to Marc Aimont Ness, a son of Jeannine Ness and Dr.
Gayl Ness of Ann Arbor, Mich.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Rothkopf, 29, graduated from Oberlin College.
She is a second-year medical student at Case Western Reserve University.
Her father, a lawyer, was a Deputy Secretary of Transportation in the Bush Administration.
Her mother is the administrator at Woodley House, a psychiatric and social-services agency in Washington.


Attention Rotisserie Shoppers . . .; A Maven's Guide to the Senior Circuit's Great and Near-Great
This National League Rotisserie analysis was prepared by Paul Belinkie.
The American League will appear tomorrow.
If you have $26 and a dream, you can play Rotisserie baseball, a game in which "owners" build fantasy teams made up of real major league players who are selected at an auction draft at the beginning of the season.
Each team has a roster of 23 players.
In a typical league, a limit of $26 can be paid to purchase a team and a player can be drafted for as little as 10 cents.
Rotisserie owners bid against one another in their draft, and once a player is chosen no other owner can pick him.


IN SHORT: FICTION
AMERICAN STAR A Love Story. By Jackie Collins. Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.


HOW JACK KEMP LOST THE WAR ON POVERTY
Jason DeParle's article on Jack Kemp's ill-fated war on poverty twice describes the former Budget Director Dick Darman as mocking the idea of "empowerment" as a left-wing idea from the 60's ("How Jack Kemp Lost the War on Poverty," Feb. 28).
This reflects the state of Darman's regrettable ignorance.
The word "empowerment" first appeared in a brilliant 1967 book entitled "Black Power and Urban Unrest," by a distinguished scholar and churchman, Dr.
Nathan Wright Jr.
Dr.
Wright, who had recently been chairman of the National Conference on Black Power, eloquently introduced the idea of empowerment to the Senate Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Affairs on July 27, 1967.
Far from being a 1960's leftist, Dr.
Wright was a lifelong registered Republican.
His testimony was in support of a bill sponsored by all the Republican senators to help lower-income people become homeowners.
He was featured in a cover story in this magazine in 1968 as a black Republican likely to be influential during the Nixon years. (Alas, his wise voice was largely ignored.)


Those High-Tech Jobs Can Cross the Border, Too
IN theory, it is an attractive proposition.
Mexico, with its low wages, would lure away only the low-skilled, easy-to-do jobs.
The complicated, skilled work, requiring more training and education, would remain in the United States, at higher pay.
The rub is that Mexicans are quickly learning to do the high-skilled, complicated jobs.
Contrary to expectations, those are also being exported.
That is a painful revelation for Americans.
South Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Spain, Singapore and Thailand have all demonstrated how rapidly a nation bent on industrialization can master complicated tasks that once seemed reserved for Japan, Germany or the United States.
Oceans and tariffs had shielded Americans from the full force of this trend.
But now Mexico, just down the highway, is struggling to industrialize.
And the North American Free Trade Agreement is about to dismantle what is left of the barriers that protected American jobs.


A Plea for Health-Care Cooperation
To the Editor:
I hope that the doctors don't feel alone ("The Dangers of Declaring War on Doctors," March 21).
Many nurses feel that the new Administration and Hillary Rodham Clinton have declared de facto war on them, too.
Mrs.
Clinton has impugned the motives, compassion and ingenuity of all health-care professionals.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate


Profile/Frank G. Zarb; His Formula: Smith Barney + Shearson = Powerhouse
When Sanford I. Weill arranged earlier this month to buy the Shearson securities firm, he turned to his old friend and colleague, Frank G. Zarb, to restore its flagging profits.
It wasn't the first time.
Twice, earlier in his career, Mr.
Zarb had left Mr.
Weill to take jobs in Washington.
But after each departure, he was welcomed back, even sought after.
Five years ago, Mr.
Weill turned to Mr.
Zarb to turn around the money-losing securities firm Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
He succeeded, and last year Smith Barney earned $170 million.
But Mr.
Zarb saw a need for more resources.
Mr.
Weill, now 60 years old and eager to build the company, agreed and went shopping for Shearson, another firm with lagging fortunes.
He is looking to Mr.
Zarb to merge the two firms into a Wall Street powerhouse.


Susan Cheswick, James Brewer
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard R. Cheswick of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Reid Cheswick to James Edward Brewer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
W.
Brewer of Joplin, Mo.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Cheswick, 38, is a national account manager for Computerland, the computer retailer, in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is the president of the Cheswick Investment Company in Greenwich, Conn.


POSTINGS: For the Public, Too; Athletic Center for Lehman
Back in 1946, the gym at the Bronx branch of Hunter College was the site of the first meetings in the United States of the United Nations Security Council.
Things change.
In 1968, the Bronx branch of Hunter became Lehman College; the old gym, built in 1931, has been proposed for landmark status and is to be turned into a student center or classroom space.
And come September, a new $57 million physical education and athletics center, the largest public facility of its kind in the Bronx, is to open at Lehman.


Men, Women, Abuse and Humiliation
"IMAGINING BRAD," which was perceived as a sick joke during a brief Off Broadway run just three years ago, is, all at once, too uncomfortably close to out-of-the-closet dysfunctionalism.
Now it warrants more of a grimace than even a grin.
O.K., this one is about child abuse, wife abuse and as an added fillip, the ultimate disability: total deformity.
The victims are women.
The abusers and the misshapen, all unseen, are men.


Nolan Ryan's Other Pitching Career
WITH broad chest, strapping arms and thick legs, he resembles so many younger men earning millions at a child's game.
It is only when the focus narrows upon his face that one begins to understand the phenomenon of Nolan Ryan.
There, time has left signs that are more typical of a 46-year-old executive: deep crow's feet at the eyes, leathery skin, a receding hairline chasing thinning hair.
Next week, when the Texas Rangers open the baseball season in Baltimore, Mr.
Ryan will begin his 27th and last year, an all-time Major League record.
Only hockey's Gordie Howe, among all professional athletes in history, will have played more seasons, 32.
And no pitcher comes close to his records for strikeouts (5,668) and no-hitters (7).


As Japanese as Burt Bacharach
THE ELEPHANT VANISHES
Stories.
By Haruki Murakami.
Translated by Alfred Birnbaum and Jay Rubin. 327 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $21.


MARCH 21-27: French Elections; Mitterrand Prepares To Share Power Again
France's Socialist Party was given such a drubbing in last Sunday's first round of parliamentary elections that only a few details are left to be wrapped up in today's runoff.
Just how big a majority will the conservative Union For France coalition end up with in the 577-member National Assembly?
Which well-known Socialists will lose their seats?
The first round decided almost everything else.
France's voting system insured that, with 39.5 percent of votes last Sunday, the conservatives will control about 80 percent of parliamentary seats after the runoff.
And, as widely predicted, the Socialist President, Francois Mitterrand, will again have to "cohabit" with a conservative government as he did from 1986 to 1988.
His own term ends in 1995.


Talking: Buffering; Living Too Close To a Road
Let me live in my house by the  side of the road  And be a friend to man.
WHEN Sam Walter Foss, the 19th-century New Hampshire poet, paid this tribute to curbside living a century ago, he wasn't kidding.
Living close to the road -- even better, a crossroads -- meant enjoying to the fullest the fellowship of passers-by.
It provided easier access to vital services.
It made a statement about the owner: He or she loved people.


Inspectors vs. Hotel on Chairless Atrium
Whether you were staying there or not, had a dime in your pocket or didn't, you could always be a guest of the Parker Meridien Hotel in mid-Manhattan during the 1980's, just by taking one of the 40 or 50 seats arranged around little bistro tables in a welcoming mid-block atrium.
David S. Perrin, whose office is next door, was one of the brown-bag regulars in those years.
"It was a very nice lunch crowd," he recalled.
"They could not have afforded the pricey restaurants on 57th Street, so they read the paper or read a book, and then went back to work."


Leaps of Faith


An Excess Of Analysis
To the Editor:
In "The Rhyme and Reason of Rhythms"  [ Feb. 28 ] , Edward Rothstein tried to show how "the very invention of ethnomusicology is a manifestation of the quest for universals that has been prominent in Western art, science and philosophy." He suggests that we (the West) have advanced ethnic music by trying to "understand" it through our disciplines of "rationality," our view of "education" and what we call culture.


Conservatives Are Not to Blame
To the Editor:
In her essay "Some Holes Don't Come From Bullets"  [ March 7 ] , Caryn James is correct in identifying "Falling Down" as a cynical, push-your-buttons type of film but wrong in asserting that its design and appeal are "rabidly conservative." To the contrary, every aspect of the film -- action, character, theme, art direction, dramatic structure -- reflects a decidedly liberal world view.


MARCH 21-27: Bosnia; A New Truce Raises Few New Hopes
A United Nations-sponsored cease fire was agreed to in Bosnia and Herzegovina late last week, but it looked likely to be as fragile as the many that preceded it.
For the Bosnian Serb forces, the truce consolidated recent territorial gains that seemed likely to insure Serbian domination in an area planned for a Muslim majority in the peace plan proposed by international mediators.
Undermining the plan, in fact, is important to the Serbs.
Not only do they say the proposed map of 10 autonomous provinces is unfair; they say a unitary, sovereign Bosnian state is not viable and the land should be carved up among the Serb, Muslim and Croatian communities.


Right-Size Tool Makes the Job of Drilling Easier
AN electric drill is essential for home repair.
It may even be more useful than a hammer or a saw.
Choosing a drill to buy is not too difficult.
The model should be reversible, for retrieving screws, and it should have trigger-controlled variable speeds.
A drill's size is characterized by the capacity of its jaws, or chuck.
A drill having a chuck capacity of three-eighths of an inch is the most versatile for home repairs and general carpentry.


Right-Size Tool Makes the Job of Drilling Easier
AN electric drill is essential for home repair.
It may even be more useful than a hammer or a saw.
Choosing a drill to buy is not too difficult.
The model should be reversible, for retrieving screws, and it should have trigger-controlled variable speeds.
A drill's size is characterized by the capacity of its jaws, or chuck.
A drill having a chuck capacity of three-eighths of an inch is the most versatile for home repairs and general carpentry.


No Headline
N.H.L.
Lemieux Gets 2 More Mario Lemieux scored his 54th and 55th goals of the season yesterday as the Pittsburgh Penguins won their ninth straight game, 5-3, over the host Boston Bruins.
The loss ended Bruins goalie Andy Moog's winning streak at 10 games.
Lemieux set up Rick Tocchet's 40th goal at 9 minutes 14 seconds of the first period, halting Moog's scoreless string at 131 minutes 53 seconds. (AP)


Israeli Opposition Elects New Leader


Mutual Funds; When a Balanced Diet Is the Goal
WITH the stock and bond markets near all-time highs, a smart investment may be a mutual fund that owns both.
Indeed, balanced funds have become the darlings of the fund industry lately, with many major fund groups weighing in with new entrants: the Scudder, Dreyfus and Janus Balanced Funds; Fidelity's Global Balanced Fund, and Vanguard's Balanced Index Fund among them.


What Civic Leader Said in Interview
May I please have this opportunity to set the record straight?
A letter was published on Feb. 28 stating that I had a letter printed on Feb. 7 concerning the Long Island Developmental Center.
This was not true.


From the Bus Stop To the Big Leagues
They have memories they can never forget, memories they will not let themselves forget because they remain so integral to where they are today.
Minor league memories, years and years of them, are scattered throughout the Yankee clubhouse like dozens of stray socks.
Open a major league locker, find a minor league memory.
It is difficult to pick a starting point for this tour back through the bushes because there are so many Yankees who slept, or tried to sleep, in seedy hotels, who took the eight-hour bus rides and who worked construction or drove beer trucks in the off season so they could play minor league ball while hoping for a chance to make it to the "show."


A Muslim Describes Her Ordeal
For Kada Ordagic and more than 650 other Muslim women and children packed into hospitals, schools and day-care centers here, the hunger and terror they experienced in Srebrenica are eclipsed only by their anxiety for relatives still caught in the besieged town.
Almost every day since January, when the Serbian nationalist forces began a major offensive to drive the predominantly Muslim population from eastern Bosnia, artillery shells have pounded the region's towns and villages.


Bigger Playoff A TV Payoff
To the Sports Editor:
Major league baseball owners are nothing more than bartenders trying to cash in by serving the baseball public a watered-down drink.
They purport to be in favor of expanding (and diluting) the playoffs but are reluctant to publish what the actual vote was.
They say that a survey they have done of 12,000 baseball fans shows overwhelming favor of expanded playoffs.
Their survey, their statistics; in this day and age, do they expect us, the public, to believe?


Bowman's Comeback
CHRISTOPHER BOWMAN, the charismatic figure skater now performing professionally in the Ice Capades, is planning a competitive comeback aimed at the 1994 Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway.
Bowman, 26, said yesterday he was seeking reinstatement with the International Skating Union.
His coach, JOHN NICKS, yesterday confirmed that he would mail a registered letter and an application to the United States Figure Skating Association.


Nancy A. Low, James Sullivan
Mary R. Low of Potomac, Md., has announced the engagement of her daughter Nancy Anne Low to James McGrath Sullivan, a son of Barbara M. Sullivan of Bedford, N.Y., and the late Edward O. Sullivan Jr.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Low, 29, is the manager of training and development at Estee Lauder Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Mount Vernon College.
Her father, the late George M. Low, was the deputy administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in Washington and the president of the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.


Victoria Falls
To the Editor: The walk described between the Victoria Falls Hotel and the Zimbabwe entrance to Victoria Falls in your article ("The Smoke That Thunders, Jan. 24) calls to mind an interesting encounter my wife and I had last July. Traversing our path, at 15 miles an hour, was a kudu antelope just eight feet in front of us. Be alert!
While you are at the falls you must not skip the views from the Zambian side, which in certain respects are even more spectacular than those from the Zimbabwe side.
There is a bridge crossing the Zambezi River separating the two countries, and it makes a pleasant four-mile walk.
For those not inclined to walk, taxi service is available.
Take your passport and $10 visa fee.


Jacqueline Pelosi, M. T. Kenneally
Paul F. Pelosi and Representative Nancy Pelosi of San Francisco have announced the engagement of their daughter Jacqueline Frances Pelosi to Michael Terence Kenneally, a son of J. Thomas Kenneally of Kilquaide, County Wicklow, Ireland, and Patricia Steele Kenneally of Houston.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Pelosi, 25, is a promotions coordinator at Gourmet magazine in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is the president of Financial Leasing Services, a venture-capital company in San Francisco.
Her mother, a Democrat, is a four-term Representative from California.
Miss Pelosi's maternal grandfather, the late Thomas D'Alesandro Jr., was a Representative from Maryland and the Mayor of Baltimore from 1947 to 1959.
Thomas D'Alesandro 3d, an uncle of the bride, was Baltimore's Mayor from 1967 to 1971.


Who Lives In a Shoe?
Why should your feet be opped up inside in summer?
They want to get out and have fun just as much as you do.
Sandals should be part of their lives.


Colonial-Style Kites Airborne (at Times)
On the first day of spring, as the sun shone brightly and a slight wind stirred the trees, a group of children gathered at Washington's Headquarters Museum here to welcome the season with kites.
In a workshop led by Cynthia Grant, the museum's curator, five children and two parents decorated precut diamond-shape paper with Colonial designs, pasted the paper onto wooden frames and produced airworthy creations that a few tried out in the parking lot.


5 Pieces of Europe's Past Return to Life: Germany; Chorin monastery, a Gothic jewel in former East Germany
Now that Germany is united, many citizens are setting out to explore parts of their country that were formerly forbidden to them.
Among those most exhilarated by their new physical freedom are residents of what was once West Berlin.
For years confined to a small urban enclave, they are now able to explore surrounding areas of the former East Germany.
One of the first places many of them visit is the splendid medieval monastery at Chorin, less than two hours by car from Berlin.
The monastery took 60 years to build and was finally completed in 1334.
It thrived for two centuries, home to more than 400 Benedictine monks.
It was closed when northern Europe broke with Rome during the Reformation, and was plundered several times during the Thirty Years' War from 1618 to 1648.
Efforts to repair the damage have been under way sporadically for more than 100 years.


Traffic Alert
Alternate-side-of-the-street parking rules will resume tomorrow in New York City, according to the Department of Sanitation.


Laurie Whitmore, Kevin Lippincott
July wedding plans have been announced for Elizabeth Lawrence Whitmore and Kevin Frederick Lippincott.
Both work for Frito-Lay Inc. in Dallas, she as a senior business analyst and he as an assistant product manager.
Ms.
Whitmore, who is 28, is known as Laurie., She graduated from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George M. Whitmore Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
Her father is a management consultant there.


Karen Jane Falcocchio, James F. Drake
Karen Jane Falcocchio, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John C. Falcocchio of Forest Hills, Queens, was married there yesterday to James Frederick Drake, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick G. Drake of Stirling, Australia.
The Rev.
Noel Vanek, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the Church in the Gardens.
Mrs.
Drake, 28, is a vice president with the investment management subsidiary of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
In May she is to join the subsidiary's office in Sydney, Australia, where her husband is an associate for the Chicago-based law firm of Baker &amp; McKenzie.
The bride graduated from Wellesley College.
Her father is a professor of transportation engineering at Polytechnic University in Brooklyn and a principal partner at Urbitran Associates, an engineering firm in Manhattan.


THE CAMPUS CRIME WAVE
Matthews clearly says Brown is among the institutions dealing with campus crime as it occurs in American society.
However, the cover of the magazine leaves the reader with a frightening and mistaken impression by portraying a clearly identified Brown police officer next to a headline reading "Crime Turns the Campus Into an Armed Camp."
Ironically, only three months ago Brown decided
against
arming its police officers because the campus community felt it wasn't necessary.
Neither Brown nor most colleges and universities are "armed camps." Neither are we, or most institutions, facing serious student-against-student crimes, another of Matthews's sweeping generalizations.
By far the majority of our problems are petty larceny resulting from such student carelessness as unattended book bags or leaving dorm or student room doors unlocked.


BENEFITS
Haitian Art Show
TODAY -- Haitian paintings, metal sculptures, ceremonial flags, wood carvings and papier-mache will be offered for sale and at auction at a benefit for Eye Care, which supports clinics in Haiti.
There will be rum punch and other refreshments from noon to 5 P.M. at the Convent of the Sacred Heart, 1 East 91st Street.
Suggested contribution, $30, at the door.
Information: (212) 534-0108.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CHINESE SCHOLARS UNITE
Scholars from the People's Republic of China and from Taiwan will discuss their differences and their future in a day and evening conference at Yale on Saturday.
The event is open to the public for a fee of $20 and free to students.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
EMILY.
By Michael Bedard.
Illustrated by Barbara Cooney.
Doubleday. $16. (Ages 5 to 8) An entirely plausible story about a little girl who lived across the street from the reclusive poet of Amherst.
There is enchanting precision in the watercolor illustrations.


His Bosnia Trial Ending, Serb Asks Death Penalty
At the end of a three-week trial that offered a harrowing chronicle of the brutality of the Serbian nationalist policy of "ethnic cleansing" against Muslims, a 22-year-old Serbian fighter accused of 35 killings and 16 rapes took the stand today to tell a Bosnian military court here what sentence he would consider just.
"I suggest the death penalty for myself," the defendant, Borislav Herak, said in a barely audible voice as he stood hunch-shouldered before the five-man tribunal that will hand down its verdicts on Tuesday.


The Secret of a Siberian River Bank
From its headwaters on the Russian-Mongolian border, the Ob River flows northwest across Siberia, sweeping through thick fir forests and marshlands before emptying into the Arctic Ocean.
Like the Mississippi, which also traverses flat, low-lying country, the Ob flows in lazy bends and loops, and changes its course slightly when it floods.
In May 1979, swollen by melting snow, the Ob began eating away at its banks at a Siberian town called Kolpashevo.
As the flood waters gnawed deeper into the base of the river bank, the earth and sand that crumbled into the water disclosed a mass of human skeletons.
Beneath this strata of bones was another layer: whole corpses.
Buried in dry, cold sand that lay just on top of permafrost, they had not decomposed; they had been mummified.
Embedded in the river bank were more than a thousand skeletons and bodies in all.
The horrified townspeople of Kolpashevo knew why the dead were there.
This spot had been the site of the regional headquarters of the N.K.V.D., the Stalin-era secret police.
In the preserved corpses, some Kolpashevo residents recognized people they knew, still wearing the same shoes and clothes they had been arrested in some 40 years earlier.


The Center of Gravity Moves West in Canada
CANADA'S West Coast has always been an anomaly, an enclave on the other side of the mountains with its own special customs and manners, a place ignored by the rest of the country and seeming to prefer it that way.
Its distance -- three time zones from Ottawa -- and its often eccentric leaders fostered the notion that British Columbia was not to be taken seriously.
John Smith, the province's premier from 1872 to 1874, changed his name to Amor de Cosmos because it "tells what I love most: order, beauty, the world, the universe."


For Recitals, No Place Like a Home
CHAMBER music can flourish in church, synagogue or concert hall, but for a number of years now Performers of Westchester has been operating on the premise that this intimate form of musical expression is best heard by small audiences in private homes.
The group has scheduled spring recitals by such fine ensembles as Concorde, the Arista Trio and the Brentano Quartet in about half a dozen houses around the county.
The first, with Beethoven and Franck sonatas plus the D minor Mendelssohn Trio, played by Alexander Simionescu, violinist; Wendy Sutter, cellist, and Joel Rosen, pianist, will be given twice: this afternoon at 4 o'clock in Mamaroneck and Friday at 8:30 P.M. in Mount Kisco.
For reservations or a brochure, the number to call is 693-1151.
Organ music, of course, is more logically heard in church, and today at 4 o'clock a single celebratory concert replaces the three-recital series that has been the six-year norm for Music at St.
James.
"We had to cut back to one program this time because the organ was being expanded by one stop, meaning that the instrument had to be taken apart and then reinstalled," said Allen Hughes, a former music critic for The New York Times who has been supervising the programs at the Episcopal Church in North Salem.
"The chancel area has also been remodeled, with an oak floor put down around the altar area, so that our little chapel can now actually hold a smallish chamber orchestra."


Phoning Is an Art in the Age of Shoulder Surfers
ON the Saturday of the recent March blizzard, I was at Pennsylvania Station in New York, along with a number of other die-hards, trying to catch a train.
I eventually got where I was going, but spent much of the day struggling with telephones, and most of the next week learning how to avoid phone problems.
In the station, I needed a phone.
After a circuit around the 50-odd pay phones, I decided against using one of them to call my out-of-state destination.
Like many, I have become uneasy about punching in or reciting credit card numbers in places in the city where card-number thieves operate, such as Penn Station, the Port Authority Bus Terminal and Grand Central Terminal.


A Barrel of Clippings
To the Editor:
In his review of "Upon This Rock: The Miracles of a Black Church," by Samuel G. Freedman (Feb. 21), Anthony Heilbut says that "some journalists" have criticized the Nehemiah housing project for "shoddy construction."


Back In the Saddle
Call it the second coming of the Urban Cowboy.
Last week, Denim and Diamonds, a chain of country and western dance clubs in California, opened its first East Coast outpost at 511 Lexington Avenue (48th Street).
With its steer skulls, fake cacti and real cowhide, the club has the feel of a down-home Hard Rock Cafe.
"We feel even in New York it's time for country," said Greg Stewart, a managing partner.
"We're an upscale club, not a honky-tonk sawdust-on-the-floor sort of place."


Taylor Wants This to Be Year That Is, Not Was
This was the year Lawrence Taylor was going to be a retired football player, spending those balmy summer days on the golf course rather than in training camp.
Instead, at age 34, he wants to play again, and negotiations will start in earnest Tuesday between Steve Rosner, his agent, and George Young, the Giants' general manager.
Taylor's goal: A two-year contract for about $3 million a year.
That would be the highest salary ever for a Giants player, the highest ever for a defensive player anywhere, at least until Reggie White soon signs for $3.5 to $4 million a year.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
'FINDING INTIMACY'
Dr.
Robert Karen, a clinical psychologist who practices in Manhattan, will be the opening speaker on Friday evening in Montclair at a conference intended for those who find it difficult to form close relationships as adults.
Dr.
Karen's third book, "Becoming Attached," will soon be published by Warner Books.


Is Mondello Practical On Abortion Stance?
G.O.P.
Nassau County leader Joseph Mondello in his March 7 letter appears to come up short with his suggestion that opponents of abortion -- who presently support Right to Life political party candidates -- should seriously consider realigning themselves within either the Republican or Democratic Parties, so as to acquire more political clout for their pro-life position.
To be consistent, would Mr.
Mondello also urge registered voters within both the Liberal and Conservative Parties to do likewise?
After all the New York State Right to Life political party consistently pulls a bigger vote than does the Liberal Party in election after election, while it has remained competitive with the Conservative Party in various parts of our state.


Meanwhile, There's a Whole Lot of Faking Going On
Jeff Torborg, then the first-base coach for the Yankees, used to steal signs from the catcher all the time.
He got one to Oscar Gamble in 1980 and it resulted in a home run that won a game.
He got another for Graig Nettles that same season.
Another home run, another game won.
The Orioles won 100 games in 1980.
The Yankees won 103 and the American League East.
Torborg likes telling the story, and the manager of the Mets likes allowing the listener to draw whatever conclusions he or she likes.


Kathryn Tyus and Johnathan Adair
Mary E. Tyus and Geoffrey Tyus, both of Columbus, Ohio, have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathryn Yvonne Tyus to Johnathan Frank Adair, the son of Frank and Margaret Adair of Atlanta.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Tyus, 29, is the manager of program development for the Children's Television Workshop, the nonprofit television production company in New York.
She graduated from Ohio State University.
Her father is the founder of Tyusco Music Ltd., a jazz production company in Columbus, and is a jazz pianist there.
Her mother is an English and remedial-reading teacher at Eastmoore Senior High School in Columbus.


Rancor Grows in Russian Parliament
Revving up their all-out verbal attack against President Boris N. Yeltsin and his battered economic program, his major opponents in the Russian Congress have dropped all pretenses and revealed their unreconstructed Communist instincts.
As the members of the Congress of People's Deputies gather for the ninth time since their election in 1990, the word "democrat" is spoken with a contemptuous sneer, while "comrade," once used solely by the staunchest of Communists, has become fashionable again.


Papa Bear


Susannah Drake, Stephen Culhane
Dr. and Mrs.
Charles L. Drake of Norwich, Vt., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susannah Churchill Drake to David Stephen King Culhane, a son of David M. Culhane of Port Washington, L.I., and Jennifer K. Curran of London.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Drake is studying for master's degrees in architecture and in landscape architecture at Harvard University.
She graduated from Dartmouth College, where her father, a geophysicist, is a professor of earth sciences.


Winter's Lash Still Lingers Despite Thaw
With the first balmy weather in months, the snow banks from the blizzard two weeks ago are gone or dwindling everywhere.
But some effects of the winter in the New York region will linger longer: the brownish-reddish tips of salt-damaged evergreens, the sounds of schoolchildren still in the classroom at the end of June, and the depletion of bank accounts, both municipal and personal.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
(###) ###-####
MAYBE it was the Long Island accent.
When choosing the first area in the country to offer Voice Dialing, Nynex executives selected the Bay Shore-Islip area.
Perhaps they figured if a computer could understand Longgg Eyelanders it could understand anyone.
Last Monday 400 customers made communications history when they were hooked up to Voice Dialing.
They can now reach other numbers by simply speaking the name of whomever they are calling.


The Post (H.I.V.) Test Club
A club in this country that lists 9,000 members has only one requirement for admission.
All who want to join must show proof that they have been tested for the virus that causes AIDS.
The Post Test Club is an anomaly, particularly in Uganda, where people are used to relying on their families rather than strangers for support, where traditions dictate that friendship and trust are expressed primarily through family ties.


For a Moment, a Senate Majority of Clintonites
IT was only one pace in a long journey.
But the Senate's approval on Thursday of the general outline of the Clinton economic program, just 36 days after the President proposed it, left no question that the Government is on its new course.
Taxes are going to rise.
The military faces deep spending cuts.
And Washington is prepared to spend more in areas that were allowed to languish in the Republican years, areas like education, civilian research and public works projects.


Workers Need Place in the Economic Sun Again; A New Feudalism
To the Editor:
"New Jobs Lack the Old Security in a Time of 'Disposable Workers' " (front page, March 15) does not look to consequences of this situation.


HOW JACK KEMP LOST THE WAR ON POVERTY
DeParle's article is one more illustration of the root cause of the Republican electoral defeat.
In 1988, the country was seduced by Peggy "a kinder, gentler America" Noonan, but woke up in bed with George Bush instead.
NAOMI WISE
San Francisco


3 Young Lions Get A Lesson in Humility
THE young players sizing themselves up as future contenders for the world championship could take little comfort from their adventures at the Linares International Tournament, which took place Feb. 23 to March 14 in Spain.
They made no impression on the titleholder, Gary Kasparov of Russia, who snatched first prize in fine style.
The 29-year-old genius went undefeated and surpassed the three whom many consider his greatest threats on the horizon -- Viswanathan Anand of India, 23, and two 24-year-olds, Vasily Ivanchuk of Ukraine and Boris Gelfand of Belarus.
Of course, Kasparov's immediate menace is Nigel Short of England, the official challenger for the title match being arranged for August.
Speculation about more remote challengers may be premature, yet it goes on anyway.


Facing New Attacks in Congress, Yeltsin Shifts Gears to Seek Talks
Faced with a severe new assault from an aroused Congress of People's Deputies, President Boris N. Yeltsin abruptly changed course today and urged that he and the leaders of the legislature, the Government and the Constitutional Court meet until they reach accord.
The unexpected, emotional and apparently improvised appeal from Mr.
Yeltsin came at the end of a day in which the tide of battle between the President and hostile deputies rocked back and forth to the constant din of heated insults.


Deferred Payment On J.U.A Claims
Re: "Making Hay of Insurance Settlements," March 7:
It's an obligation rather than a conflict to inform a client holding onto a J.U.A. deferred payment claim of the possibility of selling that claim at a discounted price.
It would be asking too much to require a contingency-retainer client, typically a person without much in the way of disposable income, to retain and pay for a second lawyer to review a decision to sell a J.U.A.-deferred claim.


Exploring The Murky World of Drug Prices
LAST week an advisory panel of the Food and Drug Administration recommended approval of Tacrine, the first drug to treat Alzheimer's disease, and health economists are quaking to see how much it will cost patients.
Although the drug produces slight or no benefit in most patients, Warner-Lambert has indicated that its price was likely to be well over $1,000 a year.
And since there is no other treatment for Alzheimer's and Warner-Lambert has the sole right to produce it, patients or their insurers are expected to pay.
Now that the Clinton Administration has chastised the pharmaceutical industry for excessive prices and profits, health economists have found themselves wondering how to settle on a fair drug price.
At the heart of the debate is the inherent tension between patients who feel entitled to medicines at an affordable price and drug manufacturers whose first allegiance is, after all, to their shareholders and who will sell drugs for as much as they can.


ENDPAPER: Life and Times; Let George Be George
On the day George Steinbrenner returned from a well-deserved hiatus, I was as far from Fort Lauderdale, Fla., on baseball's spring training map as one could get.
I was in Yuma, Ariz., the spring home of the San Diego Padres, a dot in the southwest corner of the United States where not even the Padres want to be anymore.
But on that day, March 1, Yuma was a good place to be, far removed from the media circus that, in the sports world, only the principal owner of the New York Yankees could create.
In the 20 years of Steinbrenner's reign, I have witnessed -- worse, been a part of -- most of his circuses.
Not that this is any claim to fame, but I am the sole reporter who covered Steinbrenner in his first year, 1973, and who continues to be a baseball reporter.


State Battling Pyramid Scheme
PROSECUTORS, legislators and state consumer-affairs officials have begun a concerted attack on an old scam with a new name that is popping up in towns across the state: a pyramid scheme known as the Network.
Touted as "the opportunity of a lifetime" in its promotional literature, the Network offers what is described as a nearly effortless, risk-free way of turning $1,500 into $12,000 almost overnight.


Guest Smokers
To the Editor: I am responding to the Letters to the Editor about smoking on airlines (Jan. 3).
I am a nonsmoker and do not have any health problems related to smoking but won't be surprised if I have one soon.
On one recent flight, a friend and I arrived at the airport three hours before the flight, hoping to get seats in the nonsmoking section.
But the nonsmoking section was full and we had to sit with the smokers.


B.U. and Maine Keep the East Skating
Maine and Boston University, the two titans from Hockey East, swept the ice tonight at the Centrum before a capacity crowd of 12,047 and qualified for the final-four phase of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's tournament.
The semifinal pairings at the Bradley Center in Milwaukee on Thursday are Boston University against defending champion Lake Superior State and Maine against Michigan.
The Eastern teams' opponents are both from the Central Association.


Wall Street; America's Gains Prove an Illusion Overseas
TO most followers of the American stock market, the story over the past decade has been one of almost steady increases.
To be sure, there was the 1987 crash, and the 1990 slide that coincided with the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
But in both cases the market quickly recovered and moved to new highs that were far above the old ones.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500, at its closing high of 456.34 earlier this month, was up 35.5 percent from its 1987 pre-crash high of 336.77, and up 23.7 percent from its 1990 peak of 368.95.
But from the perspective of some foreign investors, the American bull market topped out in 1990, and little has happened since.
The profits in dollars have vanished for those who keep their books in Japanese yen.
For multinational companies, some of the gains in price seen here may reflect the fact their foreign earnings translate into more dollars, not from any fundamental improvement.
Expressed in yen, the S.&amp; P. 500's March high was just 11.5 percent above the 1987 peak, and was down 1.4 percent from the 1990 high.


More Ice Than Trout For the Opening Day
The trout season begins April 1 in New York State, but with a little ingenuity those who planned to celebrate its advent should be able to find something better to do.
Over the past quarter of a century, there have been opening days on which it was possible to fish in some degree of comfort and with a reasonable chance of persuading a trout to strike at fly, lure or bait.
But the forthcoming April 1 holds little such promise.


When Thoughts Turn to the Tasks Ahead
SPRING had a tough time getting here this year.
But it has arrived and gardeners now have major cleanup tasks ahead of them.
For a while it seemed as though spring were coming along in its usual tranquil way.
Many of the bulbs started to push up before the snowstorm hit.
Many were in full bloom, while others were showing off their lovely floral petals.


Amherst Coach Earned His Boot
To the Sports Editor:
Richard E. Merritt's letter about Amherst College football (Mailbox, March 12) warrants a rebuttal.
First, even though he was considered Coach Ostendarp's "right-hand man" until Ostendarp's retirement in 1991, John McKechnie had been serving as the football team's de facto coach since 1989 and as a result was partially responsible for the team's present situation.


Sick of Formulas, Movie Directors Try TV
For film directors, television was always like a godawful small town, the kind of place they wanted to see only in a rear-view mirror.
And who could blame them?
The product was turned out on the assembly line, production values were cheesy, network meddling was a given, and the possibilities for creative work hovered somewhere just north of zero.
Film directors were the artists.
Television directors were either hacks or newcomers desperate for a ticket to Hollywood.
But the road from television to Hollywood has gradually become a two-way street, and just now a lot of traffic is going the other way.
Undeterred by the fairly dismal record amassed by their Hollywood predecessors, a herd of film directors and producers is heading full speed for the vast wasteland.
They are lured in part by the more streamlined production process of television and by the promise of riches for a hit series, but also by the freedom to experiment, a changing creative climate and the medium's increasing technical sophistication.


MARCH 21-27: The Space Shuttle; A Launching Delay At a Bad Moment
The space shuttle Columbia thundered and spewed exhaust last week, but was suddenly grounded when a computer sensed a valve failure and shut the engines down three seconds before liftoff.
The failure is expected to delay the nine-day mission at least three weeks.
In addition, the failure came amid a rush to streamline the space program, and the cost of launching the shuttles, estimated at up to $1.7 billion per flight, had already begun driving the Administration away from the fleet.


A Little Night Music


Editorial Notebook; A Test You're Apt to Flunk
Here's a quiz for industrial policy buffs: Which of the following products and production processes discovered in the last 35 years produced the biggest economic gains?
A computer control system?
An electronic device for using videotape?
A new type of primary metal?
A process for producing aromatic chemicals?
A new stain remover?
A household cleaning device?
A new type of thread?


Battle Rages on Lake Erie Over 25 Miles of Sand
The sandy peninsula of Long Point, with its marshes, dunes, grasslands and beaches, stretches 25 miles into Lake Erie from just south of this village.
It is the habitat of 691 species of plants, 42 of which are rare in Ontario, and a major feeding and regrouping area for thousands of migrating birds.
The longest freshwater sand spit in the world, Long Point owes its existence to the currents that sweep against the north shore of Lake Erie and carry hundreds of thousands of cubic yards of sand and fine gravel to the reef each year.
The shallow inner bay is a natural hatchery for millions of fish -- mainly perch, carp, yellow pickerel, whitefish, various species of bass and coho salmon -- and frogs and turtles.


Stadium Deal Off for Yanks
The Yankees' grandiose plans to switch their spring training complex and a Class A minor league team to a prospective $50 million center four miles from Disney World have unexpectedly crumbled.
The center in Kissimmee would have included a 12,000-seat baseball stadium, a 30,000-seat amphitheater and administrative offices and would have been solely financed by Osceola County, but the project was scuttled Friday when the county informed the Yankees that the proposal had been removed from its agenda.


As the Academy Hails Women, Women Talk Back
Whether the Oscar ceremony turns out to be hideous or sedate, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences has already done one shameless and hilarious thing: choosing the theme "Oscar Celebrates Women and the Movies" for a year in which there were notoriously few good roles for women. (Talk about overcompensating!) Still, the theme draws attention to a problem so acute that even top actresses have become outspoken about it.
When Emma Thompson accepted the Golden Globe for her performance in "Howards End," she ended her speech by saying, "If I have a wish left in the world, it is just for the creation of more great female roles." It was a generous, enlightening thank-you -- if
she
thinks there's a problem, there must be one.
And it suggested that a valuable perspective on the issue would come from women able to choose the best available roles.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Mar. 13  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $282,500
40 East 10th Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,150-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; windowed kitchen, 2 exposures, foyer, fireplace; maintenance $1,030, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Coleman Neary Realty)  SoHo  $217,500
547 Broadway (Prince St.)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 2,500-sq.-ft. prewar loft co-op; handyman special, mixed-use, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,200, 50% tax-deductible (Brokers: Douglas Elliman-Eychner Associates)  Sutton Place  $690,000
2 Sutton Place South  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,900-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, windowed kitchen, fireplace; maintenance $1,700, 38% tax-deductible (Brokers: David Day Realty-Douglas Elliman)  Upper East Side  $475,000
325 East 79th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. renovated prewar co-op; 24-hr. elevator/doorman, dining room, eat-in kitchen, beamed ceilings; maintenance $1,475, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Douglas Elliman)  Upper West Side  $510,000
300 Riverside Drive (102d St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, 2 exposures, dining room; maintenance $1,100, 41% tax-deductible (Broker: A. J. Clark)  BRONX  Pelham Parkway South  $190,000
931 Brady Avenue  2-family, attached brick house; 3 bedrooms, dining room in primary duplex unit; 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; front porch, 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Marland Real Estate)  Riverdale  $275,000
2501 Palisade Avenue  (Villa Charlotte Bronte)  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. duplex prewar co-op; Hudson River view, 2 terraces, fireplace, dining and laundry rooms, eat-in kitchen; maintenance $1,182, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Marilyn &amp; Morris B. Sopher)  BROOKLYN  Flatbush  $179,000
320 Stratford Road  5-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family, detached 1908 frame house; dining room, fireplace, original wood details, driveway, large yard, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,650 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  Park Slope  $203,000
309 Sixth Avenue (Second St.)  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft prewar co-op; dining and utility rooms, private roof deck, den, fireplace, original wood detail; maintenance $575, 55% tax deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)  Prospect Park South  $386,000
91 Rugby Road  7-bedroom, 4-bath, one-family, detached brick house; dining room, finished basement, stained-glass windows, patio, 2 fireplaces, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $3,700 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS  Astoria Heights  $84,000
21-59 78th Street  (Garden Bay Manor Condos)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 851-sq.-ft. postwar condo; dining room, storage room; common charge $365, taxes $1,150 (Broker: Rose Marie Realty)  Forest Hills  $68,000
(The Mayflower)  69-10 Yellowstone Boulevard  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 810-sq.-ft. renovated prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, eat-in kitchen, garage; maintenance $360, 42% tax-deductible (Broker: Kraham Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Huguenot  $136,000
99 Mimosa Lane  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family frame town house; aluminum siding, dining room, eat-in kitchen, skylights, indoor garage, 30- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $1,437 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  New Springville  $167,000
24 Bowling Green Place  2-family semi-attached frame house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room, screened patio in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; 30- by 123-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)


Southern Winds
Nature has been having its way with this most civilized and pleasant of towns.
A ghastly rainstorm has been hanging over the Gold Coast since the beginning of March, ruining everything scheduled for the end of the season.
Of course, residents of any coastal community know they must defer to the weather. But
such
weather -- it just seemed unfair.
Tents were getting shredded and blown down.
Hostesses, who erred in thinking they could will away storm clouds by making little pacts with God, ordered chairs, tables and place settings moved indoors at the last minute.


Turn Me Loose
Almost three decades ago, the Beatles heard us say we wanted a revolution, and they responded by singing, first we'd love to see your plan.
When we wouldn't commit, they changed the world for us.
Fresh visions wait for no man.
It's no different talking to buyers and retailers in men's wear today.
They trumpet the new soft suit, produce figures showing the success they're having with vests, herald the at-long-last acceptance of three-button jackets and cite market research stating that 66 percent of the males in California go to work without a tie.
But ask if this means there's a revolution going on, and they'll "shhh" and hound you as if you were munching pretzel rods while Paul Scofield plays Lear -- Don't you dare mention radical change for men!
Not now!
Not when we're just getting them back into the stores.
What do you want to do, scare them back into chinos and oxford cloth forever?
Why can't you talk about trends?
Now, there's a nice word.
But something
is
happening here.
And what it is is exactly clear.
It's not a trend.
It's no fad.
The new shapes, bold ideas and fresh direction you're about to see on the following pages are not whims whipped up merely for a season.
It's too bad that, thanks to its incessant application in promoting everything from dishwashing detergent to hair conditioners, the word "revolution" has been neutralized in any situation that does not involve ack-ack fire -- because this time it's the real McCoy as sure as Grandpappy Amos had a limp.


A Snare for All Who Live In Comfort
Curtis Cravens calls his new sculpture a "homeless trap," though he says that what he really wants to capture is the conscience of the passer-by.
For the last few weeks, he's been placing the artwork, a huge wood and metal mousetrap baited with a sleeping bag, in parks and other public spots in Manhattan and Brooklyn.
"It seems like I'm suggesting we should just trap the homeless," Mr.
Cravens said.
"Instead, it's asking the question, 'Could it get to this point?' "


Teddy Roosevelt's Credentials
To the Editor:
As the executive director of the Theodore Roosevelt Association, I would like to respond to Erwin Knoll's review of Nathan Miller's well-written new biography of Roosevelt (Feb. 28).


Knicks Decide To Take Charge
Instead of worrying about their recent problems, the Knicks took steps to solve them.
In a team meeting before Friday's 105-95 victory over the Los Angeles Lakers, the Knicks reinforced their commitment to winning.


MARCH 21-27: Trade Center Bombing; 2 More Arrests Give Some Shape To the Puzzle
A month into the investigation of the World Trade Center bombing, more puzzle pieces are falling into place, but the larger picture is still far from clear.
Last week, Mahmud Abohalima, a New Jersey cab driver who had been apprehended by Egypt, was turned over to the United States.
Bilall Alkaisi, 27, another taxi-driving emigre from the Middle East, turned himself in to the Newark office of the F.B.I.


A Holocaust Memorial
A museum opening next month in Washington will serve as a national memorial to the millions who were persecuted by the Nazis: Jews, Jehovah's Witnesses, Gypsies, homosexuals and people with disabilities.
Scheduled to open April 26, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum will include such artifacts as concentration camp uniforms and underground newspapers, plus video and audio tapes describing life before and during the Holocaust.


Counting the Cost of Cleaning Up the Storm
THE remains of the Blizzard of 1993 may finally be melting away, but now comes the hard part for officials left trying to reconcile their municipalities' already strained finances with the huge costs incurred by the snowfall.
"Like the landscape, our budget was blown out with the storm," said James Madaffari, Peekskill's assistant city manager.
"And now we are left with a deficit, because we were in a tenuous position to begin with."


Price Hearing Three Pairs of Footsteps
The field bunched up behind a safe and sound Nick Price today, setting up what should be an explosive finish at the Players Championship.
Price ground out a solid third-round 71 over a windy and drying Stadium Course at the TPC Sawgrass for a 54-hole total of 13-under-par 203.
But drafting him expectantly at 204 are three formidable names: Mark O'Meara, Bernhard Langer and Greg Norman.


Sara M. Waring, Taegan Goddard
Lucy Waring Young and Hugo Young of London have announced the engagement of her daughter Sara Mercedes Waring to Taegan Daniel Goddard, a son of Stephen and Patricia Goddard of Hartford.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Waring, 26, is a research assistant at the World Bank in Washington.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her mother is an artist in London.
Her stepfather is the political columnist for The Guardian newspaper in London and the author of "Iron Lady," a biography of Margaret Thatcher.
The future bride is also a daughter of the late March Chase Waring, the founder and president of the Waring Consultancy, a financial consulting company in Jakarta, Indonesia.


Karen Maleh, Howard Tubin
June 1994 wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Maleh of Yardley, Pa., for their daughter Karen Marie Maleh and Howard Brett Tubin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Tubin of Tenafly, N.J.
Miss Maleh, 25, is an environmental project coordinator at World Envirotech Inc., an environmental engineering concern in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Clark University.
Her father is the senior executive vice president for sales and marketing at United Research Laboratories, a drug maker in Philadelphia.
Her mother, Viviane Maleh, teaches French and Spanish at Hopewell Valley (N.J.) High School.


James Volcker and Martha DeJong
Mr. and Mrs.
Bastiaan C. DeJong of Chatham, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Martha Anneke DeJong to James Paul Volcker, the son of Paul Volcker, the former Federal Reserve chairman, and Barbara Volcker of New York.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss DeJong, 33, graduated from Wheaton College and is an M.B.A. candidate at Emory University.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president at Anglo Nordic Shipping Ltd., a shipping concern in New York.


Amtrak Delays New Schedule
Amtrak schedules for the entire system that were due to change April 3, with the start of daylight time, will remain in effect until May 1.
The summer schedule, effective May 2 through October, will involve "hundreds" of changes to allow for extensive track work in the Northeast and the necessary new national connecting times, according to an Amtrak spokeswoman.
The track work was decided on too late to print revised timetables in time for the expiration of the winter 1992-93 tables, so the winter tables will remain in effect for the extra month.


Oedipus the Movie


IN SHORT: FICTION
PAGAN BABIES By Greg Johnson. Dutton, $20.


BEST SELLERS: March 28, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he commits suicide, presents serious problems for an 11-year-old boy.
2
2
33
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
3
5
THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The fourth and concluding volume in a series about a fantasy land.
4
4
3
THE CHILDREN OF MEN, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $22.) In 2021, when Britain is a police state and the human race is approaching its end, an Oxford historian struggles with his fate.
5
6
8
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a psychopathic serial killer in Washington.
6
5
3
NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) In Victorian-era Minnesota, a servant hopes to win an heiress's heart by helping her family win a yacht race.
7
1
THE DEVIL'S HEART, by Carmen Carter. (Pocket, $20.) The crew of the U.S.S.
Enterprise in a new "Star Trek" tale of adventure and betrayal.
8
10
6
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) A series of fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a young clerk in a Swiss patent office.
9
7
9
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $23.) The case of a woman journalist charged with killing an eminent novelist.
10
9
18
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
11 *
8
30
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
12
11
10
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
13 *
15
4
DISNEY'S ALADDIN, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works/Penguin USA, $6.98.) An illustrated retelling of the ancient story of a street boy and a genie who provides unexpected experiences.
14
12
3
TO GREEN ANGEL TOWER, by Tad Williams. (DAW, $25.) The third and concluding volume in the fantasy series "Memory, Sorrow and Thorn."
15
23
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
6
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians, scientists, therapists and patients about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
2
2
28
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
3
33
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales.
4
5
19
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
5
4
4
OFFICIAL AND CONFIDENTIAL, by Anthony Summers. (Putnam, $25.95.) The life of J. Edgar Hoover, head of the F.B.I. from 1924 to 1972.
6
6
41
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
7
9
27
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
8 *
10
15
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) Spirituality in everyday life.
9
7
3
ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA, by John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Investigations into the geological history of California.
10
8
2
PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, by Paul Kennedy. (Random House, $25.) A Yale historian assays social and political forces and how they will affect the future.
11
13
10
NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.
12 *
11
5
MARLENE DIETRICH, by Maria Riva. (Knopf, $27.50.) The legendary actress as remembered by her daughter.
13
14
8
MAKING THE MUMMIES DANCE, by Thomas Hoving. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The reminiscences of the former director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
14
23
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general.
15
12
6
AROUND THE CRAGGED HILL, by George F. Kennan. (Norton, $22.95.) Philosophical meditations on the world and its future.
15
6
THE WIVES OF HENRY VIII, by Antonia Fraser. (Knopf, $25.) The lives of the King's six spouses.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
2
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Advice about investing in stocks and mutual funds.
2
2
55
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $15.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
3
3
37
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf from a legendary teacher.
4
4
5
COOKING WITH REGIS &amp; KATHIE LEE, by Regis Philbin and Kathie Lee Gifford with Barbara Albright. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips on cooking and more than 150 recipes from the talk show hosts.
5
5
55
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THIS I CANNOT FORGET: The Memoirs of Nikolai Bukharin's Widow, by Anna Larina. (Norton, $24.95.) After her husband's execution by Stalin in 1938, Ms.
Larina survived more than 20 years in the gulag to write this lyrical memoir of a love that inspired her and of the doings of Bolshevism's inner circles.
UNDER A NEW SKY: A Reunion With Russia, by Olga Andreyev Carlisle. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $21.95.) A detailed, insightful account of Russian intellectuals and trends since 1960 by the daughter and granddaughter of pre-Revolutionary literary figures.
VAN GOGH'S ROOM AT ARLES: Three Novellas, by Stanley Elkin. (Hyperion, $22.95.) A subtle, complicated, sometimes astonishing collection; in the title story, a provincial American teacher is overwhelmed by his encounter with formidable world-class academics while living in the painter's very bedroom.
FDR.
Into the Storm 1937-1940: A History, by Kenneth S. Davis. (Random House, $35.) Mr.
Davis's fourth and penultimate volume on Franklin D. Roosevelt casts him as a weak leader in his second Presidential term; the encyclopedic documentation is unmatched.
THE CHURCH AND THE LEFT, by Adam Michnik. (University of Chicago, $24.95.) Published in Polish in 1977, Mr.
Michnik's essay argues that the secular opposition to Communism must reconsider the reflexive anticlericalism of the left.
THE MAN WHO DREAMT OF LOBSTERS, by Michael Collins. (Random House, $19.) Stories by an Irish-born writer that happen not in the Ireland of myth but in a squalid third-world country.
RAMEAU'S NIECE, by Cathleen Schine. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $19.95.) This inventive comic novel, a literary hybrid, is both an essentially 18th-century moral tale and a parody of post-modern form.


Influences Behind Serial Killers
In "Writer Finds Bearings and Success"  [ Jan. 17 ] , you quote Sean McGrady, author of the thriller "Dead Letters," as saying that we need merely look at modern society for an explanation of serial killers.
Well into writing a book myself whose cast includes a borderline necrophiliac, I immediately read "Dead Letters" to see if the work elaborated upon what Mr.
McGrady had told the reporter, an opinion rather at variance with my own).


Pollution Costs Torment a Town Already Reeling
It is not enough that the old mills along the Naugatuck River here are fading, and that unemployment in this Litchfield County town stands at 14.1 percent, the highest in Connecticut.
No, amid hard times, a raft of environmental problems have come along.
Sewerage.
Landfills.
Even the water supply.
It sometimes feels as if Thomaston is wearing out.


THE CAMPUS CRIME WAVE
Matthews's article, while replete with numerous examples of moral degeneration and widespread crime at Brown University, neglects to mention the cause of these problems.
The baby-boom generation has crippled our economy with a 13-digit debt, depleted our natural resources, permitted our infrastructure to decay, eliminated all standards of common decency and created a war machine capable of liquidating millions of people in a matter of seconds.
Unlike our parents, we will have difficulty finding jobs, we will not own our own homes, and in a service economy we will most likely never see the tangible fruits of our labors.
For years the baby boomers have spoken with regret about the legacy they will leave their children.
Well, we are their children.
We see the world they have left us and many of us choose to drink ourselves sick.
Can anyone honestly blame us?
JACOB APPEL Class of '96, Brown University
Providence, R.I.


In Europe, America's Grip on Pop Culture Is Fading
When he was younger, said Peter Schild, a 25-year-old university student here, he and his friends would often buy things just because they were American, from athletic shoes and music cassettes to movie tickets and blue jeans.
As far as he was concerned, America's icons and heroes were Europe's too, part of a common cultural matrix reinforced by imports of American television shows and the latest Hollywood movies.
Now, like many his age, Mr.
Schild says he is looking increasingly to the countries around him, rather than to the United States, for his cultural signals.
"I like America still, but now I want to know I am more interested in Europe, including European music and films," Mr.
Schild said.
"Perhaps I've just seen too much of American culture that I take it for granted, but it's Europe that seems new and exciting to me now."


Indecent Behavior
To the Editor:
I am a Rush Limbaugh admirer.
"Falling Down" portrays the sort of behavior he would rail against.
Mr.
Limbaugh wants all people to develop their skills and be the best they can be.
Ms.
James has performed a valuable service for me: I will not waste my money on this movie.
But she is wrong about Mr.
Limbaugh.
DOROTHY CANNON New Canaan, Conn.


Q and A
Post-Bankruptcy Prospects Question: In 1990, we were forced to file for bankruptcy.
Now we are finally back on our feet financially and would like to purchase a small home of our own.
Can we get a mortgage? . . .
Fernando Carrion, the Bronx.
Answer: Yes, but it won't be easy.
According to Beryl Riley, a mortgage manager with Chase Manhattan Bank in New York, your best bet may be secondary lenders, such as Champion Mortgage, which may also charge you a higher rate.
Mortgage brokers may also help you find a lender.
Some banks, such as Chase Manhattan, will consider an application from someone with a bankruptcy on his credit report, but only if there is a full discharge of the bankruptcy and the borrower has established good or secured credit.
Further, two years should have elapsed since the bankruptcy discharge, three years if there is a down payment of less than 20 percent.
Also, it should be documented that extraordinary circumstances caused the bankruptcy, such as an extended illness that was not covered by health insurance, and that the event is not likely to occur again.
Escrow Accounts Question: I recently refinanced my mortgage, a fixed rate on a private single-family residence.
My bank, however, has refused to give me a current escrow analysis.
Who regulates escrow accounts?
Can I ask my bank for a complete escrow analysis more than once a year? . . .
Randy Hunt, Locust Valley, L.I.
Answer: No.
According to Clare E. Sykes, a spokeswoman for the New York State Department of Banking, escrow issues are governed by the Federal Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act, which describes how escrow accounts are done, including how often escrow analyses can be requested.
She added that analyses must be given annually, but no more often unless the lender desires.
If the loan is refinanced by the same lender, the same rule applies.
If a new lender refinances, then a new analysis is made.
Security Deposit Question: My security deposit for my apartment is in a savings account under the name of the owner.
I have a letter from her bank verifying that this account is separate from the owner's other accounts.
But who is entitled to the accumulated interest?
Also, the owner lives on the West Coast and travels extensively.
How can I make sure that my deposit will be returned?
Can I not pay my last month's rent? . . .
K.A.
Hanson, Manhattan Answer: Maybe.
According to Michael Finder, a Manhattan lawyer, when a landlord takes a security deposit it must be placed in a trust account and segregated from other money.
Technically, he added, the account also has to be in the tenant's name.
He said that if the building had six or fewer units the owner did not have to pay interest.
But if it has more than six units the tenant is entitled to the interest in the account, minus a 1 percent administration fee, which goes to the landlord.
The interest can be accrued or paid annually; it's the landlord's choice.
If the apartment is a New York rent-stabilized unit, the tenant can request that the interest be paid annually.
Mr.
Finder said that, in New York, landlords had to return a security deposit within a reasonable amount of time; no exact number of days is prescribed.
And though not paying your last month's rent is a violation of your lease, it has also become an almost customary practice.
The landlord then keeps your security deposit and, if necessary, pursues a legal action to recover any damages.
"It is common to not pay the last month's rent to get a security deposit back," he said.
Technically, Mr.
Finder added, a landlord could sue for nonpayment of a last month's rent and the tenant would be responsible for the landlord's legal fees.
This rarely occurs, though.
And as for any possibility of eviction during the last month, it couldn't be accomplished within 30 days, at least not in New York, he said.
Should you decide to pay your last month's rent, Mr.
Finder recommended contacting your landlord before your lease expires and reminding them that you are expecting your deposit back.
If you don't receive it within 30 pays, pursue legal action.


Pact to Return Aristide to Haiti Is Called Near
Backed by strong diplomatic pressure from Washington, United Nations negotiators are close to announcing a settlement of the Haitian crisis that would return the country's exiled President, diplomats familiar with the talks say.
Under the proposed accord a consensus Government would be announced in a few days, and the central power broker of the country since the coup in September 1991, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, would resign as commander of the army.
The settlement calls for the return of the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, in six months.


The View From: Washington; Investors Head for the Hills With a New Commodity
REGARD the ostrich, one of nature's strangest creatures: Little head, long neck, fat middle.
When fully grown, it is taller than the tallest professional basketball center.
The ancients called it "camel bird" because, with its ungainly walk and long neck, it looked rather like a camel.
And if it's true that the camel looks as if it were created by a committee, the ostrich looks as if it were created by an even bigger committee.
Despite its looks, and an undeserved reputation for sticking its head in the sand when it is afraid, the ostrich is rather enjoying a national craze that is being reflected in Connecticut.


U.N. Is Developing Control Center to Coordinate Growing Peacekeeping Role
In a windowless office on the 30th floor of United Nations headquarters here, with maps of Somalia and Mogadishu taped on the walls, an Egyptian major, a Zimbabwean major and a Pakistani captain watch television and wait for the telephone or the fax machine to ring.
They are part of a seven-officer team that keeps in touch with the American-led force in Somalia.
But they are also the embryo of the new command and control center the United Nations plans to create here over the next few months to keep headquarters linked day and night with all its peacekeeping operations around the world.


Right-Size Tool Makes the Job of Drilling Easier
AN electric drill is essential for home repair.
It may even be more useful than a hammer or a saw.
Choosing a drill to buy is not too difficult.
The model should be reversible, for retrieving screws, and it should have trigger-controlled variable speeds.
A drill's size is characterized by the capacity of its jaws, or chuck.
A drill having a chuck capacity of three-eighths of an inch is the most versatile for home repairs and general carpentry.


Jennifer Lyons, Stephen Brennan
Jennifer Helen Lyons, the director of the Joan Daves Literary Agency in New York, was married yesterday to Stephen Vincent Brennan, an actor and theatrical director in New York.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman performed the ceremony at Wilson's Grill and Bar in New York.
Ms.
Lyons, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and received a master's degree in German literature at Middlebury College.
She is the daughter of Nick and Mari Lyons of New York.
Her father is the president of Lyons &amp; Burford Publishers, in New York, and is the author of a fly-fishing memoir, "Spring Creek." Her mother is a painter in New York.


Social Commentary Expressed In a Mom and Pop Gallery
CRITICS are sometimes accused of reviewing a gallery as much as its show -- and with some justification.
But when the display is at a space like the Prezant Art Gallery here, it is impossible to discuss one without the other.
After all, the gallery is in a house that, poised above its garage in the front and a small garden behind, is occupied by the owners, Jack and Toby Prezant, who refer to the gallery as a mom and pop operation.
Then there is the interior, which is a maze of rooms and passages leading to a well-appointed kitchen giving onto a glass-enclosed porch.
That the walls are lined with paintings (mostly by Mr. Prezant) and books in no way detracts from the sensation of being in a miniature casbah.
But this may simply be because of the low-light living room, which, in retrospect, seems to be all cushions and an Oriental rug.


His Bosnia Trial Ending, Serb Asks Death Penalty
At the end of a three-week trial that offered a harrowing chronicle of the brutality of the Serbian nationalist policy of "ethnic cleansing" against Muslims, a 22-year-old Serbian fighter accused of 35 killings and 16 rapes took the stand today to tell a Bosnian military court here what sentence he would consider just.
"I suggest the death penalty for myself," the defendant, Borislav Herak, said in a barely audible voice as he stood hunch-shouldered before the five-man tribunal that will hand down its verdicts on Tuesday.


The Hot Ticket
WHAT: New York Knicks tickets.
Those big ones to die for, those 3-by-7-inch color postcards posing as ducats.
They cost $400 apiece and the two above would place you and a friend at courtside amid the celebrity elite at the season finale against Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls: a chance to wave at Woody or have the Adonis-like Knicks forward Anthony Mason land in your lap.
Gaze at the tickets now.
Cut them out.
Frame them.
You may never see them again.
At least not in your hand.
Or your lifetime.
WHAT ELSE: Cheaper Knicks tickets ($12 to $75) are scarcer than humility in George Steinbrenner or hair on Burt Reynolds's head.
Thirty-three of the Knicks' 35 home games have sold out.
Even scalpers need scalpers.
WHERE: Madison Square Garden, 33d Street and Seventh Avenue.
CULTURAL BENEFITS: Knicks games have become a nexus of New York culture (or stars just in from wherever), making the gaggle of glitterati that once accompanied Jack Nicholson and his sunglasses to courtside of Los Angeles Lakers games seem underpopulated.
It is where film meets hip-hop meets politics meets sports.
Only Swifty Lazar's Oscar-night party matches this eclectic turnout.
WHO: There's Spike Lee in one of the 58 $400 courtside seats.
And John McEnroe, Ronald Perelman, LL Cool J and Ahmad Rashad.
Right behind the Knicks bench in his $75 club seat is Woody Allen (no longer spotted with Soon-Yi Farrow Previn).
And there's Danny Aiello and Ed Bradley, Bill Murray and Peter Falk, Gloria Estefan and Senator Bill Bradley, Hammer and Rodney Dangerfield, Smokey Robinson and Dustin Hoffman, all sitting courtside.
Mr.
Riley is a GQ dream, a man whom suits were made for and whom designers would love to dress and send down a runway.
He may perspire in those immaculately tailored suits but he wouldn't let it show.
When his Armani pants were split during a free-for-all last week against Phoenix, the rip was repaired at halftime.
WATCH THE GAME, GET A DANCE: Except for eccentric Dancing Harry, who used to boogie in the stands and hex rival teams during the Knicks' heyday of the 1970's, the Garden had been dance needy until the Knicks City Girls arrived in 1991.
The troupe of 15 Paula Abdul wannabes (Ms. Abdul, by the way, is an ex-Laker Girl) have eight outfits from which to choose during their halftime, timeout and between-quarters rock, rap, hip-hop and techno numbers.
FUTURE AS HIP HANGOUT: As long as they win.
But watch the Knicks crash in the playoffs, and Spike &amp; Company will cross the Hudson for New Jersey Nets games.
Stars have already abandoned the Lakers for the Clippers in Los Angeles, so there's precedent.
Stars don't want to be seen with losers.
It's boring.
It's embarrassing.
Would Arnold call if the Knicks had 19 victories and 45 losses?
Does he go to Dallas Mavericks games?
Get out of here.


The Cult of the Cousin
POET AND DANCER
By Ruth Prawer Jhabvala. 199 pp. New York: Doubleday.


China Names Party Leader to the Presidency
China announced today that Jiang Zemin, its Communist Party leader, would also become the nation's President, a move that for the first time since the late 1970's gives one man the top posts in the party, Government and military.
Not since Hua Guofeng picked up the three posts after Mao died in 1976 has one Chinese leader been given so much formal authority.
The promotion, which had been expected, is a reversal of the leadership's recent efforts to begin separating the Communist Party from the Government.


Directed by Mr. Aaron? Mr. Lynch? Mr. Smithee
Allen Smithee has written screenplays ("The Horror Show") and directed films ("Morgan Stewart's Coming Home").
Along the way he has collected reviews in The New York Times ranging from "degenerates into a series of genre cliches" (Stephen Holden on "The Horror Show") to "it's hard to imagine any adult sitting through this movie without dozing off or cracking up" (Caryn James on "Morgan Stewart's Coming Home").
Now Mr.
Smithee has made his MTV debut, directing Whitney Houston's hit "I Will Always Love You."
Can this paean to love really be the work of the same man who directed the wacky "Shrimp on the Barbie"?
In a word, no.


Nets Floored by Lack of Scoring Punch
The Nets' sudden offensive problem, having two of their top scorers out because of injury, worsened tonight in the face of their fifth game in seven days.
Points were excruciatingly difficult for New Jersey to produce at the Orlando Arena, as the Nets faded badly in the second half and lost to the Orlando Magic, 98-84.


Doting on Divas: Private Jokes, Open Secrets
"But seriously, opera queens," the emcee said, addressing the audience during a New York performance last year by the all-male Gran Scena Opera Company, and the crowd roared in approval.
Seriousness had little to do with anything: the stars of this revue included the Russian "traumatic" soprano Vera Galupe-Borszkh, the Italian tenor Alfredo Sorta-Pudgi (who lost his toupe in moments of high passion) and the last surviving diva of the Golden Age, Gabriella Tonnoziti-Casseruola.
The spoof was as much about the personalities of the opera stage as about the operas themselves.
Wagner's Valkyries carried the requisite spears and shields but turned out to be a bitchy assemblage of divas jealously upstaging one another in falsetto extravagance.
And between the operatic numbers came much conversation.
Give a diva a microphone, it seemed, and "she" was ready to ramble, about an aging or overweight colleague or about voices cracking under the strain of unduly delayed retirement.


When Thoughts Turn to the Tasks Ahead
SPRING had a tough time getting here this year.
But it has arrived and gardeners now have major cleanup tasks ahead of them.
For a while it seemed as though spring were coming along in its usual tranquil way.
Many of the bulbs started to push up before the snowstorm hit.
Many were in full bloom, while others were showing off their lovely floral petals.


Violating Our Puritan Soul
To the Editor:
At least one of Walter Kendrick's assertions about Erica Jong is not accurate; "How to Save Your Own Life" (1977), not "Fanny" (1980), was her second novel.
STEVEN G. KELLMAN San Antonio


THE CAMPUS CRIME WAVE
I went to the Rhode Island School of Design, a couple of blocks from Brown University, in 1959.
Anne Matthews's description of Brown sounds horribly familiar ("The Campus Crime Wave," March 7).
Brown had only male students then.
There were "mixers," whose purpose was to get women as drunk as possible to ease the way toward some variety of date rape.
It appears that young women are still learning the same terrible lessons of fear and submission 30 years later.
What we needed then and still need now is a change in the culture that tolerates and rewards such behavior.
Spoiled, violent, drunken boys should have to leave college without their tickets to the board rooms and other corridors of power.
They cannot be captains of industry, they cannot be football stars and they cannot be our admirals, senators or judges unless they behave.


County Clerk And Other Races Fire Up
THE letter began simply and directly: "Dear District Leader, I'd like to take this opportunity to introduce myself and to let you know that I am seeking the Republican nomination for Westchester county clerk."
It was mailed out two months ago by Marcia M. Lee, the former Mayor of Bronxville and a top administrative aide to County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke.
Since then, Ms.
Lee has met with many of the party's 1,500 district leaders in an attempt to get their support for her candidacy.


IT MUST BE THE HEAT


Data Update
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*(Residential in millions of dollars)
Jan. 93
Jan. 92
Change
New York
224.6
232.7
- 3%
New Jersey
272.9
114.0
+100%
Connecticut
61.9
43.1
+ 44%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.66
7.65
9.20
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.96
4.97
6.26
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.55
7.52
9.03
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.73
4.74
6.13
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.60
7.52
9.12
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.51
4.54
6.13
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.80
7.68
9.30
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.47
5.43
6.54
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.36
3.39
4.73
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.49
7.49
8.02
Source: HSH Associates *Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.


Healthful Tips for Passover Favorites
AS difficult as it may be to monitor fat and cholesterol most of the year, at Passover, the holiday that celebrates the deliverance of the Jews from Egypt, and which begins at sundown April 5, it becomes a Sisyphean task.
Starting with a traditional seder dinner, a ritual feast that ushers in the holiday, the observance continues for eight days and involves consuming no foods that contain a leavening other than eggs.
Not only are eggs used in huge quantities to make feathery sponge cakes for the holiday dinners but they are also essential in preparing some other traditional dishes.
The ground fish used for gefilte fish is held together with beaten egg and matzoh meal.
Eggs are essential in making good chopped liver.


Corrections
The Votes in Congress chart last Sunday misstated the position of Representative Eliot L. Engel, Democrat of New York, on a Republican-sponsored budget plan that sought to cut the deficit without tax increases.
He voted against it; he did not vote "present."


MARCH 21-27: The Gay Troops Debate; Clinton Is Back In the Storm's Eye
After playing down the initial controversy over his proposal to lift the ban on homosexuals in the military, President Clinton again found himself in the storm last week.
At his first major press conference as President, he said he would not rule out restrictions on deploying homosexuals.
The reaction all but overshadowed the other topics he was quizzed on.
Gay rights groups said they felt betrayed.
Even gay advisers to the President expressed outrage.
Mr.
Clinton insisted that he had not changed his position that gay people should be allowed in the military, but that he was not ready to say how to implement this.
Then, on Friday, officials invited homosexual leaders to the White House to reassure them.


World Markets; Fragile Optimism at the Bourse
THE conservative victory in this month's French parliamentary elections was welcomed by the Paris stock exchange late last week with a little flurry of optimism that nudged the 40-stock blue-chip index known as the CAC-40 above the 2,000 mark for the first time since last June.
But analysts are still uncertain whether this optimism is justified.
The results of last Sunday's first round of voting, with the Socialist Government suffering a crushing defeat and a conservative coalition looking assured of a massive parliamentary majority after today's run-off, were more or less expected by the markets.
So the Bourse last week was merely acknowledging that a new conservative Government is now only days away.


Healthful Tips for Passover Favorites
AS difficult as it may be to monitor fat and cholesterol most of the year, at Passover, the holiday that celebrates the deliverance of the Jews from Egypt, and which begins at sundown April 5, it becomes a Sisyphean task.
Starting with a traditional seder dinner, a ritual feast that ushers in the holiday, the observance continues for eight days and involves consuming no foods that contain a leavening other than eggs.
Not only are eggs used in huge quantities to make feathery sponge cakes for the holiday dinners but they are also essential in preparing some other traditional dishes.
The ground fish used for gefilte fish is held together with beaten egg and matzoh meal.
Eggs are essential in making good chopped liver.


Miss Braswell, James Morton 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen R. Braswell of Rumson, N.J., and Sea Island, Ga., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elisabeth Dunlap Braswell to James Carnes Morton 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Jr. of Greenville, S.C.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Braswell, 22, graduated from the University of Richmond, as did her fiance.
Her father is the president of the investment services group of the Prudential Insurance Company of America.
His office is in Newark.


Monarchs of the Forest Rise to a Dramatic Occasion
In the Redwood Forests of the California and Oregon coasts, the giant evergreens tower over a wide needle-brown floor.
A grove of these ancient trees is like a huge pipe organ, the trunks shooting 30 to 40 feet in the air before the branches even begin.
At that point, the blue-green needles act as a lense for the light, directing smoky shafts to the moss and ferns below.
In this perpetual late afternoon, everything is quickly miniaturized, especially human beings.
It was no different at the Brooks Atkinson Theater on Broadway recently.
Stagehands wrestled with 24-foot sections of the aluminum-framed "trees" that dominate the set of Lanford Wilson's play "Redwood Curtain," opening on Tuesday.
In the sunlight outside, the scrunched-velour "bark" with red and green silk highlighting had looked laughably fake.
But on the dim stage -- the deep ridges of the soft brownish trunks, the "forest floor" of sound-deadening carpet, the way the trees soared up into blackness even as the men seemed to grow smaller -- the mysteriousness and cathedral-like proportions of a redwood grove were evoked.


Profit an Unlikely Motive to Murdoch at The Post
If the newspaper were not in complete disarray and its editorial staff in open rebellion, if its share of newspaper advertising revenue in the New York market were not 5 percent and falling, and if a Mafia crime family were not accused of arranging narcotics and gun deals from its loading docks, Rupert Murdoch would still face one daunting fact in repurchasing The New York Post:
In the 12 years he owned it, he lost $150 million, by his own estimate, and the great number of people who have analyzed The Post's books all seem to agree that he stands to lose millions more if The Post falls into his lap tomorrow.


2 Killed in Store Doorway
A Brooklyn grocery store owner and a friend were killed Friday afternoon when two men shot them in the doorway of the store, the police said.
The incident occurred about 2:30 P.M., at the Rainbow Grocery on New Lots Avenue in East New York, the police said.
The owner, identified as Earl Sterling, 35 years old, of East 98th Street in Brooklyn, was shot three times and died immediately, the police said.
His friend was identified as Constance Wilson, 32, of Classon Avenue.
He was shot five times and died on the way to Brookdale Hospital.
No arrests had been made.


Amherst Coach Earned His Boot
To the Sports Editor:
Richard E. Merritt's letter about Amherst College football (Mailbox, March 12) warrants a rebuttal.
First, even though he was considered Coach Ostendarp's "right-hand man" until Ostendarp's retirement in 1991, John McKechnie had been serving as the football team's de facto coach since 1989 and as a result was partially responsible for the team's present situation.


Muslim Militants Share Afghan Link
One year after Muslim rebels ousted the Communist Government in Afghanistan, the long Afghanistan war reverberates throughout the Islamic world as veterans of the conflict take up arms to try to topple governments in Algeria, Egypt and other Arab countries.
Indeed, Mahmud Abohalima, one of the men accused of involvement in the World Trade Center bombing in New York, is said to have gone to Afghanistan to fight with antigovernment rebels for months at a time.


Q and A
Post-Bankruptcy Prospects


Sports of The Times; Sisterly Guidance For a Coach
WHEN Bobby Knight was coaching at West Point, he used to slip off to the Catskills to visit with Clair Bee, the venerable basketball coach and author, who was retired up in the hills.
Bobby Huggins, this generation's tough-minded young coach from the Midwest, has learned a thing or two from Sister Maria Helene.
"She was the head of the education department at Walsh College," Huggins said, referring to his first head coaching job in Canton, Ohio.
"She used to say that the best way to teach something is to repeat it."


Those Who Pay Health Costs Think About Drawing Lines
THEY don't like the word even in Oregon, the state that thrust it into the news.
"I certainly don't use the term
rationing
unless someone forces me to," says Jean I. Thorne, director of Oregon's Medicaid program, which this month received Federal permission for a plan in which poor people will not be covered for low-priority treatments while basic health benefits are extended to everyone.
Americans are worried about health costs, which now soak up 14 percent of the gross national product, surveys show, and want the Government to do something about them.
But one thing Americans emphatically do not want, these same surveys find, is rationing of medical care.
The idea that someone might be denied, say, an organ transplant that might save his life just because it costs so much is abhorrent.


Paradise at Home
To the Editor:
"Paradise Found" (Topics of The Times, March 15) asks, Why are Cubans who live under Fidel Castro like Adam and Eve?
I almost split my sides laughing at the thought of the Cubans, like Adam and Eve, with "no clothes," "no shelter," "one apple for two," unable to leave and "repeatedly assured that they live in paradise."


Roy Riegels, 84, Who Took Off In Wrong Direction in Rose Bowl
Roy Riegels, who became part of college football lore when his 69-yard run in the wrong direction cost the University of California the 1929 Rose Bowl game, died Friday at his home in Woodland, Calif.
He was 84.
The cause of death was complications from Parkinson's disease, his son David said.


Honoring Fulbright
The U.N. Delegates' Dining Room, March 24.


In New Delhi, Pursued by an Enormous Tree
Public art, and more especially, the mating of new art with new architecture, is a catastrophe as often as not.
A happy exception is the new headquarters of the British Council in New Delhi, which recently opened just across the road from its American counterpart and on one of the most animated of the city's boulevards.
On the street in question, poetry had hitherto played no part.
It is a business street, heavily trafficked and lined with commercial buildings, many of them newborn and mismatched.
The architect of the new British Council building is Charles Correa, who is of Portuguese origin and has been responsible for a slew of admired constructions in India.
In many of them -- notably in the new museum in Jaipur -- he has shown himself a master of light-handed poetry that sings along with the historic overtones of the site.


Dany Suslow, Lee A. Papell
Dany Elizabeth Suslow, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Suslow of Armonk, N.Y., was married yesterday evening to Dr.
Lee Adam Papell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Papell of Eastchester, N.Y.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman performed the ceremony at Tarrytown (N.Y.) House.
Mrs.
Papell, 29, is the director of marketing for Pratt Institute in Brooklyn.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father is a lawyer and real-estate consultant in Armonk.


Robert Rafsky Memorial
A memorial service for Robert Rafsky, who was a leading advocate for people with AIDS, will be held on Wednesday at 7:30 P.M. at the Friends Meeting House, 15 Rutherford Place at East 15th Street in Manhattan.
Mr.
Rafsky died on Feb. 20 at age 47.


Uptight Little Island?
To the Editor:
Maybe members of the New York press need to find out what the rest of the country is doing and thinking before writing opinions that are offensive to a great many Americans.
We do not think liberals are oddballs, but we would like the same privilege to be conservative without having our Americanism impugned.
TONI M. REYNOLDS Dallas


In the Region: Connecticut; Victorian Rehabs for Bridgeport's Needy
A HANDFUL of young Bridgeport developers are using a rarely employed Federal tax credit to help finance the rehabilitation of middle-class Victorian homes in the inner city.
The resulting units are rented to subsidized low-income tenants.
The credit applies only to properties in historic districts.
The work must be done according to specifications of the National Register of Historic Places, consisting largely of restoring the exteriors to their original condition.
The owners get a credit of 20 percent of the cost of renovation on their Federal taxes if they do not live in the house themselves.
They may, however, live in one unit of a two-family or multifamily building and still receive a reduced credit.


Reuben Fine, American Chess Giant, Dead at 79
Reuben Fine, one of this country's greatest chess geniuses, a psychologist and the author of many books about chess and psychology, died Friday night at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 79 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pneumonia that developed after a stroke, said his son, Benjamin.


Liza-Faith Cohn, William Wallach
Mr. and Mrs.
Albert L. Cohn of West Orange, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Liza-Faith Michaelis Cohn to William David Wallach, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick K. Wallach of Summit, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cohn graduated with honors from Swarthmore College.
She is a second-year student at the Benjamin N. Cordozo School of Law.
Her father is a founder of and the senior partner in Cohn Lifland Pearlman Hermann &amp; Knopf, a law firm in Saddle Brook, N.J.
Her mother, Sylvia J. Cohn, is a special counsel to the firm.


Drug Ring Trial Lurches Toward a Start
To law-enforcement authorities battling the relentless drug trade in New York City, Gerald Miller was one of the most savage and successful of the flashy young kingpins who dominated the lucrative crack business.
His ring took in up to $250,000 a week from drug trafficking in poverty-scarred South Jamaica, Queens, investigators say, adding that he and his henchmen terrorized the area and murdered suppliers they double-crossed, confederates who fell out of favor and potential rivals.


Building (and Dismantling) a Threat
With the disclosure last week that South Africa had built and later destroyed six Hiroshima-sized atomic bombs, President F. W. de Klerk confirmed both the long-held suspicions of experts and the great truism of atomic weapons: that they are more political than military, more suitable for blackmail than warfare.
In South Africa's case, the target of the blackmail, though Mr. de Klerk did not use that word, was the United States.
In the face of a military threat, he said, South Africa's strategy would have been to detonate a device underground and threaten to drop another on the enemy unless the United States intervened.
By disclosing the program, Mr. de Klerk said he hoped to dispel mistrust that might impede his country's commercial nuclear efforts.
It is safe to assume he also wanted a historical footnote as the first leader to destroy a nuclear arsenal.


Kathleen Gworek, Bryan Jennings
Dr. and Mrs.
John B. Gworek of South Windsor, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kathleen Marie Gworek, to William Bryan Jennings, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Jennings of New Canaan, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Gworek, 26, is a candidate for an M.B.A. at Northwestern University, as is her fiance.
She graduated magna cum laude from Boston College.
Her father is a dentist in South Windsor, where her mother, Janet Gworek, owns a tax preparation service.


Piscataway Journal; Election Battle Rages Over School Superintendent's Changes
NEXT month, voters all over the state will head for the polls to pass judgment on school budgets and cast ballots for board of education candidates.
But in Piscataway, the vote will go beyond these standard issues to include what amounts to an unofficial referendum on one man -- the Superintendent of Schools, Dr.
Philip Geiger -- and the changes he has brought about in this district of about 5,800 students.
With a total of nine candidates, only two of them incumbents, vying for four board seats -- an unusually high number, caused by the retirement of one member and the resignation of another -- both the pro- and anti-Geiger factions expect the campaign to be active and nasty.


Dear Member of the N.R.A.
Each year you pay $25 to a powerful national lobby that is supposed to look out for the interests of people who own guns for hunting, target shooting or self-defense.
You might be interested to know what it's been doing with that money.
Most recently, the National Rifle Association spent your dues to defeat gun control laws in New Jersey and Virginia.
In both cases the lobbyists failed miserably.


Irene M. Koch, Ronald Adelman
Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome S. Koch of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Irene Marci Koch, to Ronald Wolf Adelman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton Adelman of Tenafly, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Koch, 28, is an associate at the New York law firm of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher.
She graduated cum laude from Cornell University.
She and her fiance received law degrees from Fordham University.
Her father is a first vice president of Gruntal &amp; Company, the investment concern, in Scarsdale.
Her mother, Judith Koch, is a vice president of Dudley D. Doernberg Real Estate in Scarsdale.


Disabled Learn to Protect Themselves:


Sound Bytes; Alsop's the Name, So Opinion's the Game
Strong opinions run in the family of Stewart Alsop Jr., the bearish-looking, perpetually rumpled and never bashful editor-in-chief of Infoworld, a weekly newspaper covering the personal computer industry.
His father, Stewart Alsop, and uncle, Joseph Alsop, were nationally syndicated political columnists.
Actually, this is the second time around for Mr.
Alsop at Infoworld; he was fired from the same job in 1984.
That led him to start PC Letter, an industry newsletter that attracted a wide following among industry executives for Mr.
Alsop's views on product strategies, his often acidic "open letters" to industry executives, and "The Official PC Letter Vapor List" of hardware and software products that are announced long before they are ready to be sold.


Hand Check N.B.A. Violence
To the Sports Editor:
The increase of flagrant fouls and violence between players in today's National Basketball Association is a direct result of the elimination of the defensive hand check from games.
Physical contact has always been a part of modern professional basketball.
But when the N.B.A. abolished a defensive player's ability to use the hand check as a way of slowing down the offensive player he was guarding, players began finding new ways to keep their opponents from going to the hoop.
As a result, the hip check has replaced the hand check, as frustrated players try to limit their opponents' scoring chances.


Islanders Parlay: Little Foe, Big Points
Nothing like a visit from the hapless San Jose Sharks to make even the most middling of teams feel like a big fish on its frozen little pond.
Tonight the Islanders, desperate to close the 3-point gap that separated them from the fourth-place Rangers, weren't disappointed by the Sharks, with only three road victories to their credit this season.


In Aid to Yeltsin, Damage Control for the West
WEIGHED down by sagging economies and bulging budget deficits, the Western industrial nations have lost some of their ardor about lavishing billions of dollars in aid on Russia.
Eager to cut their deficits and put their domestic houses in order, officials from many countries are not exactly doing cartwheels at the prospect of providing Russia with the $30 billion to $40 billion in aid that many experts say Moscow needs this year.
The sums being talked about are considerably more than last year's $24 billion aid package.
Though such amounts are large, they could be modest compared to the price that the West would pay if Russia's President Boris N. Yeltsin were ousted and replaced by a hostile, ultra-nationalist regime.
Such a government would probably not seek to start a new cold war with the West, but its focus might be on taking back parts or all of some other former Soviet republics, especially areas with large Russian populations.
And that alone would be a formula for renewed nuclear threats and renewed tensions with the world's industrialized democracies.


Putting Together a Custom Safari
PROBABLY few vacations hold such mystique, such promise of glamour and adventure, as an African safari.
Even with relentless population growth and nearly a million tourists a year trooping through Kenya, many travelers realize at least a part of this dream each year.
Others are disappointed by poorly planned itineraries, or by being cooped up in a minibus for 10 days.
One way to insure a more pleasurable experience is to put together a custom safari with the help of an operator or safari guide.
Kenya and Tanzania in East Africa are perhaps the favorite safari destinations, and while there can be a crush of visitors in the peak seasons of July and August and December through February, it is easy to get off the beaten track.


THE EDITOR AS GAP MODEL
It's great to live in a time when, as Walter Kirn reports in "The Editor as Gap Model" (March 7), a serious journalist like Andrew Sullivan can appear as a fashion model without undermining his credibility as a professional.
Instead of a happy story about the mixing of pop culture and journalism, Kirn might have tried to explain more meaningfully what "The New Republic" thinks "post-ideological" means.
More analysis might have revealed that The New Republic is to the world of political ideas what the Gap is to clothes: a retailer of fashions that stays close to the mainstream while struggling mightily to appear on the cutting edge.
JUSTIN HUGHES
Los Angeles


Sometimes, Being Lazy Helps
I just planted my tomato, eggplant and pepper seeds last week, and in about eight weeks I will put them out in my Maryland garden.
I sprinkled a half-dozen seeds or so of each variety in four-inch pots filled with moistened, sterile potting soil. (To save on peat, which is a limited resource, it's better to use your own compost, but my pile was frozen.) Then I sprinkled about a quarter inch of potting soil over the seeds, patted it down, covered the pots with cellophane and set them on a table in a warm room (about 68 degrees by day and 60 by night).
I'll keep the soil moist by spritzing when necessary, and as soon as the seeds germinate, I'll stick them under fluorescent lights (kept as close as three inches from the baby leaves and turned off at night).
As the plants grow, I'll raise the lights and fertilize with a diluted solution every few days.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  YELTSIN FACES NEW ASSAULT


Loved To Death
THE LAST PANDA
By George B. Schaller. Illustrated. 291 pp. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.


POSTINGS: Visits to the Past; 2 Harlem Walking Tours
Harlem preservation efforts -- successes, failures, those unfolding and not yet begun -- will be grist for two free historic walking tours today and next Saturday, at 11 A.M.
No reservations.
Just show up.
"Along with success in Harlem, there is great failure," said Michael Adams, president of the Upper Manhattan Society for Progress Through Preservation.
He will lead the tours, up to six hours, through landmarked and neglected areas.


The War of a Peacetime Soldier
BUFFALO SOLDIERS
By Robert O'Connor. 324 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


Bosnia Accord Appears Near Collapse
An accord reached Friday on a cease-fire and the delivery of food and medicine to eastern Bosnia appeared on the verge of collapse today as Serbian forces reneged on their promise to allow a United Nations relief convoy to reach the besieged Muslim-controlled town of Srebrenica.
Under the accord with the United Nations, the commander of Serbian forces in Bosnia, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, had said the 20-truck convoy would be permitted to go to Srebrenica this morning after having been delayed for more than a week in Mali Zvornik, on the Serbia border with Bosnia.


Runoff Today Keeps French Up in the Air
With a conservative coalition expected to sweep into office in the second round of parliamentary elections, on Sunday, France is immersed in speculation about who will be Prime Minister and how he is likely to deal with the weakened Socialist President, Francois Mitterrand.
The elections were effectively decided last weekend, when the conservative Union for France coalition won 39.5 percent of the vote and assured itself 460 to 480 seats in the 577-member National Assembly in the runoff.
The Socialist Party, in office since 1988, drew 17.6 percent of the vote.


Cheers in Bronx Are for St. Raymond
St.
Raymond High School has beaten teams from seven states this season.
Today, in a matchup of Bronx schools, the Ravens defeated the squad from the state that means the most, posting a 96-81 victory over Walton for their first New York State Federation Class A basketball championship.
Tyler Brown of St.
Raymond, a senior who scored 35 points, rebounds and 3 assists, was named the Class A tournament's most valuable player.
Kareem Reid, a junior, scored 30 points and had 8 assists as St.
Raymond, the New York City Catholic High Schools Athletic Association champion, finished at 23-6.


Sarah A. Dalley, Arthur Shannon 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence C. Dalley Jr. of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter Sarah Adams Dalley to Arthur Vernon Shannon 3d, a son of Mrs.
Shannon Jr. of Princeton, N.J., and the late Mr.
Shannon.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Dalley graduated from Wheaton College.
She was until recently an investment officer with Nations Banc Capital Markets Inc., a bank in Washington.
Her father is the president of Dalley &amp; Associates Insurance Company, an insurance brokerage in Washington.


Congressional Memo; No Perk Too Small to Be Overlooked by Rebellious Freshmen
It may not be Lexington and Concord or the siege of the Bastille.
But on Tuesday, the freshman Democratic rebels in Congress will make their first frontal assault against perks and pork.
At stake is nothing less than the hundreds of free parking spaces at National Airport.


Food Convoy Arrives in Bosnian Town
The threat of starvation for thousands of sick and malnourished people in the besieged Muslim town of Srebrenica appeared to have been averted today, for a time at least, when a convoy of 20 United Nations relief trucks overcame more than a week of resistance by Serbian nationalist forces and reached the town.
United Nations relief officials said the convoy reached Srebrenica after nightfall with 200 tons of food, medical supplies and plastic sheeting to repair damage caused by Serbian shelling.


World Economies


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Friday about the political crisis in Moscow misstated the Russian expression for "to vote impeachment." It is "golosovat impichment."


New Delhi Journal; The Writer's Heart Belongs to India, and It Bleeds
"It's a different India," said Khushwant Singh, smoothing his brambled beard with his palm.
"It certainly is. I've seen the changes in a year and a half."
Diplomat, scholar, editor, playwright, novelist, bon vivant -- Mr.
Singh is a troubled man, troubled about his country and its future.
Never one to countenance what he sees as India's, and Indians', foibles, always quick to debunk what he regards as the pompous, the idiotic, the sanctimonious, Mr.
Singh's prose these days is increasingly weighed down by laments over his country's schisms.


Quirot Plans Comeback
ANA QUIROT, the Olympic 800-meter bronze medalist who was badly burned in a domestic accident in January, plans to return to track and hopes to compete in the Central American and Caribbean Games in November.
"I don't feel that I'm finished." Quirot, 29, told the Cuban weekly news magazine Bohemia in Havana.
"I really want to run and get back to being the same as ever."


That Other Final Four Starts
The Final
what?
Anybody who thinks big-time college basketball has come down to four teams could stand a refresher course in remedial iteration.
For by actual count, four months after more than 300 major teams began the 1992-93 season,
eight
of those teams are still alive.
And anybody who doubts it is invited to stop by Madison Square Garden tonight, or tune into ESPN, to watch four of the survivors square off for the semifinals of the 56th National Invitation Tournament.


3-Year-Old Is Hurt in Shooting; Wound Is Called Self-Inflicted
A 3-year-old boy suffered a gunshot wound in the head yesterday afternoon in a Brooklyn apartment that his baby sitter was visiting, the police said.
The wound appeared to be self-inflicted, they said.
The police were searching last night for the male tenant of the apartment in Flatlands who they believe fled with the gun immediately after the shooting.


Big Insurer's Path to Crisis Is Study in Mismanagement
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the nation's largest nonprofit health insurer, has lost tens of millions of dollars over the last decade through a series of management mistakes that have mired the company in financial crisis and undermined its dominant role in New York's health care system.
Empire, which can turn no customer away, has complained loudly of the battering it takes from giant commercial insurance companies, who can pick and choose their customers, offering policies to the healthiest and rejecting the sickest.
And commercial insurers concede that their goal is to find the youngest and healthiest pool of customers.
Quality Customers Lost
But an examination of Empire's management, including internal company reports and state audits, and interviews with 16 current and former high-ranking executives, shows that many of the company's problems are of its own making.


2 Police Officers Are Injured During Greek Parade


Political Memo; Using 'Kids' to Push Fight on Poverty May Obscure the Issues, Critics Say
Fortified by Chinese takeout food and tapes of the Grateful Dead, a dozen young workers labored overtime last week in the basement of a Capitol Hill town house, packaging social need.
They filled 5,000 envelopes with a report that says the United States increasingly consigns its children to lives of violence, poverty and failure.
They relayed background footage to a satellite and produced localized sound bites for television stations in every state.


Limbering Up for Fund-Raising Walk


Milken Sees Vindication
Michael R. Milken, who came to symbolize the Wall Street excesses of the 1980's, says he feels vindicated for pioneering the widespread use of junk bonds, the securities that fueled a wave of corporate takeovers and ultimately led to his downfall.
After serving nearly two years in jail for securities fraud, he stepped back into the public spotlight this weekend at an educational conference sponsored by his philanthropic foundations.


Another Reopening Day at the World Trade Center


A Cherry Blossom Festival Without Blossoms?


Dance in Review
Barnard College Dance Department  Minor Latham Playhouse Broadway at 119th Street Morningside Heights


Russians Fill Streets, Not Barricades
For a brief moment today, a whiff of the Bastille wafted through the Kremlin.
As the Congress of People's Deputies prepared for a secret ballot on toppling President Boris N. Yeltsin and its own chief, Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, a spokesman for the Mayor of Moscow warned that the deputies had better have lunch inside the crenelated ramparts of the Kremlin.
Outside, he said, the crowds were big.


Kate Reid, Actress, Dead at 62; A Veteran of Hundreds of Roles
Kate Reid, an actress whose hundreds of roles included starring onstage in "Death of a Salesman," in the film "Atlantic City" and in television episodes of "Dallas," died on Saturday at her home in Stratford, Ontario.
She was 62.
The cause of death was cancer, said her agent, Richard Schmenner.


Dance in Review
Open 24 Hours Dance Company  CBGB's Gallery 313


Review/Recital; A 17-Year-Old Violinist's Belated Debut
Juliette Kang was 13 years old when she won the Young Concert Artists auditions, but the organization, with a combination of wisdom and humanity rare in the world of musical commerce, decided to let her develop further before presenting her in the New York recital debut that is part of the prize.
Since then, she has continued her studies at the Curtis Institute and at the Juilliard School, won a few more prizes (including the Yehudi Menuhin International Violin Competition last year) and given several concerto performances.
So although it would be an exaggeration to describe the 17-year-old violinist as a fully seasoned musician, on Tuesday evening at the 92d Street Y she played a challenging debut program with the assurance and grace of a musician who is used to the stage.


Editorial Notebook; Diplomacy's Permafrost
Communism collapses; so does apartheid.
The cold war ends; a new world order is perceived.
Nevertheless, such tectonic shifts in the earth's political crust appear to have little effect on hard-core regional disputes.
This sobering thought is prompted by the announcement that the presidents of Cyprus's two communities will meet briefly this week at the United Nations to discuss further meetings.
For sure, every effort should be made by other parties to press for a settlement of a dispute that will soon turn 20.
But don't hold your breath.


Jennings Settles For Third
Amid the accelerating growth of women's distance running, three-time defending champion Lynn Jennings of the United States placed third today in the world cross-country championships.
Seeking a record-tying fourth straight triumph, the versatile Jennings, 32, captured the bronze medal behind Albertina Dias of Portugal and Catherina McKiernan of Ireland.


Market Place; Nearly worthless Wang shares generate revenue for the Amex.
STOCK in Wang Labs is all but worthless, a fact that the company confirmed when it filed its plan to emerge from bankruptcy.
Responding to that plan, the American Stock Exchange announced plans to stop trading the stock at the end of March.
But that was before the Amex realized just how much volume a worthless stock can generate.
On Friday, the exchange said it would keep trading the shares.
"We saw a significant amount of volume taking place and felt that investors would be better served by having it take place in our marketplace," said Jules Winters, the exchange's chief operating officer.


Tuning In to Hear Alcoholics Anonymous
To the Editor:
A March 5 article about a public radio program in New Haven that broadcasts Alcoholics Anonymous meetings might convey the idea that A.A. groups and local radio stations have not long joined together.


Weekly Treasury Auction Will Be Confined to Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
Traders said that by late in the day on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was at 2.92 percent and the six-month bill at 3.03 percent.


Essay; Unfinished Business
How can Bill Clinton be saved from making the same tragic blunders that ruined George Bush in the Persian Gulf?
The new President has already started down the primrose path of dallying with Saddam Hussein.


Deputies Cast Secret Vote
Votes in most democracies -- especially the ones on removal of a president -- are held by roll-call so it is clear where each legislator stands.
But in Russia, the more important the vote, the more secretive the legislators are.
Hiding behind closed curtains, the deputies of the Russian Congress were free to vote against President Boris N. Yeltsin without being held accountable by their constituents or political parties.
Though the ouster attempt failed, 617 votes were cast against the President, only 72 short of the required two-thirds majority.


Secondary Market Is Sought
Lawmakers in the House and the Senate are mapping out divergent paths to a common objective: creating a secondary market in which small-business loans can be bought and sold in much the same fashion that mortgage-backed securities are traded.
Advocates of a secondary market for small-business borrowings say it could unleash a flood of investment capital that would wash away the biggest obstacle facing many small companies: a lack of credit.


Barrie C. Weston and Kevin L. Tawes
Barrie Christine Weston, a daughter of Barbara Weston of Mount Kisco, N.Y., and the late Warren W. Weston, was married in Mount Kisco yesterday to Kevin Lee Tawes, the son of Catherine Tawes of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Orrie L. Tawes 3d of New York.
The Rev.
Peter Colapiertro, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Francis of Assisi Church..
Mrs.
Weston-Tawes, 24, is an assistant to the president of retail operations at Eileen Fisher Inc., an apparel company in Irvington, N.Y.
She graduated from Arizona State University.
Her father was a consultant for Interstate Motor Carrier, a trucking insurance company in Freehold, N.J.


European Airlines Nearing Decision on Possible Merger
Four European airlines that have been discussing closer ties will soon decide whether to merge into a more muscular carrier capable of surviving in an increasingly competitive industry, company executives say.
Negotiators from Scandinavian Airlines System, KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, Swissair and Austrian Airlines could recommend to their managements as soon as next month whether to proceed with a full-fledged merger or with a more limited agreement to link flight schedules and marketing and maintenance programs, the executives said Saturday.


Sports of The Times; Madness That Goes Past March
And all along most of us thought that that's what these universities were supposed to be up to, to begin with.


No Headline
"People used to say to themselves, 'I may pay interest once in a while, but that's not really me because I'm going to pay it it all off next month.' In the last year people began to be more honest with themselves." -- RUVAN N. COHEN, director of credit card marketing at Citibank.  [ A1:4. ]


Mexican Media Sales
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. and Paramount Studios will join several Mexican investors to bid for media outlets being privatized by the Mexican Government, according to news reports here today.
Raymundo Gomez Flores, president of Grupo Geo and Banca Cremi S.A., was quoted by the Notimex news agency and a local newspaper as saying that an investor group including the two American companies would try to buy two television channels, the daily El Nacional newspaper and a chain of movie theaters.


In German Election, Greens Gain on Far Right
To the Editor:
Unfortunately, your March 8 report from Bonn on gains by far-right candidates of the German Republican Party in the prosperous western state of Hesse continues your tendency to downplay the role of Green parties around the world.


Overlooked by Yankees, Draper Is a Lock for Mets
One morning in December, it happened.
Mike Draper woke up and discovered he wasn't a Yankee anymore.
In an organization full of prospects and sure things, Draper suddenly was considered expendable.
Those things happen in baseball.


Bipartisan Barbs Served at Gridiron Dinner
President Clinton was skewered in skit and song on Saturday night at the annual Gridiron Club dinner, the white-tie event that is as much a rite of spring for journalists here as cherry blossoms are for tourists.
As one group performed a song to the tune of the Coasters' classic "Yakety Yak," Mr.
Clinton, dressed in a black sequined tuxedo jacket, surprised the audience by joining the performers to play saxophone on the refrain.


Game Called on Account of Unsportmanslike Weather


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  YELTSIN SURVIVES, NARROWLY  After narrowly surviving an unexpected vote on his ouster in the Russian Congress, President Yeltsin claimed victory over a "Communist coup d'etat." But his foes were heartened by the close call.
A1  For a moment, a whiff of the Bastille wafted through the Kremlin.
A6


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: N.C.A.A. TOURNAMENT -- West; Temple Tempers Fly
Just when Michigan seems only half-interested, its players try lob passes dapper enough for the 11 o'clock news.
Today, on the brink of the Final Four, Jalen Rose arched such a feed to teammate Jimmy King, who dunked it hard and swung pleasurably on the rim.
By virtue of that play, Michigan's lead grew to 8 points with three tenuous minutes still to play in the Kingdome this afternoon, and Temple Coach John Chaney's screeching temper then helped the Wolverines win the National Collegiate Athletic Association West Regional with a swagger, 77-72.
"We haven't peaked yet," said Wolverines forward Chris Webber.


No Headline
SKIING Wachter Collects Title Racing under pressure on the final day of the season, Anita Wachter of Austria stayed cool and captured her first women's overall World Cup title yesterday.
Wachter, 26, knew that her German rival, Katja Seizinger, would be unable to mount a real challenge in the final slalom in Are, Sweden.
But Wachter still had to complete both runs and finish in the top 15 in order to get the points necessary to claim the title.
And that's exactly what she did.


The Real Crying Game
Just over a week ago, right before Mother's Day in Britain, Irish Republican Army killers planted two bombs in a shopping center in Warrington, on the Mersey River near Liverpool.
The bombs were timed so that people fleeing the first explosion would be caught by the second.
The killers showed more practiced cunning than their clumsier counterparts in the acclaimed film "The Crying Game."
Jonathan Ball, 3 years old, was shopping for a Mother's Day present when he died.
Tim Parry, 12 years old, was buying soccer shorts; he ran from the first explosion straight into the second.
Most of his face was blown away; he died six days later.


Lynda Fuhrman and Joshua Rovine
Lynda Beth Fuhrman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lionel Fuhrman of New York, was married yesterday to Joshua Benjamin Rovine, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur W. Rovine of New York.
Rabbi Arthur Schneier performed the ceremony at the Park East Synagogue in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Rovine, 28, is a bilingual special education teacher at Public School 72 in Manhattan.
She graduated from Mercer University and received a master's degree in special education from Hunter College.
Her father is an account executive at Towers Financial Corporation, a financial services company in New York.


Dance in Review
Chiang Ching  Taipei Theater


CHRONICLE
QUEEN ELIZABETH as a black person? SPIKE LEE as a white person?
The current issue of Colors, the magazine sold in 100 countries to promote Benetton, the clothing company, is devoted to the issue of race, and one article, called "What If . . . ?" shows pictures of famous people with skin tones altered by way of a computer.
Queen Elizabeth is depicted as a black, Spike Lee as a white and Pope John Paul II as an Asian.
Another article lists racial epithets.


Six Killed as Plane From Teterboro Airport Crashes
A small private plane crashed this afternoon in an industrial complex here about five minutes after taking off from Teterboro Airport nearby, killing all six people aboard, the authorities said.
The plane crashed at 4:35 P.M. in light rain and fog in a commercial area of Elmwood Park, a borough about 15 miles northwest of New York City, said Chief Byron Morgan of the Elmwood Park police.


As Attacks on Israelis Mount, Leaders Debate Self-Defense
As two more Israelis were stabbed, including one killed by Arab workers in the Gaza Strip, the country heard conflicting suggestions today from its political elite on how to go about defending itself.
Warning that Israel may face even tougher times in coming months, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said today that high school students ought to carry clubs to swing at knife-wielding assailants.


U.S. Suspects Iran Is Helping Iraq To Evade Embargo on Oil Exports
United States intelligence agencies have expressed concern that Iran and Iraq may have struck a deal calling for Iran to buy oil from Iraq in violation of United Nations sanctions, senior Clinton Administration officials said today.
Such an agreement between the two Middle Eastern adversaries would undermine international efforts imposed after the Persian Gulf war to deprive Iraq of oil revenue, the officials said.
They said they were worried that the two countries' common enmity toward the United States may have caused the them to set aside years of animosity, at least partly.


Look, in the Stands, It's Fernandomania!
When he stepped onto the field, more than 6,000 fans, many dressed in the garb of either the St.
Louis Cardinals or Baltimore Orioles, rose to deliver a lengthy and warm ovation.
No, it wasn't the Orioles' Cal Ripken Jr., or his shortstop counterpart and likely fellow future Hall of Famer, the Cardinals' Ozzie Smith.
The player the fans rose to salute on Saturday was Fernando Valenzuela, the pitcher who seems destined to resume his love affair with baseball fans as well as his Quixotic journey through the major leagues after an absence of one and a half years.
Going by the Numbers
For Valenzuela, having regained his velocity and emotional vitality while pitching last year in his native country of Mexico, is about to bull his way onto the Orioles' roster and perhaps into the club's starting rotation.
And he is doing it by the numbers, among the most impressive in the Grapefruit League, having pitched 14 scoreless innings in five appearances.


Typewriter Seized in Bombing Inquiry
Law-enforcement officials searching for clues in the bombing of the World Trade Center seized a typewriter and computer disks from the apartment of one of the five men arrested after the blast, the man's lawyer said yesterday.
William M. Kunstler, who is representing Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny, said the equipment was confiscated shortly after the F.B.I. arrested his client earlier this month.
Mr.
Elgabrowny, 42, is being held without bail on charges of interfering with Federal agents who arrived to search his apartment in connection with the bombing investigation.
Though Mr.
Elgabrowny was not charged directly in the bombing, law-enforcement officials consider him a suspect and say he is associated with others charged in the blast.


Head of Joint Chiefs Plans To Serve Out Full Term
Gen.
Colin L. Powell will serve out his full term as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, retiring Sept. 30, his spokesman said today.
The spokesman, Col.
F.
William Smullen, acknowledged that General Powell had broached the idea of retiring a few months early in conversations with senior military officials last fall, but said the general had never gone beyond raising his retirement as a possibility.


Questions Remain On Ayer Deal
Ayer Inc. announced on Friday that it would sell a stake in the agency company to a financial partnership led by Richard Humphreys, the former president and chief executive of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Worldwide.
But the announcement by Ayer, which ended two years of speculation on the privately held company's search for new capital to deal with its large debt, raised as many questions as it answered.
Mr.
Humphreys and Jerry J. Siano, chairman and chief executive, declined to disclose details about the arrangements of the transaction, which involves an infusion of an unspecified amount of capital by Mr.
Humphreys; W. Y. Choi, who is described as a South Korean publisher, and two unidentified American private investors from outside the advertising industry.


Willie Nelson He's Not
As bad as FRANK VIOLA's singing was, it was nothing compared to his pitching.
Viola endured the embarrassment of having his rendition of "On the Road Again," which he sang at a Karaoke party on New Year's Eve, played over the loudspeakers as he warmed up yesterday for a game against the Minnesota Twins in Fort Myers, Fla.


Anthony Gets Team Support
Greg Anthony's teammates had to persuade the Knicks' front office to allow Anthony to travel with the team while serving his five-game suspension for his role in the Phoenix brawl.
The Knicks' management wanted to send Anthony home last Wednesday, angered by the sucker punch he hit Kevin Johnson with during the melee with the Suns on Tuesday night.
But according to an NBC televison report today, four teammates spoke up in Anthony's behalf at a team meeting on Wednesday in Salt Lake City.


INSIDE
Right Finishes French Rout
Confirming their showing in the first round of voting, conservatives completed their trouncing of President Mitterrand's Socialists.
Page A3.
Post Changing Hands
Abraham Hirschfeld agreed to hand The New York Post to Rupert Murdoch, and Post officials said a new editor had been chosen.
Page B1.
College Final Four Is Set
North Carolina and Michigan triumphed and joined Kentucky and Kansas in the N.C.A.A. basketball semifinals.
SportsMonday, page C1.


New York Magazine: Bucking Trends
On March 4, New York magazine was all set to run a cover story titled "All the Pretty Young Things" about the latest, coolest, "most divinely decadent," beautiful young people in New York.
That afternoon, word came that an arrest was imminent in the World Trade Center bombing.
In the next 18 hours, a 3,000-word article on the bombing was written and edited, and a new cover delivered to the printer.
By Saturday afternoon, right on schedule, more than 400,000 copies with "The Arab Connection" on the cover were on their way to subscribers and newsstands.


DDB Needham Loses Audi Account
Audi of America Inc. abruptly changed course last week in the review on its estimated $23 million account, which has been at DDB Needham Worldwide since 1969.
Two days after inviting the agency to participate in the review, Audi executives notified DDB Needham executives at a meeting in New York late Thursday that the review would proceed without them because there was "little likelihood DDB Needham would successfully compete," said Patrick Fitzgerald, an Audi spokesman in Auburn Hills, Mich.
DDB Needham will serve the account while Audi hires a consultant to help with the review, he added.


Corrections
An article in Business Day last Monday about the Chemical Banking Corporation's merger with the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation misstated Chemical's ranking in foreign currency trading.
According to a survey in the May 1992 issue of Euromoney magazine, Chemical ranked second overall, after Citibank, although it was first in currency trading with other banks.


Machine Tool Orders Rise on Stronger Export Demand
Machine tool orders rose sharply in February, in part because of strong export orders, the industry's trade association will report today.
The data provide further signs, along with recent figures that showed stronger factory orders, higher production and longer workweeks, that the health of American manufacturing continues to improve.


Horror for Hollywood: Film Hits a Nerve With Its Grim View of Hometown
Over the years, Hollywood has offered many portraits of its home territory, from a paradise of turquoise pools to apocalyptic visions like "Blade Runner." More knowingly than most moviegoers, Angelenos could shrug off the distortions as just illusion.
But now a film has struck a nerve in Los Angeles.
The city is in an uproar over the Warner Brothers hit "Falling Down," a tale of a laid-off military worker played by Michael Douglas, a middle-aged man who mentally snaps in a freeway jam, leaves his car and embarks on a violent journey through a hostile city, much of it graffiti-splattered and ethnically threatening.


For New I.B.M. Chief, Spinoff May Be a Model
Louis V. Gerstner Jr., I.B.M.'s new chief executive, says he plans to spend his first few months on the job talking to his managers, workers and customers worldwide as he tries to devise a plan to make the troubled computer giant more nimble and more competitive.
If he's looking for a place to start, he might consider dropping by a company that was spun off two years ago by the International Business Machines Corporation.
For since it left the I.B.M. embrace, Lexmark International Inc. has made the kind of changes in management, marketing and corporate culture that many analysts, and even many I.B.M. managers, agree that the lumbering I.B.M. must now make.


Where 'Boys Will Be Boys,' And Adults Are Befuddled
It was lunchtime at Lakewood High School and the big men on campus were strutting their stuff at the local Taco Bell.
Eric Richardson, a 17-year-old football star, swaggered in, a T-shirt reading "No Crybabies" stretched taut across his pectorals.


This Final Four East-West Shootout Happens on Ice
The four top-rated teams, as selected by the hockey committee of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, blazed through their quarterfinal tournament games Saturday night, setting up East-West confrontations in the semifinal round.
Maine, ranked first in the polls all season, will play Michigan, seeded No. 2 in the West, and then Lake Superior State, the defending champion and the foremost Western team, will meet Boston University, No. 2 in the East, on Thursday at Milwaukee in the kind of intersectional confrontations that have marked this competition since its inception 45 years ago.
The championship game will be played on Saturday.


O'Connor Praises the Work of the Police
In a sermon yesterday at St.
Patrick's Cathedral, John Cardinal O'Connor, the Archbishop of New York, defended the city's Police Department in light of allegations of misconduct by some officers.
Three weeks ago, two New York City police officers and a state police investigator, who are members of an elite group, the New York State Drug Enforcement Task Force, were arrested on charges that they sold about $25,000 worth of heroin.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B10-11.


Yanks' Final Roster Remains a Mystery
Opening day is one week away, and the Yankee clubhouse still contains at least eight players who will not travel to Cleveland for the first game.
Manager Buck Showalter wants to pick a starting lineup by Monday and General Manager Gene Michael wants to have the 25-man roster completed by Thursday, but both wishes may not come to fruition.
The Yankees are moving methodically.
Michael was asked today how he would relieve the gridlock if the Yankees are unable to make a trade soon, but he declined comment.
Then asked if the Yankees had to be careful about demoting certain players because it could harm their psyche, the general manager put his head down and walked away.
The question went unanswered.


Stuart W. Cook, 79, Psychologist Who Revealed Effects of Racism
Dr.
Stuart W. Cook, a social psychologist who studied the impact of racial and religious prejudice on society, died in his sleep at home in Boulder, Colo., on Thursday.
Dr.
Cook was 79 years old.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his son, Stephen H. Cook.
Mr.
Cook said his father suffered a stroke in early January.


Pitino's Rising Star Approaches Its Zenith
The story was told to make a point about one of his Kentucky players, a 6-foot-9-inch forward named Jared Prickett.
An amazingly hard worker, Rick Pitino was calling this lanky, blond freshman from Fairmont, W. Va.
Pitino conveyed it as only he can, creating an image half-rooted in truth and half-staged for theater of the absurd.
"He's got a Larry Bird work ethic," said Pitino, after Prickett's stunning 22-point, 11-rebound performance on Saturday led the Wildcats past Florida State, 106-81, in the Southeast Regional final and into the Final Four for the first time since 1984.


Critic's Notebook; Ice-T's Latest Gangster-Rap Caper Finds Him Alone and on His Own
What, no controversy?
A week after the release of Ice-T's "Home Invasion," there's no brouhaha, no radio talk-show buzz; there are no stern protest letters from concerned organizations, no tabloid headlines.
The lack of reaction to a performer who made waves last year from the Lollapalooza Festival to the Presidential campaign suggests only too clearly how timid and touchy Time Warner has become.
The album has four-letter words, plenty of sexism and some anger at the police, but it's well within the parameters of action movies and standard gangster rap.
After police associations around the country protested "Cop Killer," a song by Ice-T's heavy-metal band, Body Count, Time Warner paid lip service to artists' free expression while Ice-T "voluntarily" removed the song from the album.
But the conglomerate had become anxious.
Earlier this year, Time Warner not only refused to release "Home Invasion" in the form Ice-T wanted, but dropped him from the Sire label and shelved plans for Ice-TV, a cable-television talk show.
"Home Invasion" was released by Ice-T's own Rhyme Syndicate label, distributed by Priority Records.


Michal Fox and James R. Smart
Mara Rebecca Fox, a daughter of Drs.
David and Louise Fox of Haworth, N.J., was married yesterday to James Ross Smart, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Smart of Wethersfield, Conn.
Rabbi Dov Gartenberg officiated at Holly Hedge Estates in Solebury, Pa.
Ms.
Fox, who is known as Michal, graduated cum laude from Princeton University, from which her husband graduated summa cum laude.
Her father is a professor emeritus of educational research at City College in New York.
Her mother is an associate professor of educational psychology at Hunter College in New York.


Bosnian Enclave Lets Some Serbs Go
Rado Filipovic pressed his cane into a mound of snow and watched dejectedly today as 45 other Serbs boarded a bus for a 30-mile trip to a Serbian-held part of Bosnia.
"I'm not on the list," said Mr.
Filipovic, a 66-year-old retiree.
He said local officials had told him he would be allowed to leave Tuzla with the other Serbs.
"I don't understand why I can't go," he said.


Abroad at Home; Death Of a Dream
The dream of a united Europe, powerful contributor to a better world, is dead.
It died when the European Community refused to act against Serbian aggression -- when it would not lift a finger to stop mass racial murder on its own continent.
The Community survives, but it is a soulless creature.
Its bureaucrats set standards for the butterfat content of ice cream.
The vision that inspired Jean Monnet and the other great founders is gone.


Shoreham Plant Is Proposed As Terminal for New Ferry
When the Shoreham nuclear-power plant was built here more than a decade ago amid protests and fears of a nuclear accident, no one envisioned it as a peaceful ferry terminal.
But a deep canal built to draw water from Long Island Sound to cool the nuclear plant's reactors may now become safe harbor for a new class of high-speed ferry service to Connecticut.


Oregon Health Scheme Victimizes the Poor
To the Editor:
"Health Care the Oregon Way" (editorial, March 20), in support of the President's approval of the Oregon plan to "ration" services in its Medicaid program, overlooks a basic flaw in that plan: it is offensive to the principles of a democratic state.


Times Delivery Head


BASEBALL: American League, Where You, Too, Can Be Boss; From Boston to Baltimore, the Cry Is Heard: Play Rotisserie!
This American League Rotisserie analysis was prepared by Paul Belinkie.
If you have $26 and a dream, you can play Rotisserie baseball, a game in which "owners" build fantasy teams made up of real major league players who are selected at an auction draft at the beginning of the season.
Each team has a roster of 23 players.
In a typical league, a limit of $26 can be paid to purchase a team and a player can be drafted for as little as 10 cents.
Rotisserie owners bid against one another in their draft, and once a player is chosen no other owner can pick him.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Bank First, Oklahoma City, an initial public offering of 1.3 million shares.
Oppenheimer&amp; Company.


Nonprofit Insurance Giant Seeks Increases to Stay Afloat
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield is the largest of a network of 71 independent, nonprofit companies that provide health insurance to 68 million Americans in all 50 states.
The first of the plans was formed 60 years ago as a way for people to pay in advance for hospital care.
Blue Cross plans cover hospital costs, while Blue Shield plans pay doctors' bills.
In many areas, like New York, the plans are operated by one nonprofit corporation.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: N.C.A.A. TOURNAMENT -- East; North Carolina and Michigan Reach the Heights
The University of North Carolina has about, oh, 18 7-footers on its roster.
The number is actually four, but in college basketball, having four big men like that on one team is pretty outrageous.
Even on the Tar Heel sideline this afternoon against Cincinnati, there was a 7-footer from the Netherlands, Serge Zwikker, a redshirt freshman who was cheering in a nice suit and tie.
If you build it, the 7-footers will come.
What the Tar Heels have built is a dynasty, thanks mostly to King Dean.
When you're North Carolina, the well is deep, and this is the time of year to tap it.
The Tar Heels won a wild, competitive, wacky game in the final of the N.C.A.A.
East Regional at Byrne Meadowlands Arena over a Cincinnati team with a lot of heart.
But unfortunately for the Bearcats, those hearts weren't beating in particularly tall bodies.


Review/Film Festival; Days of Rice Cakes, Friendship and Gay Love
Sayoko, who is bright and pretty, would seem to be not very different from many other young women in the affluent Japan of today.
She isn't career-driven, but she has a career of sorts as an actress, dubbing the voices for animated films.
She lives alone in a small, cluttered duplex flat in what could be either Osaka or Tokyo, without a boyfriend, without commitments.
If she's a bit aimless and lonely, she's not especially aware of it.
All this changes in the opening sequence of "Okoge," Takehiro Nakajima's very fine new Japanese film, which is as melancholy as it is wise and funny.
One afternoon at the beach with a girlfriend, Sayoko suddenly realizes that they are sitting in the middle of a sort of gay enclave.
Men of all ages, sizes, builds and temperaments line the sea wall behind them.
Sayoko is curious.
Her girlfriend is appalled.


Risen From 'a Living Cemetery'; A Former White-Collar Criminal, Who Found God in Prison, Is Ordained a Minister
Until recently, much of Henry G. Fury's adult life could best be described as a riveting, sometimes unpleasant courtroom drama, with Mr.
Fury playing all the parts himself.
He was, for several years, a town justice in Carmel, N.Y., where he earned a reputation as a "hanging judge" and once sentenced a lawyer to 15 days in jail -- later reduced to a fine -- for being two hours late for an assault trial.
Mr.
Fury was also a real-estate lawyer, whose lucrative 20-year career came to a crashing halt in 1988 when he pleaded guilty to charges of bank fraud.
As punishment for his crimes, he spent the next 18 months as an inmate in a Federal penitentiary.
Hours of Reflection
But much has changed for Mr.
Fury, 54, since he was released from prison in 1989.
This afternoon, his brushes with the law behind him, he was ordained as a Protestant minister at an emotional ceremony in a stone-covered church in this Westchester County community.


Sports of The Times; North Carolina Can't Cut It After Game Is Won
THIS is the definition of a big-time basketball "program." North Carolina does not do nets -- except at the Final Four.
It declines to cut down the stringed trophy for anything but the national championship, taking the position that running around with tape-cutters at a regional tournament is a trifle tacky.
Oh, maybe in the old days the North Carolina players were allowed to cut down the nets after a regional victory, but this is Dean Smith's ninth time in the Final Four, and the players pick up on his calm disdain for anything but the trip to the Final Four in late March.


Consumers Finally Respond To High Credit Card Interest
After a decade of self-deception, Americans have finally begun to face the truth about how much interest they actually pay on their credit cards.
And now, for the first time, many consumers are shopping for a card that will charge them a lower rate.
For years, many consumers were drawn to Mastercards and Visa cards issued by banks mainly on the basis of which one offered the highest credit limit.
Studies show that the vast majority of card holders simply told themselves that they did not pay any interest, when two-thirds of them did.
Thus they were undisturbed by interest rates that stubbornly remained around 19 percent even as other rates fell sharply. 'More Honest With Themselves'
"People used to say to themselves, 'I may pay interest once in a while, but that's not really me because I'm going to pay it it all off next month,' " said Ruvan N. Cohen, director of card marketing at Citibank, the nation's largest bank and largest issuer of credit cards.
"In the last year people began to be more honest with themselves. They admit they pay interest and have started to read the rate disclosure boxes. We have to respond to that."


Holly Fidelman and Leonard Weiss
Holly Sue Fidelman, the daughter of Ruth Ellen and Stanley Fidelman of East Brunswick, N.J., was married yesterday to Leonard David Weiss, a son of Sidney and Sandra Weiss, also of East Brunswick.
Rabbi Joseph Maza performed the ceremony at the Livingston (N.J.) Country Club.
Mrs.
Weiss, 26, is a sales representative for Du Pont Pharma Inc., a pharmaceutical company in Wilmington, Del.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
Her father is a senior vice president of Merck &amp; Company, the pharmaceutical concern in Whitehouse Station, N.J.
Her mother is a speech and language specialist at the Wilson School, a public elementary school in Sayreville, N.J.


Health Choices in New York
Governor Cuomo's plan to change his state's health-care system is perhaps most significant for what it does not say.
News analysis, page B1.


Critic's Notebook; Ice-T's Latest Gangster-Rap Caper Finds Him Alone and on His Own
What, no controversy?
A week after the release of Ice-T's "Home Invasion," there's no brouhaha, no radio talk-show buzz; there are no stern protest letters from concerned organizations, no tabloid headlines.
The lack of reaction to a performer who made waves last year from the Lollapalooza Festival to the Presidential campaign suggests only too clearly how timid and touchy Time Warner has become.
The album has four-letter words, plenty of sexism and some anger at the police, but it's well within the parameters of action movies and standard gangster rap.
After police associations around the country protested "Cop Killer," a song by Ice-T's heavy-metal band, Body Count, Time Warner paid lip service to artists' free expression while Ice-T "voluntarily" removed the song from the album.
But the conglomerate had become anxious.
Earlier this year, Time Warner not only refused to release "Home Invasion" in the form Ice-T wanted, but dropped him from the Sire label and shelved plans for Ice-TV, a cable-television talk show.
"Home Invasion" was released by Ice-T's own Rhyme Syndicate label, distributed by Priority Records.


As Wachtler Awaits Fate, a Tortured Tale Emerges
IT all began with a hang-up.
Alone in a hotel room out of town, Sol Wachtler telephoned Joy A. Silverman at her Park Avenue apartment in November 1991, ostensibly for a restaurant recommendation.
What he really hungered for was something else.
They had only recently ended their furtive romance, at Mr.
Wachtler's initiative but by mutual consent.


Back to School for Honda Workers
For the 5,400 workers who assemble the popular Honda Accord at a factory here, the unthinkable finally happened.
Tougher competition from the Big Three and tepid demand for cars have forced the Honda Motor Company to trim production significantly for the first time in the plant's 10-year history.
Organizers from the United Automobile Workers union, which waged an unsuccessful campaign to organize the plant, had warned years earlier that if Honda ever slipped, workers would suffer without protection of a union contract.


Out at Home: The Rangers Continue Their Slide
A year ago, the Rangers had the best record in the National Hockey League and the Quebec Nordiques had one of the worst.
But when the two teams began play last night at Madison Square Garden, Quebec was tied for the third-best winning percentage and the Rangers were better than only 9 other teams in the 24-team league.
The Nordiques validated the truth of the standings when they won a 3-2 thriller, with Claude Lapointe scoring the winning goal on his rebound with 96 seconds left.
It was the Rangers' third consecutive defeat, all at home, and their fifth home defeat in their last six games at the Garden.


How to Break Food-Stamp Cycle
To the Editor:
Re "Food Stamps Users Up Sharply in Sign of Weak Recovery" (front page, March 2):


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
New-Home Sales Feb.
Personal Income Feb.


Close the Military Language School
To the Editor:
Your March 13 front-page article on military base closings reports the Pentagon's claim that the intelligence community objects to closing the Defense Language Institute in Monterey, Calif., and contracting for classes at universities.
As a former instructor at the institute and a curriculum developer there, I disagree.
The institute serves no explicit intelligence-gathering purposes, and its mission can be carried out more efficiently by civilian universities.


Bridge
The Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals ended at 2 A.M. this morning with a victory for a team headed by Howard Weinstein of Chicago.
His teammates were Peter Nagy of Chicago, Dan Morse of Houston, John Sutherlin of Dallas, Tommy Sanders of Nashville and Russ Arnold of Miami.
Arnold was a last-minute replacement for Sanders's regular partner, Bill Pollack of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
The Weinstein team trailed by 20 imps after the first 16 deals against Cliff Russell of Miami, Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., Bjorn Fallenius of Manhattan and Mats Nilsland of Sweden.
But Weinstein regained the lost ground to lead by 2 imps at the midpoint of the match, surged to a 42 imp lead in the third quarter, and held on to win by 49.


20,000 Rally in Dublin for Peace in North and Against I.R.A. Killing
An estimated 20,000 Irish men and women rallied today in favor of peace in Northern Ireland and against the Irish Republican Army, whose bombs eight days ago in Warrington, England, killed two children.
Since Monday, throngs have come to downtown Dublin to sign condolence books and leave gifts of teddy bears and bouquets in memory of the two boys, 3-year-old Jonathan Ball and 12-year-old Tim Parry.
The successive demonstrations, including the one today, have been the largest and most intense public expression of anger at the I.R.A. and of demands that politicians work harder for a peaceful settlement of the Protestant-Roman Catholic conflict that has killed 3,053 people since 1969.


Ellen Aschendorf and Robert Shasha
Ellen Aschendorf, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Aschendorf of New York, was married yesterday to Robert Shasha, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred Shasha of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Milton Polin officiated at the Grand Hyatt hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Aschendorf Shasha is the founder and president of Egg Electric Inc., an electrical contracting company in New York and New Jersey.
She graduated from Baruch College.
Her father is the president of the Artic Electric Corporation, an electrical contracting company in New York.


Dance in Review
Pam Quinn And Michael O'Connor  Bessie Schonberg Theater


Tired of Presidents? Brazil Can Vote for King
Once a sun-bronzed surfer, Joao Henrique de Orleans e Braganca has traded blue jeans for European suits and now races from university debates to television talk shows.
With one month left to campaign, he is running for king.
"Why a king and not a president?" the 38-year-old scion of Brazil's Braganca clan, descendants of Brazil's last Emperor, asked a visitor.
"A king is not tied to a political party. A king is not tied to any economic groups."


The Talk of Hollywood; Low-Key as Hollywood Allows: The Other Awards Ceremony
Forget that other event taking place on Monday night at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion.
"This
is the event that counts, not the Academy Awards," Tom Rothman, the president of production at Samuel Goldwyn Pictures, said half-jokingly on Saturday afternoon, wandering beneath an enormous and packed tent beside the beach in Santa Monica.


Budgeting in the Dark
At least one state capital -- Albany, N.Y. -- seems to have missed the message for change in last year's elections.
With just three days to go before the new fiscal year, Gov.
Mario Cuomo and the two legislative leaders are still haggling over the budget.
Worse yet, the people of New York don't know what deals are being cut.
The truth is that the people of New York hardly ever know what's happening on budgetary matters that deeply concern them.
Despite the electorate's declaration last November that business-as-usual isn't good enough, business-as-usual in New york means secrecy-as-usual.
In other states, and Washington, D.C., budget proceedings have become increasingly visible.
In New York, the political powers still negotiate behind doors.


Hirschfeld To Hand Post To Murdoch
Abraham Hirschfeld agreed yesterday to surrender The New York Post to Rupert Murdoch, clearing the way for a Federal bankruptcy judge to transfer the cash-starved, pixilated newspaper today into the hands of its once and future owner for 60 days -- and perhaps for a new era of Murdochian journalism in New York.
Anticipating his return to the helm, Mr.
Murdoch told Pete Hamill yesterday that he would not be kept on as editor and said that a new editor would be named today.
Post officials said last night that the new editor would be Ken Chandler, the executive producer of Fox Broadcasting's "A Current Affair," who was a former editor in chief at The Boston Herald and former managing editor of The Post under Mr.
Murdoch.


Review/Film; Innocent Deaf Woman Is Menaced by Evil Cop
In Robert Greenwald's suspense film "Hear No Evil," Marlee Matlin plays Jillian Shananhan, a fiercely self-reliant deaf woman who unwittingly comes into possession of a priceless stolen coin.
Through much of the film, she is menaced by Lieutenant Brock (Martin Sheen), the sadistic police officer who engineered the heist and wants his treasure back.
Brock happens to be an opera nut who when interrogating witnesses turns up the volume on "Cavalleria Rusticana" to drown out their screams.
Jillian's ally and soon-to-be-lover Ben (D. B. Sweeney) is that epitome of sensitive male perfection, a rock-climbing chef.
"Hear No Evil," which opened locally on Friday, aspires to be a kind of yuppie "Wait Until Dark" for the deaf.
Its strongest asset is its star, who exudes some of the same defiant sensuality that animated her Oscar-winning performance in "Children of a Lesser God." Periodically, the film suspends its conventional soundtrack to try to imagine what it's like to be deaf and in mortal peril.
But its gestures in that direction are only token.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
For the first time, consumers are shopping for credit cards that charge lower interest rates, and as a result, rates are continuing to drop.
Citibank will announce today that it is lowering rates to 15.4 percent, from 19.8 percent, on nine million cards.  [ Page A1. ]
Lawmakers in the House and the Senate are mapping out divergent paths toward the creation of a secondary market where small-business loans can be bought and sold.  [ D1. ]


District Attorney's Arrest
Richard A. Brown, the Queens District Attorney, helped to make an arrest last night under the Queens end of the Triboro Bridge.
According to Sgt.
Tina S. Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman, Mr.
Brown and his driver, Detective Michael Huysman, happened upon a minor traffic accident that had triggered a fistfight at 9:30 P.M.
They separated the combatants, one of whom attacked the detective, she said.
Sergeant Mohrmann said they arrested Henry Adams, 35, of 1325 St.
Marks Place, Brooklyn, who was charged with driving while intoxicated and resisting arrest.


METRO DIGEST
PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES SCRAMBLE FOR MONEY  As states reduce aid to higher education, public universities, especially those in the Northeast, are having to become more competitive in private fund-raising, once largely the domain of private universities.
The cuts have been so drastic that public colleges around the country are inventing new ways -- or refining old tricks -- to raise money for basics.
A1.
ERRORS HAVE DRAINED HEALTH INSURER  Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the nation's largest nonprofit health insurer, has lost tens of millions of dollars over the last decade through a series of management mistakes that have mired the company in financial crisis and undermined its dominant role in New York's health-care system.
A1.


Albany Lawmakers Unlikely to Meet April 1 Budget Deadline
Adapting what has become the political cliche of the moment, the Assembly counsel, Benjamin Chevat, posted a sign in his office a few months ago saying: "It's a timely and honest budget, stupid!"
But with the new fiscal year starting in four days and no budget deal in sight, one of Mr.
Chevat's colleagues suggested recently that the slogan be changed to: "Just do it, stupid!"


Congress in China Re-elects Premier
Prime Minister Li Peng was re-elected today to a second five-year term, strengthening his position in the generational transition now beginning to take place in the Chinese leadership.
For all the dizzying economic change under way in China, Mr.
Li is expected to continue to represent the hard-liners who favor repression of dissident voices that challenge the Communist Party's leadership.


Corrections
A sports article on Kentucky's victory over Florida State in the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament on Saturday was omitted from some copies yesterday; an earlier report on the Kansas-Indiana game appeared in its place.
An article about the victorious Kentucky team appears today on page C1.


CLINTON CONSIDERS STOPPING MEDICAID UNDER HEALTH PLAN
As part of its health-care plan, the Clinton Administration is considering a proposal to dismantle the Medicaid program and integrate low-income people into the same networks of doctors, hospitals and private insurance companies that would serve more affluent people, Administration officials say.
But poor people would probably receive medical and social services beyond the standard package of health benefits to be guaranteed to all Americans, the officials said.
These might include additional dental care, transportation to a doctor's office and translation services for people who do not understand English.
And the Government would help pay the insurance premiums and other health costs of low-income people. 'Really Serious Problems'
Confidential work papers from Hillary Rodham Clinton's Task Force on National Health Care Reform say that maintaining a separate Medicaid program "would perpetuate segregation of the poor in the health-care system, with the associated adverse implications for access to and quality of care."


Making 'Barbarians' Had Its Perils for HBO
There is nothing so delicious as watching once-powerful people fall.
That is what Home Box Office was banking on when it decided to make a television film of "Barbarians at the Gate," the story of the leveraged buyout of RJR Nabisco and how it succeeded in ending the careers of RJR's chairman, F. Ross Johnson, and the chief executive of Shearson Lehman, Peter A. Cohen.
So far, Home Box Office has read its audience right.
When the film had its television premiere on March 20, it got a 14.1 rating, beating the three television networks and rival cable services, and making it the fifth-most-successful HBO movie to date.
Each rating point equals 931,000 homes.
Sometimes an Indirect Route
But the decision to make "Barbarians" reflects some of the perils of producing television movies in an era of increasing competition and audience fragmentation.


Busch Begins to Question Its TV-Baseball Marriage
Anheuser-Busch is taking a jaundiced view of major league baseball at precisely the time that the sport needs its largest television advertiser the most: television ratings are down, future TV revenues are expected to tumble, there is no commissioner and baseball is struggling to modernize itself by adding a tier of playoffs and speeding up games.
"We're cautiously reviewing our investment," said Tony Ponturo, vice president of corporate media and sports marketing for Anheuser-Busch.
"I feel like we're still very much a baseball sponsor, and we like our investment, but we're reviewing where the ratings and trends are going."


Carolinians' Reaction To Cremins Not Pretty
A South Carolina newspaper columnist yesterday called BOBBY CREMINS "wacky." University of South Carolina trustees questioned his mental stability.
In barbershops and bars, the sometimes epithet-laced talk was about how Cremins had elated Gamecock fans with his announcement Wednesday that he would leave Georgia Tech to coach at his alma mater, and then how he had burst that bubble with his announcement Saturday that he was staying in Atlanta.


Focus Now Is How to Pay for Governor's Goals
Lawmakers and interest groups responded to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's health-care plan with tempered enthusiasm today, for the most part applauding its ambitious goals but asking how the Governor proposed to pay for them.
Mr.
Cuomo's immediate concern will be to convince the State Legislature that his proposals, particularly those that would give financial incentives to primary-care programs, will not funnel money away from the state's financially struggling, but politically powerful, hospitals.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; As Cable Makes Inroads, Networks Cast a Wider Net
In their continuing search for the key to survival in an increasingly competitive television environment, network executives have pinballed back to a familiar position:
They want to be broadcasters again, with emphasis on "broad."


Change in Puerto Rico Will Affect Mainland
To the Editor:
Re "Hurricane Bill Threatens San Juan" (Op-Ed, March 11) by Rafael Hernandez Colon, former Governor of Puerto Rico:
Puerto Rico will not be the only victim of a Clinton Administration plan to wipe out tax incentives to companies that build plants in United States commonwealths and territories.
The proposal's impact will ripple clear up to New York City.


Patents
RESEARCHERS studying Lou Gehrig's disease announced this month that they had identified a defective gene that seemed to cause genetically transmitted cases of the disease.
Last week a biotechnology company won a patent for a synthetic version of the gene that it hopes may be used to treat victims of the disease the way insulin is used to treat diabetics.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or A.L.S., a neurodegenerative disorder that destroys the body's neuromuscular system, is called Lou Gehrig's disease after the baseball player who was one of its famous victims.


In Russia, It's Business as Usual
As they watched the tug-of-war between President Boris N. Yeltsin and Russian lawmakers unfold last week, American companies with operations in Russia went stoically about their business, even as events reinforced the risk and uncertainty of functioning in a country at odds with itself over the pace and direction of economic change.
In part, the lack of reaction reflected a realization on the part of many businesses that nothing much of substance could be done in a situation that was changing by the hour.


Service Plan Means Still Higher Tuition
To the Editor:
I am dismayed at President Clinton's community-service solution to the costs of a college education.


Agency Makes Changes at Top
Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly of Providence, R.I., has announced executive changes and expansion plans.
Tom Monahan, president and executive creative director, will officially leave the agency to pursue creativity training and consulting for corporations.
Mr.
Monahan, who is 42, has not been actively involved with clients the last two years; he will remain on the agency's board.
David Lubars, 34, executive vice president and creative director, was promoted to chief creative officer, assuming some of Mr.
Monahan's responsibilities.


France's Conservatives Drive Home Their Victory
Confirming its strong showing in the first round of voting last weekend, France's main conservative coalition completed its trouncing of the governing Socialist Party today by winning a huge parliamentary majority in a runoff election.
Projections based on nearly complete results gave the Union for France coalition 487 seats in the 577-member National Assembly, reducing the once-powerful Socialists to an almost marginal 67 seats.
The Communist Party and its allies won 23 seats, while the far-right National Front and an environmental alliance won no seats.


Cindy Horowitz, Devin Wenig
Cindy Lee Horowitz, a lawyer, was married yesterday to Devin Norse Wenig, also a lawyer.
Rabbi Jack Bemporad officiated at the Huntington (L.I.) Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Wenig, 27, is an associate at Chadbourne &amp; Parke in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Princeton University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Horowitz of North Woodmere, L.I.
Her father, now retired, was an auto franchise owner in Lawrence, L.I.


Storekeepers Slain in Separate Incidents
The 27-year-old manager of a bodega in Brooklyn and the 42-year-old owner of a hardware store in upper Manhattan were shot to death Saturday in unrelated incidents, the police said yesterday.
The bodega manager, Victor Urena of the Park Slope section of Brooklyn, was shot after he had surrendered an undetermined amount of cash to two robbers who entered his store at 187 York Street near Bridge Street in the Vinegar Hill section at 5:10 P.M., said Sgt.
Dennis Singleton, commanding officer of the 84th Precinct detective squad.


Mimi Brody and Harry Appelman
Miriam Anne Brody, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur L. Brody of Bethlehem, Pa., was married yesterday to Harold Stewart Appelman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Evan H. Appelman of Downers Grove, Ill.
Rabbi Gerald Serotta performed the ceremony at the Algonkian Regional Park in Sterling, Va.
Ms.
Brody, 31, who is known as Mimi, is keeping her name.
She is a legislative aide in Washington to Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts.
She graduated with highest distinction from the University of Michigan, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she received a law degree from Harvard University.
Her father, now retired, was a professor of psychology at Lehigh University in Bethlehem.


Laurie Meister and Laurent Melka
Laurie Meister, a daughter of Henry and Joan Meister of Rye Brook, N.Y., was married yesterday to Laurent Melka, the son of Alfred and Georgette Melka of Marseilles, France.
Rabbi Hai Krief performed the ceremony at Etz Haim Synagogue in Marseilles.
Mrs.
Melka, 32, is a vice president of emerging-market equity sales at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets in London.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is a stockbroker at Ernst &amp; Company in New York.


Irish Rally for Peace, and Against I.R.A.


Cuomo Health Plan: Sweeping Yet Selective
The sweeping plan to change New York State's health care system, unveiled by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo on Saturday -- with its proposed regulation of doctors' fees, limitations on high-cost technology and encouragement of primary care medicine -- was perhaps most significant for what it did not say.
The Governor and his advisers faced a complex spectrum of options, many of which have been tried in other states and all of which are before the health care task force forging a national policy in Washington.
What Mr.
Cuomo chose and did not choose is a measure of the political and emotional status of the debate, a prediction of what the Clinton Administration will propose, and an attempt to respond to the health care crisis and influence the outcome of the debate.
Philosophy and Economics
He did not, for instance, propose that the state insure all its citizens.
Hawaii, the only state that currently takes on that responsibility, has been doing so for 17 years, by requiring employers to pick up the cost of insurance premiums for any person working more than 20 hours a week.
Vermont, which has the only Governor who is a doctor, has passed a plan that would provide universal health insurance by 1995.
And Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey has proposed the state subsidize private-health-care groups, like health maintenance organizations, to pay for the uninsured.


AIDS Benefit At Easter Bowl
The Easter Bowl junior tennis tournament of Miami plans to dedicate its 25th anniversary event, to be held April 4-10, to its longtime chairman, Arthur Ashe, by staging a pro-celebrity fund-raiser for a foundation he established.
Two of South Florida's most renowned sports figures, Chris Evert and Miami Dolphins Coach Don Shula, will join tennis pros Mary Joe Fernandez, MaliVai Washington, Stan Smith, Brian Gottfried, Harold Solomon, Jon Secada, the pop star, and Dick Schaap, the sports broadcaster, in the Easter Bowl Tennis Challenge.


YELTSIN, SURVIVING CLOSE VOTE, CLAIMS DEFEAT OF A 'COUP'
After narrowly surviving an unexpected vote on his ouster in the Congress of People's Deputies, President Boris N. Yeltsin tonight appeared triumphant before a crowd of jubilant supporters, claiming victory over a "Communist coup d'etat."
But after a tense day that began with an aborted compromise and ended with a dramatic showdown, the foes of Mr.
Yeltsin were heartened by his close call.
Of 1,033 deputies, 617 voted against him in secret balloting, only 72 fewer than the two-thirds required for his removal from office.


Not Just News Readers, But the 'Right Kind'
With raids, court fights and musical mastheads, the New York City newspaper war has been absorbing to watch these last few months.
But listen to what newspaper securities analysts are talking about: "Sure the publisher and the editor can make a difference," said John Morton, at Lynch, Jones &amp; Ryan, "but what we are talking about is getting enough of the right kind of readers to impress advertisers."


Players Championship Won by Steady Price
Dominating both a treacherous golf course and a cast of formidable pursuers, Nick Price produced the best golf of his life today to win the Players Championship by five strokes.
Price completed a wire-to-wire victory with a closing 67 over the Stadium Course at TPC Sawgrass for a 72-hole total of 18-under-par 270.
It shattered the tournament record by three strokes and left Bernhard Langer in second place, trailing by five strokes.


Review/Film Festival; Days of Rice Cakes, Friendship and Gay Love
Sayoko, who is bright and pretty, would seem to be not very different from many other young women in the affluent Japan of today.
She isn't career-driven, but she has a career of sorts as an actress, dubbing the voices for animated films.
She lives alone in a small, cluttered duplex flat in what could be either Osaka or Tokyo, without a boyfriend, without commitments.
If she's a bit aimless and lonely, she's not especially aware of it.
All this changes in the opening sequence of "Okoge," Takehiro Nakajima's very fine new Japanese film, which is as melancholy as it is wise and funny.
One afternoon at the beach with a girlfriend, Sayoko suddenly realizes that they are sitting in the middle of a sort of gay enclave.
Men of all ages, sizes, builds and temperaments line the sea wall behind them.
Sayoko is curious.
Her girlfriend is appalled.


Resolved: Kansas Extends Its Season
The morning after Kansas Jayhawk fans could officially begin their scramble to the Final Four, 40 minutes of their team's perspiration could be distilled into several decisive seconds.
Near the end of the Midwest Regional final against Indiana on Saturday afternoon, the resolve of talented athletes and the philosophy of their coach came together to help win a game and extend a memorable season.


CHRONICLE
After playing three nights in midtown Manhattan, PRINCE shifted locales and played the Apollo Theater in Harlem for the first time.
"Yeah, we uptown tonight!" Prince yelled to the crowd, which included Representative CHARLES B. RANGEL, Democrat of New York, according to The Associated Press.


Traffic Alert
Alternate-side-of-the-street parking rules will resume today in New York City, according to the Department of Sanitation.


When Does Duplication of Words Become Theft?
If trees are "festooned" with Spanish moss in two biographies of Abraham Lincoln, is one author guilty of plagiarism?
No?
Suppose the borrowings of words and felicitous phrases come to a total of 175 in a single book?
The definition of plagiarism -- passing off the work of another as your own -- once seemed rather simple.
But several recent cases have made it a matter of hot dispute, so much so that the American Historical Association has formed a committee to redefine the term and fine-tune the definition, including a sample list of first-degree and second-degree offenses.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Optioned Jason Bere, pitcher; Shawn Gilbert, infielder, and Warren Newson, outfielder, to Nashville of the American Association.
Sent Barry Jones, pitcher; Joe Hall and Norberto Martin, infielders, to their minor league camp for reassignment.


CLINTON CONSIDERS STOPPING MEDICAID UNDER HEALTH PLAN
As part of its health-care plan, the Clinton Administration is considering a proposal to dismantle the Medicaid program and integrate low-income people into the same networks of doctors, hospitals and private insurance companies that would serve more affluent people, Administration officials say.
But poor people would probably receive medical and social services beyond the standard package of health benefits to be guaranteed to all Americans, the officials said.
These might include additional dental care, transportation to a doctor's office and translation services for people who do not understand English.
And the Government would help pay the insurance premiums and other health costs of low-income people. 'Really Serious Problems'
Confidential work papers from Hillary Rodham Clinton's Task Force on National Health Care Reform say that maintaining a separate Medicaid program "would perpetuate segregation of the poor in the health-care system, with the associated adverse implications for access to and quality of care."


Good Housekeeping modifies its campaign celebrating families to embrace the nontraditional.
GOOD HOUSEKEEPING magazine is hoping critics of its trade advertising will give their seal of approval to a revamping that significantly softens the campaign's contentious "new traditionalist" thrust.
In print advertisements that begin running today, the Hearst Magazines monthly introduces a third phase of the campaign, which raised the hackles of feminists and liberals when it appeared in 1988 with an effusive embrace of so-called traditional values.
Ads, created by Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor in New York, carried the theme "America is coming home to Good Housekeeping," which was perceived as an endorsement of the backlash against feminism that encouraged homemakers to stay at home and working women to return home.


Newspaper Editors to Name a Black as President
Editors of the nation's major newspapers are gathering in Baltimore this week for a convention that is supposed to be remembered as a racial milestone: the American Society of Newspaper Editors is installing its first black president.
The convention will feature the appointment of William A. Hilliard, editor of The Oregonian and one of the highest-ranking black journalists in the country.
The Portland newspaper he edits, the only statewide daily in Oregon, is the 26th largest in the country.


Congress in China Re-elects Premier
Prime Minister Li Peng was re-elected today to a second five-year term, strengthening his position in the generational transition now beginning to take place in the Chinese leadership.
For all the dizzying economic change under way in China, Mr.
Li is expected to continue to represent the hard-liners who favor repression of dissident voices that challenge the Communist Party's leadership.


Japan Stocks Rise
Stocks traded higher here today.
At its close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 259.68, or 1.38 percent, to 19,048.38.
On Friday, the Nikkei rose 23.78 points, or 0.13 percent.


SOMALIA'S LEADERS REACH AGREEMENT
Thirteen days of talks in the Ethiopian capital and plenty of international arm-twisting have led Somali leaders to agree on the first form of government their country has known for more that two years.
But while expressing hope for peace, Western diplomats and United Nations officials were skeptical about the solidity of the pact, which was signed late Saturday, and its ability to survive without being propped up by outside countries.
Incidents of looting and attacks against relief organizations in Somalia continue, emphasizing the fragility of the accord.


Clinging to Thin Hope In Debris of Hurricane
At first glance, it appears that Hurricane Andrew demolished the house just yesterday.
Wooden roof beams are still exposed, windows have not been replaced and huge piles of debris clutter the driveway.
But it has been seven months since the storm hit, and George Vargas, a 37-year-old butcher, has spent nearly every day supervising the painfully slow reconstruction of the home he shares with his wife, Amy, and their 6-year-old daughter, Isabel.
He can afford the time because the storm also destroyed Homestead Meat Market, the business he and his father, now 65, operated for more than 20 years.


U.N. Relief Truck's Mishap Unleashes Anger From Serbs
A truck in a United Nations convoy taking food to the besieged Muslim-controlled town of Srebrenica in eastern Bosnia smashed into a Serb's car here today, and for a moment this placid Serbian farming village became a focus of all the hatred and misunderstanding unleashed by the Balkan war.
The truck, part of a convoy that has been on the road for almost two weeks, skidded out of control on the sleet-covered highway, slammed into the truck in front and then slid across the road into the path of a small car driven by Aleksandar Drobcevic.


Review/Television; Such a Mischievous Bunny Boy
Parents eager to shield their fragile tots from the glitz and gushing of the Academy Awards on ABC at 9 P.M. can tap into a perfect bedtime story on the Family Channel at 8.
One of the most popular children's-book series ever written -- it's estimated that 80 million copies have been sold in more than 20 languages -- has finally decided to go the route of animation.
"The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends," its six exquisite episodes costing a hefty $11 million, is timed to coincide with the 100th anniversary of the 1893 Beatrix Potter "picture letter" to a 5-year-old, which became the foundation for the subsequent books.
Miss Potter, who died in 1943 at the age of 77, left the rights to her work to Frederick Warne &amp; Company, the exclusive publishers of the stories from the beginning.
As both writer and illustrator, Miss Potter was not enthusiastic about animation.
In 1935, she spurned a lucrative offer from someone her heirs refer to as "a well-known American animator."


Books of The Times; Flowers Often Imitate Human Proclivities
Natural Affairs A Botanist Looks at the Attachments Between Plants and People By Peter Bernhardt Illustrated. 225 pages.
Villard Books. $25.


Congress and the Freedom to Choose
Picture some women who have decided to end their pregnancies.
Because their state has only three abortion providers, they have had to drive many miles to a clinic.
There they learn that they cannot have the procedure for another 24 hours.
That provides just enough time for the anti-abortion protesters who habitually surround the clinic to spring into action.
The delay gives them time to harangue the women and to identify them through their license plates, then call their families and tell them what their wife or daughter or sister is planning.
The women themselves are a kind of captive audience.
Many of them, unable to afford a room, are forced to sleep in their cars.


Happily for Knicks, Trip Comes Full Circle
The Knicks' western trip took many turns.
But when it ended, they were still headed in the right direction.
Holding off a second-half rally, New York disposed of the injury-riddled Golden State Warriors, 94-84, tonight at the Oakland Coliseum.
The victory enabled the Knicks (47-20) to end their four-game trip with a 2-2 record, and it moved them within half a game of the Chicago Bulls (48-20) in their race for the best record in the Eastern Conference.


Dance in Review
Sally Gross and Company Dia Center for the Arts


As States Cut Aid, Public Colleges Work Harder for Private Money
As states reduce aid to higher education, public universities, especially those in the Northeast, are having to become more competitive in private fund-raising, once largely the domain of private universities like Yale, Stanford and Duke.
The cuts have been so drastic that public colleges around the country are inventing new ways -- or refining old tricks -- to raise money for basics like faculty salaries, student financial aid and library books, and to avoid further increases in tuition and student fees.


Time May Be Ripe for Discovery of Elusive Gravity Waves
IT is a long shot, scientists admit, but there is just a chance that radio signals now reaching Earth from three speeding spacecraft will reveal the existence of gravity waves, elusive undulations that physicists believe exist but that have defied direct detection.
Detecting these waves, which are predicted by Einstein's General Theory of Relativity, would be a scientific triumph.
A means of observing and studying them could allow scientists to investigate collisions between black holes, the violent dynamics of certain kinds of galactic nuclei, and perhaps even the Big Bang explosion in which the universe is believed to have been created.


Oscar Spreads Himself Around


Both Sides Blinked
It was a brawl of extraordinary viciousness.
But as the echoes of the final insults died in the Kremlin's majestic halls this evening, there was no winner, and none in sight.
Counting their casualties, both sides shrilly claimed victory for "the people" and "democracy." But in the smoldering aftermath of the latest in their escalating duels, it appeared that neither of the contestants, President Boris N. Yeltsin and the Congress of People's Deputies, could win.


New Vaccine Method Using DNA Protects Mice Against a Flu Virus
A NEW kind of vaccine, which uses direct injections of DNA particles instead of the whole virus to induce immunity, has proved effective in protecting mice against influenza A.
The new method delivers "naked" DNA directly into a cell, prompting the mice to manufacture foreign proteins and then antibodies against them, holding out promise for vaccination against other infectious diseases, scientists reported recently in the journal Science.


Review/Television; Hoping That Children Aren't What They Eat
A dependable rule for churning up public concern over many an issue is: A little child shall lead them.
So be reassured that "In Our Children's Food" contains no new or conclusive evidence that children (or even mere adults) are being harmed by the pesticides that are pumped into the nation's fruits and vegetables.
The bad news -- and this is the subject of the "Frontline" report by Bill Moyers -- is that economic pressure, political calculation and bureaucratic sloth are impeding Washington's investigation of the matter.
The focus tonight is on a National Academy of Sciences report on "Pesticides in the Diets of Infants and Children," now promised to be ready in June, about three years late.
The hourlong documentary, which of course has lots of pictures of children eating, begins with the sad personal experiences of a farm worker and a farmer, who say their children were made ill by pesticides.


Stocks Edge Upward as Dow Gains 15.12, to 3,455.10
A stock market buttressed by stronger bond prices preserved some moderate gains yesterday after being tossed by end-of-the-quarter stratagems.
Drug stocks and other consumer issues that have trailed the market bounded ahead, while some of the heavy-industry stocks that have had an energetic quarter fell.


First, the Good News About DOS.6
THE MICROSOFT CORPORATION has arranged the introduction today of DOS 6.0, the latest major revision of the most widely used personal computer operating system software.
The new DOS adds a variety of new features, including data compression, that until now have been available only as add-on utilities from other companies.
For people who are buying a new computer, some form of DOS 6.0 will probably come already installed on the hard disk.
That makes the decision to use DOS 6.0 easy.
And for most veteran PC users, the new DOS 6.0 features are an attractive bargain.
Microsoft has set a price for the DOS 6.0 upgrade kit that will allow most stores to sell it for $50 or less until May 31.
After that, the suggested retail price will be $129.95.


Making Trade Pact Work for the Environment; Poverty-Level Wages
To the Editor:
"America's Newest Industrial Belt" (news article, March 21) provides insight into the maquiladora zone in the north of Mexico, where more than 500,000 Mexican employees work for United States companies.
You describe the low-wage rates that have attracted American companies large and small to build factories there.
United States household names like the Ford Motor Company, General Electric, Zenith, Johnson &amp; Johnson, A.T.&amp;T., I.T.T. and General Motors dot the border landscape.


On My Mind; America the Terrorist
From Presidents on down, officials of the United States engage in murder, treason, terror, bombing and torture -- all on the soil of the country.
Government by atrocity is built into the executive branch.
Military and intelligence agencies send executioners into the streets to shoot Americans and foreigners or blow them up in their hotels.


Q&amp;A
Homing Squirrels
Q.
If I catch the squirrels that have taken over my bird-feeder and take them to the woods several miles away, will they make it back to my yard?
In other words, do squirrels have a homing instinct?
A.
"They do have such an instinct," said John C. Muir, an urban geographer who is executive director of the Brooklyn Center for the Urban Environment in Prospect Park.
"It is not well understood by science, but they will often return several miles."
As an example, he described an informal experiment at his own institution, which conducts extensive environmental education programs for school children and adults.
Some years ago, he said, a classroom in the park's Picnic House was invaded by squirrels that would distract the children.
"You have never lived until you have dealt with hundreds of fourth-graders, at the most inopportune time, aroused by cries of 'Rat! Rat!' " he said.
So the center trapped the squirrels alive and transported them as far away as the Dyker Beach Golf Course near the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, which is about seven miles away from Prospect Park, as the crow flies.
"We got a chance to know these squirrels intimately," he said, "and there is no doubt that the same ones were back in three to four days." They had somehow found their way for more than seven miles, through urban backyards and busy streets, to their preferred habitat.
Water With Meals
Q.
My grandmother used to say you shouldn't drink water with your meals, only afterward.
Is there any reason for this?
A "Physiologically, it can't make any difference at all," said Dr.
Marion Nestle, chairman of the department of nutrition, food and hotel managment at New York University.
The water is absorbed by the body, she said, just as the body absorbs the significant proportion of food itself that is water.
The only real difference is that water takes up space in the digestive tract that could be occupied by food.
"Many diet plans suggest drinking huge amounts of water with food," she said, to provide extra bulk and keep the person from eating to excess, but she said that most people's calorie-control mechanisms quickly compensated for such attempts to outsmart them.
"It is funny how the advice has shifted," she said.
"People eat so much more now that I guess you can ascribe it to the shift from nutritional deprivation to nutritional excess."
Readers are invited to submit questions about science to Questions, Science Times, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Questions of general interest will be answered in this column, but requests for medical advice cannot be honored and unpublished letters cannot be answered individually.


U.S. and Britain Softening Emphasis on Ousting Iraqi
The United States and Britain have begun to move away from their insistence that the trade embargo against Iraq cannot be lifted while President Saddam Hussein remains in power.
Both President George Bush and Prime Minister John Major had said on several occasions that the sanctions must remain until President Hussein has been toppled, though the Security Council resolutions imposing the embargo contain no such requirement.


Despite a Rebuff by Palestinians, U.S. Is Hopeful on Mideast Talks
Despite the continuing violence in the occupied territories and another rejection of a compromise by Palestinian delegates, the Clinton Administration expressed optimism today that the Middle East peace talks will resume in Washington on April 20.
As a result of talks between Secretary of State Warren Christopher and a delegation of Palestinians on Friday and Saturday, Richard Boucher, the State Department spokesman, said the Administration believes significant progress was made in coaxing the Palestinians back to the peace talks.


Seoul Eases Stand on Nuclear Inspections of North
Taking a more conciliatory line than the United States has, a top South Korean official said today that North Korea might have to be offered inducements to open suspected nuclear sites to international inspection, in addition to being threatened with sanctions.
In urging such a course, the official, Foreign Minister Han Sung Joo, expressed a strong wariness about actions that might add to North Korean resentment.
He said in an interview here that the international community should move only gradually as it seeks North Korean compliance.


Los Angeles Lays Plans to Avoid Repeat of '92 Riots
This is a city determined to do things right next time.
Caught flat-footed by last year's riots, Los Angeles is vigorously preparing for any disturbances that may follow the conclusions of two racially charged trials in the coming weeks.
A mood of grim readiness is settling over the city, with one recent poll showing that 67 percent of the residents expect new riots.
Some people are buying guns, sales figures show, and some are planning out-of-town vacations.
Owners and tenants of glass-fronted office buildings are stocking up on plywood and making evacuation plans.


Gordon Metcalf, 85, Ex-Chief Executive Of Sears, Roebuck
Gordon M. Metcalf, who was chairman and chief executive of Sears, Roebuck and Company from 1967 until his retirement in 1973, died yesterday at the Eisenhower Medical Center in Palm Desert, Calif.
He was 85 and lived in Indian Wells, Calif.
A spokesman for Sears, Jerry Buldak, said the cause of death was not immediately clear.


Probation for Gastineau
After being sentenced to three years of probation and fined $1,400 for possession of drug paraphernalia yesterday, MARK GASTINEAU, the former defensive end-turned-boxer, said he wanted to return to the ring.
The one-time Jet star said he planned to return to New York, "get with my trainer and get back on track."


Valvano 'Satisfactory'
JIM VALVANO was listed in satisfactory condition today at Duke University Medical Center in Raleigh, N.C.
The former North Carolina State coach entered the hospital last week, said STEPHANIE BASS, a spokeswoman for the hospital's cancer center.


Students and Developer Learn From One Another
IT was the environmentally concerned 10-year-olds against the business-oriented developer.
The developer did not fare as badly as he had feared.
The showdown took place late last week in a cheery, cluttered classroom at the Wading River Elementary School.
The developer, Charles B. Mancini, had come to explain why he wanted to build 360 houses on 520 acres of the Pine Barrens, the largest undeveloped area of Suffolk County.


Classical Music in Review
John Davis Pianist Alice Tully Hall


Chicago Names Professor As Business School Dean
The University of Chicago today named Robert S. Hamada, a leading professor of finance at its Graduate School of Business, to succeed John P. Gould this summer as the school's dean.
Known as the home of the "Chicago school" of economists, whose advocacy of free markets dominated political thinking in Washington during the Reagan and Bush Administrations, the business school has in recent years gained a reputation as a center for research and teaching on quality control and technology transfer and for training in leadership skills.


Still Climbing
Even if the Big Three airlines have left USAir behind in market share, they might envy the recent performance of its stock.
In recent weeks, USAir has concentrated on the strengthening domestic market while receiving fresh capital from British Airways.
Yesterday, USAir gained more money by selling a London route to UAL.


Cease-Fire in Bosnia Holds for a 2d Day, And Sarajevo Basks
A cease-fire across Bosnia and Herzegovina held for the second day today with only minor violations, encouraging the United Nations military commander here, Gen.
Philippe Morillon, in his belief that the truce may be the beginning of the end of the year-old war.
Heavy gunfire broke out shortly before dusk in the bitterly contested western districts of Sarajevo, close to the airport, and there were reports of sporadic exchanges of tank, artillery and small arms fire elsewhere in the former Yugoslav republic.


New England Company Sets Reich Merger
The New England Investment Companies, whose subsidiaries advise institutional investors and manage mutual funds, announced a plan yesterday to merge with Reich &amp; Tang, a specialist in managing money market mutual funds.
Although Reich (pronounced Rich) is only a fifth the size of New England Investment, it will keep its name and listing on the New York Stock Exchange.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-14 RUSSIAN REFERENDUM SET
A national vote of confidence set for April 25 will test President Boris N. Yeltsin's strength, as will the month ahead as he faces widespread complaints about economic reform and tries to recover his balance after a challenge to his rule.
A1


Court Upholds Order for Independent Budget Watchdog
Nearly four years after New York City voters mandated an Independent Budget Office to keep an eye on the Mayor's budget-makers, the Dinkins administration and the City Council have yet to create one, and yesterday the courts once again ordered them to do so.
In a one-page decision, a four-judge panel of the state Appellate Division upheld a lower court ruling last year that directed the city to set up the office, which good-government advocates have long championed as a way to balance the Mayor's enormous power over estimating revenue and costs.


Editors' Note
A picture last Friday with an article about the Sudan showed a little Sudanese girl who had collapsed from hunger on the trail to a feeding center in Ayod.
A vulture lurked behind her.


Groups Laud Health-Care Reform In Theory, but Clash on Practice
After long clamoring for access to President Clinton's health-policy team, spokesmen for the elderly, doctors, dentists, chiropractors, hospital officers, insurance executives and other groups today fired a fusillade of proposals to remake the nation's health-care system.
At a daylong hearing of the President's Task Force on National Health Care Reform, the witnesses offered support for the general idea of a vast overhaul.
But they frequently criticized details of the ambitious plan being devised by the Administration for submission to Congress in early May.


I.B.M. Asked Archrival For Revamping Advice
It may be the clearest evidence yet of the humbling of Big Blue.
As I.B.M. spent the last two months asking more than 100 industry executives to each propose a cure for the ailing computer giant, the company's board turned to one of I.B.M.'s archest rivals: William H. Gates, chairman of the Microsoft Corporation.


Don't Stop the Presses: Murdoch Returns to The Post


Knicks Will Take Split And One Point Guard
What started as a disastrous trip became a decent one.
So the Knicks (47-20) returned home yesterday from the West Coast just one-half game behind the Chicago Bulls (48-20) in the battle for the best record in the Eastern Conference.
Thanks to Sunday's 94-84 victory over the Golden State Warriors, New York ended its four-game trip with a 2-2 record.
After losing the first two games of the trip, and after losing both point guards to suspensions following Tuesday's brawl in Phoenix, the Knicks regrouped and remained even with the Bulls in the loss column.
Now the Knicks, who have won 13 consecutive games at Madison Square Garden, will try to adjust their body clocks back to Eastern time for two home games, against Sacramento tonight and Cleveland on Thursday.


Mitterrand Is Floored by Vote, but Is Not Yet Counted Out
The conservative landslide in France's parliamentary elections on Sunday was a devastating personal blow for President Francois Mitterrand, but the veteran Socialist leader seems determined not to be reduced to a figurehead in his two remaining years in office.
He announced tonight that Edouard Balladur of the neo-Gaullist Rally for the Republic would become the next Prime Minister, but he noted that he would safeguard the continuity of France's foreign and military policies during his "cohabitation" with the new conservative Government.


Talking to the Task Force on Health: Experts Give Their Views: Small Businesses; The Ruination Of Restaurants, Or a Benefit?
Stephen Elmont  Vice president, National Restaurant Association
Our industry is consumed and concerned about health-care reform.
For the past few years, restaurateurs have struggled with staggering inflation and health-care premium costs, with cancellations, with denials of coverage, and now with the frightening prospect of mandates.
We are not engaged in hyperbole when we say that mandated employer-provided coverage or higher payroll taxes to pay for health benefits would literally sound the death knell for many restaurants and discourage other restaurants from ever opening.


N.Y.R.A.'s Winter of Discontent
In its flight from winter's ruins and rains, thoroughbred racing in New York will pass two milestones this week: The main track at Aqueduct finally will open tomorrow after two false starts.
And the Gotham Stakes, a traditional test for 3-year-old colts that's been twice postponed this year, will finally be run on Saturday.
The race may no longer be the stepping stone to the Kentucky Derby, but horsemen and horse players alike are hoping it will be the stepping stone to spring after the most damaging winter in memory in New York racing.


Petrovic Out Another Week
Drazen Petrovic, the Nets' leading scorer who has missed three games with an injured left knee, will be out at least another week before his condition will be reevaluated.
Jeffrey Minkoff, the team's orthopedist, yesterday said that Petrovic has been told to continue his rehabilitation exercises pending the evaluation next Monday.


Why Selling Rights to Pollute Makes Sense
To the Editor:
"Gov. Mario M. Cuomo and the New York State Legislature are moving to block a Federal law that allows one utility to sell its rights to pollute to another" (news article, March 14).
This is a bizarre effort.
Federal law envisions a market-oriented approach to reduce harmful smokestack emissions.
Companies that make extra efforts to reduce emissions can sell their emission allowances to utilities whose emissions are not as clean.


Biologists Deny Life Gets More Complex
SURVEYING life's rich parade from the first single-celled beings in the primordial soup to the diverse array of organisms into which they developed, evolutionary biologists have marveled at the ever more complex cast of creatures that has continued to grace the planet.
The evolution of larger brains, more efficient metabolisms and more elaborate social systems all seem to support the conventional wisdom that complexity increases during evolution.
So clear is the trend that some biologists suggest that the evolutionary process is actually driving the increase in complexity, pushing the upper limit of life's intricacies ever higher.
But in two of the first studies to measure these trends, based on mammals' backbones and fossil shells, researchers say they have been unable to detect any overall evolutionary drive toward greater complexity, at least over periods of tens and even hundreds of millions of years.


Mental Health Coverage Would Be a Milestone
To the Editor:
As the representatives of the primary-care physicians for tens of millions of Americans suffering from mental illness (including substance abuse), we were heartened by your March 16 front-page report that the Clinton Administration plans to cover the cost of treating mental illness and substance abuse in its health care reform proposal.


Patterns
Shows for Bridge Lines
Ellen Tracy's designer, Linda Allard, offers her opinion tentatively, like someone sharing news she's sure is unwelcome: "The extreme end of fashion is overrated. It gets a lot of coverage by the press, but it doesn't mean anything to a lot of women. We mean more to real women."
By "we," she means her slice of the market, the "bridge collections" that span the philosophical -- and price -- gap between upper-end designer lines and mass-market brands.
It seems the fashion world has come around to her way of thinking.


Sold: The Rights to Air Pollution
The Envionmental Protection Agency's first auction of rights to pollute the air attracted more participants than had been expected and reaped $21 million, according to a participant in the sale who declined to be named.
The results, which are to be announced at a news conference here Tuesday, were less pleasing for utilities that tried to piggyback on the auction to sell pollution allowances that the Federal agency had previously granted them.
The utilities set such high minimum prices that almost none of their allowances were sold, the participant said.


Classical Music in Review
Downtown Ensemble Renee Weiler Concert Hall


Where the Best-Dressed Officers Serve; Winning Fashion Kudos, New Jersey Police Say Morale Is Up and Crime Is Down
Meet the GQ men of police work:
*Chief George Faso.
He is 45 years old, 5 feet 10 1/2 inches tall and 165 pounds.
Married with three children, he is compulsively neat and collects autographs.
His last book?
"The Boys from Jersey." His drink?
Cabernet Sauvignon.


To the Pros by Stealth
The Seton Hall coach, P. J. CARLESIMO, said last night that LUTHER WRIGHT, the Pirates' 7-foot-2-inch center, made his decision to turn pro without discussing it with him.
Carlesimo said he had known there was a possibility that Wright might seek admission to the National Basketball Association draft, but he didn't find out for sure until Saturday when Wright's attorney, SAL DiFAZIO, informed him in a telephone call.


With product placements winning fans, a comedy network tailors some broadcasts for sponsors.
IN advertising industry parlance, the practice is known as product placement, though some may call it hucksterism.
Whichever term is more appropriate, advertisers who want their products pitched in uncommon settings are getting some support in words and deeds.
Take, for example, a recent survey of 171 people who were asked how they felt about product placements paid for by marketers in movies.
The results, as explained by two professors -- Eugene Secunda of Baruch College in New York and Israel D. Nebenzahl of Bar-Ilan University of Israel -- suggest that moviegoers do not object to the paid promotions if they are unobtrusive.
The respondents also prefer product placements to on-screen commercials, which were called annoying.


Co-President At Shearson Named No. 1
The American Express Company said yesterday that Richard S. Fuld Jr., co-president of its Shearson Lehman Brothers subsidiary with J. Tomilson Hill, would become president and that Mr.
Hill had resigned.
The announcement came in a letter to employees from Harvey Golub, chief executive officer of American Express.
Mr.
Golub said that a single president "would reduce the potential for confusion."


Sun Operating System Is Aimed at PC Market
Sun Microsystems, continuing its effort to expand beyond powerful work stations for elite computer users, today demonstrated a version of its Solaris operating system that will run the Microsoft Windows programs on mass-market personal computers.
The demonstration was part of a software conference sponsored by Sun at which the company introduced versions of Solaris for I.B.M.-compatible personal computers and also said it would develop Solaris for various types of machines using the Power PC chip jointly developed by Apple Computer, International Business Machines and Motorola.
Risking a Lawsuit
But because Sun Microsystems Inc. has no licensing agreement with the Microsoft Corporation, Sun executives acknowledged that the company was risking a legal challenge from Microsoft by adding a Windows capability.
Extremely popular among personal computer users, Windows simplifies computing tasks by allowing the user to issue commands by pointing and clicking a "mouse" instead of typing arcane commands.


Jacobs in Bankruptcy
ELI JACOBS, the Baltimore Orioles owner, has been forced into bankruptcy by his creditors.
A group of banks filed an "involuntary" bankruptcy petition in New York yesterday, asking a judge to rule that Jacobs should be under bankruptcy-court protection.
Jacobs has defaulted on more than $44 million in loans and personal guarantees to banks.


U.S. AGENCY CHIEF DEFENDS CULT RAID
The head of the Federal agency that conducted the raid on the heavily armed cult in Waco, Tex., today defended the mission and disputed accounts by some agents that it was replete with missteps and unheeded warnings that could have averted bloodshed.
"We did it in what we thought was the safest way, and we had a tragedy," said the official, Stephen E. Higgins, director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.


Uproar Over Killing in China's 'Model' Village
Until the slaying, Daqiuzhuang was China's model village, the kind of boom town that the newspapers praised and officials made pilgrimages to.
But model workers are not supposed to kill people.
More important, model villages are not supposed to defy the Government and protect killers.
Daqiuzhuang is China's richest village, where people live in two-story houses and the per capita income is $22,000, a bit higher than in the United States.
The confrontation there, in which the village kept out hundreds of police officers trying to arrest the suspects, is the hottest mystery in China.


Observer; Is J. Edgar Spinning?
In this fantasy I am heavily armed and shouting, "Come and get me, coppers!" in a voice just like James Cagney's.
The house is surrounded with coppers.
Don't ask me why.
Do I think I'm Jesus like the Texas man Herblock calls the Waco Wacko?
Not likely.
Maybe I've refused to file an estimated income tax form.
Whatever the offense, the Feds are out there with heavy armor.
I am not without resources though.
Guarding the back of the compound is a blonde who looks like Virginia Mayo and doesn't give me a lot of feminist lip if I call her a dame.
Another woman who looked like Joan Leslie wanted to stay too, but I made her leave.


Wachtler in Negotiations on Plea Bargain
Sol Wachtler, the former Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals, is prepared to to go to jail under a plea bargain with Federal prosecutors, but is insisting that as a condition of any deal he not be required to plead guilty to extortion, both sides in the negotiations said last night.
Yesterday afternoon, the two sides had planned for Mr.
Wachtler to appear in court today to enter a plea that would require him to serve a year to 18 months in Federal prison.
But late last night, the court appearance was postponed after the two sides could not reach a final agreement.


Cable Work May Have Caused Crash Fatal to 75


Final Four Is Host to the Belles of the Ball
There are not enough limos for the crowd that will gather in New Orleans at the end of this week.
There are not nearly enough tables at (fill in your favorite overpriced restaurant.) In the age of political correctness, after more than a decade of N.C.A.A.  tournaments that have consistently demonstrated an opportunity for the underdog, we suddenly find ourselves having to deal with Old Money.
Serious Old Money.
And you know how those people are. They buy their face paint with gold cards.


Making Trade Pact Work for the Environment
To the Editor:
"Save Nafta. But Don't Roll Over" (editorial, March 17) urges United States officials to get tougher in working out the details of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Certainly, much remains to be done, but a strategy that threatens both Mexico and Canada is not the way to do it.


An Explosive Debut Of Comet Near Jupiter
A COMET that as a single ball of dust and ice might have come and gone unobserved has suddenly burst into dazzling telescopic view all because, passing too close to the powerful forces of Jupiter's gravity, it shattered into glittering shards something like the crescendo to a fireworks display.
Astronomers described it as the brightest comet they have seen since 1976 and said it was reminiscent of the Brooks 2 comet in 1886 that broke into pieces and put on a brief but unusually brilliant show.


Review/Television; A Serious Show On Fox. Seriously.
Fox Broadcasting initiated its network ambitions in 1987 by going straight for the adolescent jugular with programs that were about as complicated as Saturday-morning cartoons.
Prime example: "Married . . . With Children." Oddly enough, Fox's most sophisticated and imaginative show turned out to be a real cartoon: "The Simpsons."
In recent months, though, Fox has been trying, even if not with much success, to broaden its prime-time demographics.
The latest effort, coming out of Robert De Niro's TriBeCa Productions, is "TriBeCa," an anthology series that hints at being downright serious.
The second installment can be seen tonight at 9.


Bonilla Gets His Wish, and His Pitch
Bobby Bonilla can't rationalize or quantify the comfort he experiences in the cleanup spot.
He can't say he gets different pitches.
He swears it's not some great appetite for responsibility.
He insists it's not about ego.
"It's where I have hit," said Bonilla. "It's what has always felt right."


Review/Dance; Ellington Meets Ailey, and Balance Reigns
For its final company premiere of the season, Dance Theater of Harlem chose "The River," a ballet in which the dancers looked splendidly at home on Friday night at the New York State Theater.
"The River" was a collaboration between two masters in their respective fields.
Duke Ellington was commissioned to write an original score; Alvin Ailey choreographed the work in 1970 for American Ballet Theater as part of the inaugural week of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington.
Over the years, however, "The River" has been revived only sporadically at Ballet Theater and the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.
Ailey's own company, which performed "The River" in December in New York, is a modern-dance troupe and its women do not execute the choreography in toe shoes as at Ballet Theater.
Too balletic for the Ailey Company, "The River" was also too idiomatic in its jazzy flavor for some in Ballet Theater's original cast, notably the classical superstars Erik Bruhn and Natalia Makarova.


Talking to the Task Force on Health: Experts Give Their Views: Underserved Consumers; Farmers Cannot Afford Insurance
Nancy Danielson  Legislative representative, National Farmers Union
To put it very simply, farmers cannot afford not to have health insurance because they risk losing their entire farm, and yet the costs have become so high that this is one of the No. 1 issues any time we go out to a farm meeting.


William Parker, Baritone, Dies; Specialist in Art Songs Was 49
William Parker, a lyric baritone who was one of his generation's most eloquent interpreters of art songs and a champion of new American music, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 49.


Hoyas vs. Gophers in Final
Even though Minnesota managed to outlast Providence, 76-70, in the stronger half of last night's National Invitation Tournament semifinal doubleheader at the Garden, Gophers Coach Clem Haskins wasn't so sure his team should be favored in the title game tomorrow night.
That's because Minnesota will be facing Georgetown, and Haskins said he has never had much success against the Hoyas under Coach John Thompson.
Not even a lackluster 45-41 victory by Georgetown (20-12) over Alabama-Birmingham in last night's opener could convince Haskins otherwise.


Talks on Haiti Shift the Focus to Aid
As part of an emerging settlement of the 18-month political crisis in Haiti, support is being marshaled from international donors to quickly mount the largest aid program this impoverished country has ever seen.
Diplomats close to political negotiations aimed at securing the return of the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, say the assistance is vital to social peace in a country badly torn by poverty and deep class antagonisms.


Review/Music; Adding a Shakespearean Tone to a Folk Melody
When a relentlessly serious mind meets music of unassuming charm, a struggle of sorts sets in.
Does the musician show respect for small works with small performances?
Or is there perhaps an obligation to raise music conceived on a limited scale to a higher and broader plane?
The questions came up several times at Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday evening when Gidon Kremer and Oleg Maisenberg played music for the violin and piano by Schubert, Bartok, Schulhoff, Dvorak and Liszt.
Mr.
Kremer gave his answer most emphatically in the modest Larghetto that ends Dvorak's Four Romantic Pieces.
From simple sadness Mr.
Kremer's violin-playing created major tragedy.
The enlargements were not inflations.
There was unadorned dignity in every stroke.
As a result, melancholy folk melody took on a tone that was very nearly Shakespearean.


Mr. Nice Is Raising Yankee Eyebrows
Mike Humphreys was not included in the Yankees' plans when spring training began last month.
The club knew he had good speed, could hit a bit and played a solid outfield.
But Humphreys was not deemed a prospect or a potential fifth outfielder.
He was just a nice player, nothing more.


Hughes Shift Will Be Blow To California
In the latest blow to California's ailing economy, the Hughes Missile Systems Company said today that it would move its engineering and product-line management, including 2,000 jobs, from several sites in Southern California to its headquarters in Tucson, Ariz., by the end of next year.
The move, which follows Hughes Missile's $450 million acquisition of the General Dynamics Corporation's missile division last August, will also mean the elimination of an additional 2,000 engineering and management jobs, mainly through layoffs, in California and Arizona.


Islanders Lose Marty McInnis
When the Islanders play the Philadelphia Flyers at the Nassau Coliseum tonight, they will be without Marty McInnis, a rookie who has played regularly and well.
McInnis will miss at least the last 10 games of the regular season with a nondisplaced fracture of the left kneecap, suffered Saturday night when he skidded into the boards during the Islanders' 7-3 victory over the San Jose Sharks.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Placed Daryl Irvine, pitcher, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Sent Jim Byrd, shortstop; Greg Blosser, outfielder; Cheo Garcia, infielder; and John Flaherty, catcher, to their minor league for reassignment.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Placed Shawn Abner, outfielder, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.


Woof! Does the Bark Fit Michigan and Its Fab 5?
There is a certain duality to Chris Webber.
On the court, he is a daredevil, a swooping pivotman who has a different jaw-drop or glare for every dunk.
But few know that his Michigan teammates call him Baby Huey, or that he sentimentally videotaped Sunday's midcourt Final Four celebration, or that afterward he playfully rolled his eyes at Coach Steve Fisher's young son, Jonathan, from the news conference podium.
If anything, though, the West Regional final here only enlarged Webber's and Michigan's reputations as prima donnas.
En route to the Final Four, the top-seeded Wolverines tap-danced out of danger in three tight games, never had to play a team seeded better than No. 7 and still strutted deliriously.


METRO DIGEST
EMPIRE UNDERWRITES A BUSINESS VENTURE Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield invested millions in a computer enterprise pitched by a board member, and it remains to be seen whether Empire got a good deal.
A1.
LETTER INTERESTS NUCLEAR AGENCY The Nuclear Regulatory Commission, already reviewing the need to increase security at nuclear power plants, said that it was particularly interested in a letter, apparently sent by suspects in the World Trade Center bombing, referring to "Nuclear targets." B3.


Suspected Head of Heroin Network Is Arrested
A man the police say is a "very important" heroin distributor and 18 of his alleged associates were arrested in raids in New York and Puerto Rico on charges they participated in a widespread heroin-trafficking network, Federal and local law-enforcement officials announced yesterday.
The suspected head of the organization, Robert Torres, 37 years old, of 2015 St.
Paul's Avenue in the Bronx, was charged with running the network in the Bronx and Manhattan and with operating a large money-laundering network based in the New York City metropolitan region and Puerto Rico.


No Headline
She had been a volunteer in my campaign, and even though the campaign was over and she no longer worked for me, I was nervous about all this sexual harassment stuff.
If I asked her out, was I breaking the law? -- ERIC D. FINGERHUT, a single Congressman, talking about dating in Washington.  [ A1:4 ]


Woman Upheld in Abuse Case Feels Vindicated
Margaret Kelly Michaels said she always thought that she would be cleared.
Until she heard a jury foreman say, "Guilty," she expected that the 10-month trial charging her with child molestation would end with her walking away.
"I was a naive little girl from Pittsburgh," Ms.
Michaels said in a telephone interview today from the Edna Mahan state prison in Clinton.
"The charges were so preposterous I thought anyone who investigated them would see the truth."


Hints of Gay-Ban Compromise in Senate
The chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee suggested today that the military permanently adopt the current compromise on homosexuals in the armed forces and not ask recruits about their sexual orientation.
The chairman, Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, made his suggestion shortly before the first of several hearings intended to allow the panel members to hear evidence on opposing sides of the issue and make up their minds.
But it was clear that many minds were already made up.


Dentist With an Idea Finds Friends in High Places
Five years ago, William N. Stratigos was a dentist with a big -- some might say far-fetched -- idea.
He wanted to get into the computer business and compete in a highly specialized field, even though he had little experience.
But he had at least one thing going for him: He was on the board of New York State's biggest health insurance company, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield.
Ignoring larger competitors, Empire gave Dr.
Stratigos's company, Sigma Imaging Systems, a long-term contract to develop a computer system that would streamline Empire's unwieldy method of handling claims.
And it dismissed the more experienced company it had previously hired for the same purpose.


Crazy Eddie Defendants Agree to $60.5 Million Settlement
A major chapter in the long-running saga of Crazy Eddie Inc. drew to a close yesterday as former officials, directors and accountants of the bankrupt chain of electronics stores agreed to pay $60.5 million to settle civil claims against them.
The settlements, which still must receive court approval, involve lawsuits filed in 1987 and 1988 by shareholders, bondholders, investors and creditors of Crazy Eddie against various officials and companies associated with the company.
The plan does not include claims and default judgments against Eddie Antar, the former chairman and chief executive of the company, who is in custody in New Jersey awaiting trial on Federal securities fraud and racketeering charges.


Russian Congress Agrees to Hold Referendum on the Nation's Rule
Adjourning after a tumultuous four-day session, the Congress of People's Deputies agreed today to a referendum next month on Russia's rule, setting the stage for another round in its overheated confrontation with President Boris N. Yeltsin.
One day after it narrowly failed to oust the President, the Congress accepted his call for a national vote of confidence in his leadership on April 25, but wrapped it in additional questions and conditions that threatened to make the results indecisive.


Time Warner Debenture Sale
Time Warner Inc. announced yesterday that the Time Warner Entertainment Company, a limited partnership principally comprising Time Warner's filmed entertainment, HBO programming and cable businesses, had sold through private placement $1 billion of 8 3/8 percent senior debentures due in 2023.
The company said proceeds from the private financing would be used to reduce Time Warner Entertainment's bank debt of about $7 billion.


Barney Hospitalized
Former Lions star LEM BARNEY, who faces cocaine and marijuana charges after being involved in a March 19 traffic accident, was listed in stable condition at a Detroit hospital yesterday.
The reason for his hospitalization was not disclosed.


Jack the Knife
"A queer thing about the most celebrated murderer in the world," wrote Edmund Pearson, the most elegant chronicler of crime.
"Nobody knows his name."
But this most celebrated murderer did have a nickname: Jack the Ripper.
During nine terrible weeks in 1888, the Ripper roamed London's Whitechapel district, killing at least five women and spawning countless books, a passel of short stories, several movies and plays, and at least one opera.


2 Women Compete to Head Federal Arts Agency
After weeks of discreet campaigning, the actress Jane Alexander and President Clinton's campaign aide Deborah Sale have emerged as the chief contenders to head the National Endowment for the Arts, say many arts administrators and Congressional staff members with connections in the White House.
President Clinton, who is expected to announce his choice shortly, is not commenting on the matter, and he may, of course, name a dark horse to the post.
But the decision has been stalled, those close to the Administration say, by a sharp division within the White House that involves personal loyalty to Ms.
Sale and differing opinions on who would be most effective at the job: a well-known actress or a politically skilled administrator.


By Design; The Big White Shirt
Sometimes the most prosaic piece of clothing suddenly becomes the hottest of fashions.
Take the white cotton shirt.
In fall collections both in the United States and abroad, oversize man-tailored shirts are being shown in a new degage way: collars open, tails hanging out, cuffs unbuttoned and dangling over the hands.
This may sound a bit grungy, but not so at Chanel.
There, Karl Lagerfeld assembled the shirts over turtlenecks and leggings and under snug cashmere cardigans or close-fitting tweed jackets.
The cover-ups always ended just below the waist, so the shirttails would be sure to show, while the cuffs dangled provocatively from narrow sleeves.
Add some swinging chains and ropes of pearls, and you get the chic picture.


Italo Tajo, a Bass, Is Dead at 77; Renowned for Opera Buffa Roles
Italo Tajo, an Italian bass who specialized in comic roles and an influential teacher, died yesterday at Christ Hospital in Cincinnati.
He was 77.
His wife, Inelda, said the cause was heart failure.


Gains Reported in Transferring Genetic Material to Mice
SEVERAL research groups have developed techniques for transferring large amounts of genetic material into mice, procedures that experts say are a major step toward identifying the structure and function of thousands of human and animal genes.
Working independently, three research teams recently reported using the genetic material of yeast as a way to transport new genes into mice and having those new gene functions passed on to offspring.


Sports of The Times; Davis Cup Conspiracy Or Upset?
ON the surface, whether grass, clay, composition or paper, the idea of the United States losing a Davis Cup match is preposterous.
In the men's world tennis rankings, five United States players are among the top 9: Jim Courier is No. 1, Pete Sampras No. 2, Andre Agassi No. 7, Ivan Lendl (who as a United States citizen is now eligible) No. 8 and Michael Chang No. 9.
No other nation has even two players among the top nine.


CHRONICLE
PAMELA KOSLOW HINES, a co-producer of "Jelly's Last Jam," is temporarily switching medium: her next project is not a play but a movie, "Watching TV With the Red Chinese" based on the book by Luke Whisnant.
Last August, Ms.
Hines said yesterday, she received a call from Nora Dvosin, a story analyst at Walt Disney Pictures in Burbank, Calif.
Ms.
Dvosin had just read the book and wanted Ms.
Hines's help.
The book is about three mainland-Chinese intellectuals who were living in Cleveland and absorbing their ideas of American culture from watching television.
Ms.
Hines duly read it, then she and Ms.
Dvosin promptly bought the rights to produce the book as a movie.


Murdoch, Revisted
When Rupert Murdoch left the New York City newspaper war five years ago, he had essentially already lost the battle he returned to fight again last night.
The Murdoch Post had tried -- and failed -- to succeed financially as a screaming, dominant city tabloid with a million readers a day.
In the interim, Mr.
Murdoch and the New York City newspaper landscape have changed.
But in the New York newspaper market, it sometimes seems, the more things change, the more they stay the same.


Talking to the Task Force on Health: Experts Give Their Views: Consumers' Groups; A Plea to Ease Agony of Deciding on a Nursing Home
Phyllis Torda  Families U.S.A.
The decision to enter a nursing home is one of the most stressful and emotional decisions for individuals and their families.
When making this decision, all Americans are entitled to the security of knowing that they will have access to nursing home care if they otherwise cannot afford it.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Stuart W. Cook, a social psychologist who studied the impact of racial and religious prejudice, referred incorrectly to a colleague of his.
The colleague is Isidor Chein.


Overflowing New Jersey River Forces Evacuation of 18


Doctor Recounts Threats By Farrow Against Allen
A clinical psychologist testified yesterday that she warned Woody Allen that she feared for his safety because of threats made by Mia Farrow.
The threats were made in the months after Ms.
Farrow learned that Mr.
Allen was having an affair with her adopted daughter Soon-Yi Previn, the psychologist testified.
The psychologist, Dr.
Susan Coates, also testified that while she considered Mr.
Allen's relationship with his own adopted daughter, Dylan Farrow, to be "inappropriately intense," the therapist never observed him acting in a sexual way toward her.
And she reported that an evaluation of Dylan conducted in 1990 found the girl easily "would be taken over by fantasy" when asked to describe something as simple as an apple tree.


Review/Fashion; Lars Goes Alpine With Dash
The stage set was a gigantic cuckoo clock, with loud ticking and a brightly colored bird.
For a minute, it seemed that Byron Lars had gone cutesy.
But as a turntable moved figures in the doorways onto the stage, the audience could see that the designer had scored again.
The models looked great.
Peasant blouses were tucked into red bell-bottoms.
Frilly aprons were tied over leggings.
Lederhosen were cut to reveal a smidgen of buttocks.
Toggle coats were closed with oversize patent-leather toggles.
Skirts with laced-up bodices were pencil slim and slit up the back.
Loden cloth was cut into jackets with hourglass silhouettes.


Edwin Wilson, 94, Minister and Leader Of Humanist Groups
Edwin H. Wilson, a founder of the modern humanist movement and a retired Unitarian Universalist minister, died Friday at Veterans Hospital in Salt Lake City.
He was 94 and lived in Salt Lake City.
He died of cancer, said Florien Wine riter, president of Humanists of Utah, a group founded by Dr.
Wilson two years ago.


INSIDE
Gay-Troop Hearings Begin
The Senate opened its hearings on homosexuals in the military by listening to legal experts.
Page A18.
Big Job Loss for California
Hughes Missile Systems said it would move 2,000 jobs to Arizona because California was "no longer a competitive place to do business." Page D1.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.38
3.04
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.92
4.08
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.03
4.15
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.69
5.76
7.19
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.89
6.94
7.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.84
7.88
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.05
6.03
6.76
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


It's Unjust to Tamper With Social Security
To the Editor:
There are at least two skewed observations in "A Test of Backbone for Democrats" (editorial, March 19):


Murdoch's Investors Wary Of Repurchasing The Post
The New York Post may greet Rupert Murdoch as its savior, but investors in the News Corporation Ltd., Mr.
Murdoch's Australian media company, are pouting at the headlines.
Since reports of Mr.
Murdoch's desire to take over the tabloid have appeared, the American depository receipts of shares of the News Corporation, which trade on the New York Stock Exchange, have fallen from $43.75 on March 19 to $41.25 yesterday, unchanged.


Clinton Soothes Senate Anxiety Over Spending
For three sleepy days, nobody in the Senate wanted to vote on the spending plan President Clinton had proposed to stimulate the economy.
Now, suddenly, they can't vote fast enough.
Spurred by a soothing letter from the President, Democratic lawmakers patched up one spat among themselves, shelved another with Republicans, and began serious legislating over Mr.
Clinton's $16.3 billion grab bag of job-making public-works projects.


Notes and Bonds Up in Light Day
The price of Treasury bonds and notes shot higher in late but light trading yesterday, after a sharp selloff on Friday raised doubts about whether the 1993 rally could continue.
The sudden rise sent the price of the 30-year bond up 21/32 point and the yield down to 6.89 percent, from 6.94 percent on Friday.
But traders said there was little to make of the price rise because it did not make up for the Friday selloff and was caused by technical trading and rumors about some possible Federal Reserve actions later in the week.


Continental Sinking
The continents, "floating" on the earth's denser interior, have sunk as much as two miles below their "proper" height, according to a report in the February issue of Geophysical Research Letters.
The researchers propose that the continents may be being pulled down by the flow of cold, dense rock originating on the ocean floors and descending 400 miles or more beneath earth's land areas.
It has long been assumed that the continents float on the underlying rock, just as an iceberg floats in water.
Evidence for this has been the rebound of a landscape, like central Canada, after an icecap has melted.


Staff Cheers As Murdoch Reclaims Post
To applause and even a tear or two, Rupert Murdoch swept into the newsroom of The New York Post yesterday afternoon to reclaim the reins of the feisty but bankrupt tabloid he was forced to sell five years ago.
Mr.
Murdoch's appearance, following a ruling by a Federal Bankruptcy Court Judge, Francis G. Conrad, that Mr.
Murdoch "may start printing The New York Post immediately," drew the curtain on the latest act in the frequently absurdist drama to save America's oldest continuously published newspaper and one of its most impudent tabloids.


Office Shelter For Homeless Spurs Action
Four months after a New York State judge held New York City in contempt for failing to shelter homeless families promptly, dozens of families continue to spend the night in city offices waiting for a room in the city's sprawling shelter system.
Frustrated by the lack of progress, the judge, Justice Helen E. Freedman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, last week held the city in contempt again, ordering the city to pay each family $50 for their first overnight stay and $100 for each night thereafter in the offices.


Systems Approach Go For Boitano in Games
BRIAN BOITANO, buoyed by the results of the world championships held recently in Prague, yesterday applied for amateur reinstatement with the International Skating Union and formalized his bid to compete at the 1994 Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway.
Boitano, the 1988 Olympic champion who will turn 30 years old in October, had planned to apply to the I.S.U. regardless of what happened in Prague.
But he was delighted that KURT BROWNING of Canada won the men's title on the strength of his artistic performance.


New Jersey Crash That Killed 6 Is Investigated


Classical Music in Review
Cincinnati Symphony  Carnegie Hall


Bridge
The American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals ended here on Sunday, and two major titles were decided.
The Open Swiss Teams was captured by Tony Kasday, Steve Sion, Billy Cohen, all of Las Vegas, Michael Seamon of Miami Beach, Fla., and Ron Smith of Chicago.
Second were Martin Scheinberg of Manhattan, Bill Eisenberg of Boca Raton, Fla., Benito Garozzo and Lea Dupont of Palm Beach, Fla.
The Women's Swiss Team title went to Karen McCallum, Kerri Shuman, both of Manhattan, Jill Meyers and Kay Schulle, both of Santa Monica, Calif.
Second were Jean Anderson, Janet Daling, both of Seattle, Sharon Colson of Kirkland, Wash., and Broma Lou Reed of Boulder, Colo.
A Take-Out Double
On the diagramed deal both West players opened two clubs, using a strong-club system.
Both North players made a take-out double, and one South chose a penalty pass, collecting 300.
When Shuman was South she jumped to three no-trump, as shown, and received the lead of the club king.
She led a diamond to the queen and another to the king which held.
A heart to the king was taken by the ace, and East led her remaining diamond to her partner's ace.


Judge Continues Drug Trial
A judge yesterday rejected a defense request to throw out a major heroin-distribution case because an undercover agent who worked on the investigation had been charged with corruption.
Judge Shirley Wohl Kram decided to continue the trial in Federal District Court in Manhattan, but she criticized the Government for having acted inexcusably by not notifying her sooner about the corruption charges.
The case is testing the effects of a police corruption scandal on hundreds of drug convictions and pending trials.
The investigator, Robert Robles, was one of three members of the New York Drug Enforcement Task Force who were arrested this month on charges of corruption.


Hillary Clinton Misses Meeting
Hillary Rodham Clinton missed the first public meeting of the President's Health Care Task Force, which she leads, to remain today at the bedside of her ill father, Hugh Rodham.
Mr.
Rodham, 81, who suffered a stroke on March 19, remained in critical condition at St.
Vincent Infirmary Medical Center here.


Delta Air Laying Off 600 Pilots
Delta Air Lines abandoned a 36-year-old no-layoff policy yesterday, saying it would eliminate the jobs of 600 pilots by the fall as part of cutbacks in its fleet and reductions in service on some routes.
The 7 percent cut in pilots is one of the most drastic steps taken by the nation's third-largest carrier, which is struggling to right itself from a severe slump in the industry.


Thousands Jam U.N. Trucks to Flee Bosnian Town
Thousands of Muslim women, children and old men crowded around a United Nations truck convoy in a besieged eastern Bosnian town today, hoping to be taken more than 60 miles to safety.
Only 2,300 could be crammed into 19 flatbed trucks for the difficult journey, and witnesses said at least two children were killed in the crush to board the trucks and four people died in the trucks before they arrived here.


Dinkins Makes Rounds Of Fund-Raising Parties
Although Mayor David N. Dinkins has not yet officially announced his candidacy, his campaign was nonetheless in full swing last night as more than 270 supporters opened their homes to hold so-called "House Party" fund-raisers.
Officials of the Committee for David Dinkins said that no specific target amount had been set for the parties last night, but that each host was asked to set a fund-raising goal of $1,000.
Guests were asked to contribute amounts ranging from $5 apiece at some parties to $500 at more lavish settings, campaign officials said.
Dinkins Attends 3 Parties
The Mayor managed to attend three events, and he delivered a short speech which -- borrowing a technique from President Clinton's campaign -- was transmitted through a conference call to each of the homes.
In his speech Mr.
Dinkins outlined the themes that were likely to be at the centerpiece of his campaign, namely that he has been a diligent steward of the city's fiscal affairs during a crushing recession.


Herman's Plans to Close Up to 132 of Its Stores
The new management team at Herman's World of Sporting Goods said in an interview yesterday that it planned to close as many as 132 of 253 stores, take an ax to bulging overhead expenses and emerge from bankruptcy protection before Christmas.
Herman's, which filed for bankruptcy protection this month, is focusing on stores in the Northeast corridor and shedding the distractions of poorly performing stores west of Pennsylvania and south of Virginia.


It's Unjust to Tamper With Social Security
To the Editor:
"A Test of Backbone for Democrats" (editorial, March 19) condemns those who seek to carry out President Clinton's pledge not to tamper with Social Security.
This alliance of Republicans and Democrats has equity on its side.
There is no equity in taxing what has already been taxed.


Classical Music in Review
Andrew Rangell Pianist Kathryn Bache Miller Theater


Mr. Cuomo, Late on Health
With the Clinton Administration poised to recommend sweeping changes in the country's health care system, here comes Gov.
Mario Cuomo with his own proposal, a 40-page blueprint for changing New York State's health care system.
What's he up to?
Think of his proposal as a semaphore, a memo to Hillary Rodham Clinton and her task force.
Mr.
Cuomo, always fond of attention, is asking to be heard.
"I'm sure the Federal people will look at it extremely carefully," he said.


Electronic Framework For Building Fiction
A FEW writers resist the notion that there are formulas for structuring novels, short stories or screenplays that enhance the chances of publication or production.
They point to Joyce or Proust or Barthelme.
Others, who write frankly for the marketplace, are not so pure.
They point to Dickens or Hemingway or even Homer.
Storyline, from Truby's Writers Studio of Los Angeles, automates the planning of a piece of fiction, particularly a screenplay.
It does not think for the aspiring screenwriter, it just reminds him of what to think of, and provides a structure both to elicit and keep track of the multitude of ideas and details that emerge in transforming the first vague musings into the finished project.


Talking to the Task Force on Health: Experts Give Their Views: Non-Physician Providers; Pleas for Cost Savings and Alternative-Care Methods
Virginia Trotter Betts  President, American Nurses Association
The American Nurses Association believes that the single best cost-savings measure is to move away from the expensive medical model of illness care that now exists in our country.


Colts Try Blockbuster For the Offensive Line
In one of the boldest, but strangest, twists yet in the National Football League free-agent market, the Indianapolis Colts made center Kirk Lowdermilk the highest-paid offensive lineman in the league yesterday, and then offered a still-larger contract to tackle Will Wolford.
Lowdermilk, a Vikings free agent, signed a reported three-year, $6 million contract with the Colts.
But that is $1.5 million less than the reported three-year, $7.5 million offer that the Colts extended to Wolford, who, until now, has played for the Bills.


RIVAL SIGNS LETTER OF INTENT TO ACQUIRE POLLENEX
The Rival Company, the housewares manufacturer, said yesterday that it had signed a letter of intent to acquire the Pollenex Corporation, a manufacturer of personal health care appliances.
A Rival spokesman said the company had tentatively agreed to pay cash and to assume the liabilities of Pollenex, a privately held company based in Chicago.


I.B.M.'s Slipped Disk: Sponsorship
With billions of dollars in losses and an embarrassing search for a new chief executive just ended, I.B.M. would seemingly have no need to sponsor sports events.
If anything were disposable -- when you're perilously close to flunking Business 101 -- a golf tournament would seem to be an easy choice.
People are disposable at International Business Machines Corporation, which is in the midst of cutting 25,000 jobs through buyouts and layoffs.


CHRONICLE
For the past six years, WALTER C. MILLER has directed the Antoinette Perry "Tony" Awards show.
Guess what?
He's doing it again, it was announced yesterday by Gary Smith, executive producer of the show.


Basking in the Glory, Blinking in the Light
The first celebrity to arrive was Stephen Rea, one of the stars of "The Crying Game." He arrived two hours early and seemed a little startled.
Moments later, Federico Fellini, the Italian master of both realism and the absurd, walked onto the red carpet and gazed around at the screaming fans.
"It's O.K. to be a little crazy," said Mr.
Fellini, who was present to accept an honorary Oscar for lifetime achievement.


8 Students Arrested After High School Disturbance


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Delta Air Lines abandoned its 36-year-old no-layoff policy, saying it will eliminate the jobs of 600 pilots as part of cutbacks in its fleet and reductions in service.  [ Page D1. ]
The Administration forced Northwest Airlines to abandon plans to start routes in competition with Reno, a new carrier.  [ D2. ]


Stock Funds Continuing Their Growth
Investors are continuing to pour money into stock mutual funds, and the quarter that ends tomorrow will probably be the best ever, exultant mutual fund managers said yesterday.
But some said that the strong flow of money into tax-exempt municipal bond funds, which set records in January and February, seems to have slowed.
"Our equity fund sales are up 41 percent from February," said Donald Webber of State Street Research, which manages funds sold by brokers and insurance agents.
And sales in February, he added, were up 33 percent from a strong January.


Continental Sinking
The continents, "floating" on the earth's denser interior, have sunk as much as two miles below their "proper" height, according to a report in the February issue of Geophysical Research Letters.
The researchers propose that the continents may be being pulled down by the flow of cold, dense rock originating on the ocean floors and descending 400 miles or more beneath earth's land areas.
It has long been assumed that the continents float on the underlying rock, just as an iceberg floats in water.
Evidence for this has been the rebound of a landscape, like central Canada, after an icecap has melted.


An Eden In Ancient America? Not Really
CONTRARY to widespread belief, evidence is mounting that pre-Columbian America was not a pristine wilderness inhabited by people who lived in such harmony with nature that they left it unmarked.
Instead, many scientists now say, the original Americans powerfully transformed their landscape in ways both destructive and benign -- just like modern people.
In the latest piece of evidence, British investigators have analyzed sediments from Lake Patzcuaro in the highlands of central Mexico and found that ancient farming practices around the lake caused "staggeringly high" rates of soil erosion, which were unsurpassed even after the Spanish arrived.
The study "shatters the myth of pre-Columbian America as an Eden in which people were 'transparent in the landscape,' " Dr.
Karl W. Butzer, a geographer at the University of Texas, wrote in a commentary on the study in the March 4 issue of the British journal Nature.


It's Unjust to Tamper With Social Security
To the Editor:
There are at least two skewed observations in "A Test of Backbone for Democrats" (editorial, March 19):


Review/Fashion; With Blass, Spontaneity Is in Style
Bill Blass fired the opening shot yesterday morning, and the fall fashion openings in New York were off and running.
What he was trying to do, he said just before his show started, was to suggest to his followers a "less uptight, more relaxed and spontaneous" way of dressing.
He was, in other words, trying to be less serious.
He succeeded admirably in presenting clothes that looked fresh but not frightening.
His scheme was to break up the conventional suit, the backbone of most serious dressers' wardrobes.
The jacket is still the key because "women collect jackets," he said.
But the matching skirt all but disappeared.


Stephen White, 77; In 60's Helped Start Public TV Network
Stephen White, a writer who helped to start the nation's public television network in the 1960's, died Saturday at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 77 and lived in Bethesda.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, his family said.


CLINTON WOULD END BAN ON AID TO POOR SEEKING ABORTIONS
Opening a new season of struggle over Federal abortion policy, the Clinton Administration plans to ask Congress to lift the nearly total ban on Federal financing of abortions for poor women, White House officials say.
The move will come in President Clinton's detailed budget request, expected to be made public the week of April 4, said George Stephanopoulos, the chief White House spokesman.
How Congress will respond and how hard Mr.
Clinton will push the issue are still unclear, say lawmakers and legislative analysts on Capitol Hill.
Abortion foes say they believe they have a good chance of blocking the President.
Signal of Deep Change
For all the uncertainties, Mr.
Clinton's decision to seek the repeal of the 16-year-old Federal prohibition, the Hyde Amendment, which applies to the Medicaid program for poor people, is a sign of the sea change in abortion politics.
Both sides of the abortion issue predict that the next six months will test old positions, longstanding alliances and the power of the abortion-rights movement under a friendly Administration.


Albany Accord Would Raise Judges' Pay Up to 21% by '94
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders reached an agreement today to provide raises of up to 21 percent to state judges by October 1994.
The judges have not received salary increases since 1987.
No other major budget agreements had been announced by early evening as negotiators raced the clock to pass a budget by April 1, the start of the fiscal year.
To convey at least an impression of movement, the Assembly passed the first of the series of bills that make up the budget, possibly as early as this evening.


Talking to the Task Force on Health: Experts Give Their Views: Physicians; Doctors Know That Change Is a Necessity
Dr. Raymond Scaletter
chairman of the board of trustees of the American Medical Association
I'm Ray Scaletter, chairman of the board of the American Medical Association, and we appreciate this opportunity to state once again our commitment to reform of the nation's health-care system.
As we have said publicly the last several years and privately in the constructive opportunities we've had to discuss our views with representatives of the Administration and this task force over the last few months, America's physicians know that change is necessary.


Italy's 'Moral Crumbling'
If only a half or even a quarter of the allegations against them are true, Italy's leaders these last few decades have lived in a twilight world with a "B" movie plot.
Consider, for instance, some of the scams that have emerged from the 13-month-old investigation into political corruption:


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day yesterday referred incorrectly in some copies to a team leader in the Honda Motor Company's training program at a plant in Marysville, Ohio.
He is Rod Summers.


Resting Rangers' Goal: Recharge, Then Charge
The Rangers don't play again until Friday, when the Islanders visit them at Madison Square Garden in a game that will likely have a special edge to it.
No matter how the Islanders do in their only game before then, the Rangers match should determine at least temporary possession of the fourth and final playoff berth in the Patrick Division.
At the moment, the fourth-place Rangers hold a 1-point lead on their rivals from Long Island, who are hosts to Philadelphia at the Coliseum on Tuesday.
A victory, defeat or tie for the Islanders against the Flyers will leave them either tied with the Rangers or 1 point away from them, ahead or behind.
After Friday's game, the Rangers and the Islanders both will have eight games left in the 84-game season.
He Would Invite All
Neil Smith, the president and general manager of the Rangers, said the Islanders "are a team that deserves to be in the playoffs, in my mind."
He added that the same goes for the Rangers, the Washington Capitals and the Devils, all scrambling for the three berths behind the two-time Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins, who have clinched the division title.


CHRONICLE
There are red ribbons that symbolize AIDS awareness.
Now there are pink-ribbon pins to signify breast-cancer awareness.
The pins are the brainchild of MARYESTA CARR, an agent in Manhattan for jewelry designers.
The idea was born partly from grief.


Single in Congress: No Time for Love, No Time for Laundry
There was a young woman from Clevelandwho wore her heart on her sleeve and asked Eric D. Fingerhut if he'd like to come over to dinner some time.
After several months, Mr.
Fingerhut, a single 33-year-old Congressman from Cleveland, called to see if she would be free one Saturday night after he finished his duties in the district.


Clifford Jordan, 61, Saxophonist Acclaimed for His Improvisations
Clifford Jordan, a saxophonist and big-band leader known for the lyricism of his improvisations, died on Saturday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 61 and lived in Manhattan.
His wife, Sandra, said the cause was cancer.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Gretzky Leads Kings  Wayne Gretzky had two goals and an assist in Los Angeles's six-goal third period last night as the Kings routed the Red Wings in Detroit, 9-3. (AP) TENNIS  The Exit Arrives Early


Scoring With the Spur Posse
All is not well in Lakewood, Calif.
True, it looks like the kind of place where there's a Brady Bunch in every split-level.
But Lakewood is also the home of a group called the Spur Posse, 20 to 30 local boys who award themselves points for having carnal knowledge of young girls.
The champion claims 66.
Lakewood suffers the usual problems of its time: shaky families, shaky employment rates.
But there's nothing new about the Spur Posse.
They're another chapter in the same old story: Young girl eager to be liked -- or noticed, anyway -- services young jock eager to prove his masculinity in the easiest, most obvious way.
She gets a reputation as a "slut"; he gets a reputation as a "stud."


Eastwood Western Takes Top 2 Prizes In 65th Oscar Show
In an Oscar year given over to smaller films, "Unforgiven," Clint Eastwood's moody, revisionist western, emerged as the big winner last night, taking home Oscars for best film and best director.
The awards, the first Oscars ever for Mr.
Eastwood, codified him as a respected film maker and Hollywood statesman after a 39-year career as an actor and, since 1971, a director.
Al Pacino was named best actor for his performance in "Scent of a Woman" as an embittered blind veteran whose plans for a final weekend in New York take an unexpected turn.
Mr.
Pacino, who had been nominated for an Oscar six times without winning, began his emotional acceptance speech by saying, "Thank you for breaking my streak," and ended it by holding up his statue and thanking the academy for "this gift of encouragement."


For Best Performer In Shutout, It's Richer
As expected, the Devils had no problem tonight with the lowly San Jose Sharks, who completed their 13-game schedule against the Patrick Division without a single point.
Led by Stephane Richer's hat trick, the Devils handed the Sharks a 5-0 setback at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena for Chris Terreri's second shutout of the season, and the fourth of his career.
The two achievements came in his 200th regular-season appearance.


The Partial Eclipse of the Fun
They will play before a sellout crowd this weekend in Atlanta, but that is not the only reason that college basketball teams in the women's Final Four will feel so crowded.
"I'd prefer to go later in the spring," said Nancy Darsch, the coach of Ohio State.
"Then, we'd be the show."


Review/Film Festival; Of Blood and Passion in the Basque Country
Every so often in "Cows" ("Vacas"), Julio Medem's epic portrayal of two feuding families in the Basque region of northern Spain, the camera draws away from the tumultuous passions of its characters to focus on the eyes of the cattle who are essential to these people's livelihoods.
After contemplating their expressionless faces, the camera returns to the drama, but detachedly, as though the director has decided to observe the world and its butchery through uncomprehending bovine eyes.
Wielded by a lesser film maker, this conceit, which alludes to the eye-slashing opening sequence in "Un Chien Andalou," the seminal 1929 Surreal collaboration between Luis Bunuel and Salvador Dali, might seem pretentious.
But "Cows" is a film so overflowing with what can only be called life-force energy that these digressions lend it an extra depth and poignancy.
At these turning points, the viewer is momentarily prodded to see the film's larger-than-life characters as tragic, mortal creatures in a landscape that will outlast them and their joys and torments no matter how intensely they live.


It's Unjust to Tamper With Social Security
To the Editor:
I disagree with your logic on taxing Social Security benefits ("A Test of Backbone for Democrats," editorial, March 19).
Since when is a couple with an income of $32,000 wealthy?


Baseball Puts Teeth in Minority Job Plans
Major league baseball owners, long impervious to criticism of their minority hiring record, signaled an about-face today, promising new initiatives that will be enforced by the threat of sanctions.
The plan, announced today by Bud Selig, owner of the Milwaukee Brewers and baseball's acting commissioner, comes at a time when the sport and its ruling executive council stand just one week away from the start of a season that has been targeted for possible boycotts by the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.


Signs of Ancient River
CLOSE examination of images from earth satellites has revealed traces of an ancient river under the sands of Arabia, which originated in the Hijaz Mountains of western Saudi Arabia and flowed eastward more than 500 miles across the desert to the Arabian Gulf.
There it formed a delta that once covered much of Kuwait, according to Dr.
Farouk El-Baz, director of the Center for Remote Sensing at Boston University, who reported the finding last week.
He believes this explains the gravel found in much of Kuwait, formed from granite and volcanic basalt unrelated to local rocks.
It now appears to have been carried across Arabia from the distant mountains.


COMPANY NEWS
CONE MILLS CORP., Greensboro, N.C., will form a joint venture with Compania Industrial de Parras S.A., Mexico, to build and operate a denim plant in Mexico.
GUARDIAN ROYAL EXCHANGE P.L.C., London, agreed to buy the Orion Insurance unit of the Nederlanden Groups N.V. for $12 million.


What Red Army?
The Red Army, once one of the world's most formidable fighting forces, is in an advanced state of disintegration.
Its finest divisions have splintered.
Its draft calls go largely unheeded.
Much of its equipment is inoperative.
Only its strategic nuclear forces remain potent.
The shocking deterioration of this once-powerful military machine has profound implications.
Unless the dimensions of the decline are recognized, there can be no sound military policy in the West or in Russia.


Brazilian Rain Forest Yields Most Diversity For Species of Trees
BOTANISTS studying a surviving patch of the dwindling Atlantic rain forest in Brazil have recorded the highest known tree diversity in the world.
Packed into a two-and-one-half-acre plot, 450 different tree species were identified by an American-Brazilian team led Dr.
W.
Wayt Thomas, a researcher for the New York Botanical Garden.


U.S. Forces Northwest To Drop Planned Routes
The Clinton Administration has forced Northwest Airlines to abandon plans to start new routes in competition with the recently formed Reno Airlines, in what is believed to be the first such Government action since the industry was deregulated in 1978.
The Administration acted after Reno Air, which started flying in July, complained that Northwest was seeking the routes to destroy it.


Clinton Likely to Seek Even More Russian Aid
The Clinton Administration is likely to ask Congress to increase direct American aid for Russia next year from the $700 million previously proposed to more than $1 billion, and to direct the assistance to Russian farmers, entrepreneurs and military officers, senior Administration officials said today.
Several key lawmakers involved in foreign aid said they would be inclined to go along with the increased spending for Russia if the President is willing to make the case to the American people.


Reform the High Cost Of Medical School
To the Editor:
You report that the Clinton Administration is considering limits on physician fees (front page, March 9).
Not once, in all the proposals for health cost containment, have I seen addressed the soaring and incredible cost of medical school education.
Recent physician graduates may easily acquire a debt for medical school alone that is the equivalent in size of a home mortgage.
However, unlike mortgages, interest payment on student debt is not deductible from income taxes.


For Twin Towers, It's Back to Work
A month after the World Trade Center explosion, thousands of workers have returned to the twin towers, their spasms of anxiety relieved by a pervasive pride that, friends and strangers, colleagues and competitors, they had all helped one another survive.
On the concourse of the trade center complex, in Tower Two, where the first tenants returned more than a week ago, and in Tower One, which reopened for its first tenants yesterday, office workers have returned to meticulously cleaned offices, fresh flowers, and elevators that whisk 110 stories skyward as though a terrorist bombing were the stuff of fiction.


Supreme Court Roundup; Court Enters New Era In Rap Copyright Case
Entering the unfamiliar terrain of rap music, the Supreme Court agreed today to examine a recording by the group 2 Live Crew parodying a classic country music song.
The case could define the status of parody under copyright law.
A Federal appeals court last year rejected the rap group's argument that its recording of Roy Orbison's 1964 hit song "Oh, Pretty Woman" constituted a "fair use" of the original, making it exempt from a claim of copyright infringement.
The appeals court said the "blatantly commercial" nature of the parody, which substituted "big hairy woman" and "two-timin' woman" for the "pretty woman" of the original, made it ineligible for the fair-use defense.


For Clinton, 'Managed Trade' Is Emerging as Policy Option
Four years ago, when even Japanese ministers were calling for their country to buy more American goods, the Bush Administration shied away from setting targets because it feared that such action might look like managing trade.
In the Bush Administration lexicon, "managed trade" meant inefficient Government meddling that inevitably did more harm than good.


Letter About Trade Center Explosion Prompts N.R.C. to Review Security
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission, already reviewing security at nuclear power plants, said yesterday that it was particularly interested in a letter apparently sent by suspects in the World Trade Center bombing referring to "Nuclear targets."
And the chief F.B.I. agent in New York City and the Police Commissioner said yesterday that the city should tighten security in public buildings, with underground garages installing video cameras to identify drivers and skyscrapers tightening security standards.


Warsaw Journal; The Russians Are Back, in Battalions, as Peddlers
At the central train station, they arrive by the score, legions of bedraggled Russians, Belarussians, Ukrainians, Moldovans and others from the east, pulling luggage carts heaped with goods stuffed inside grimy plastic bags.
From the station, they cross the Vistula to a sports arena, the Tenth Anniversary Stadium, where they join hundreds of others hawking their wares in what has become Eastern Europe's largest flea market.
Or they board buses and trains and fan out across Poland, where even the smallest town now has its "Russian market" in the central square.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Southern Indiana Gas and Electric Co., Evansville, Ind., is offering $45 million of 7.6 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2023 at 99.889 to yield 7.609 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The bonds are callable in 10 years and are rated Aa-2 by Moody's Investors Service and AA by Standard &amp; Poor's and Duff &amp; Phelps.
Common Stock  *
Corporacion Bancaria de Espana S.A., Madrid, which through direct and indirect ownership is wholly owned by the Spanish Government, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for an initial public offering that is part of a global offering of up to 31.4 million shares.
The United States offering will consist of a yet-to-be-specified number of American depository shares through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.


Chess
Over the chessboard, Reuben Fine, the American chess genius who died on Friday, exhibited two personas: that of a Dr.
Jekyll, when he had White and the advantage of moving first, and that of a Mr.
Hyde, when he had Black and the task was defense.
No one ever took a more rational, more ideal-theoretical approach to playing White than Fine.
It was not just that he was one of the great teachers having written Basic Chess Endings, The Middle Game in Chess and The Ideas Behind the Chess Openings and having brilliantly revised the seventh edition of Modern Chess Openings -- all classics -- he was also utterly committed to theory and proved how effective a weapon it could be in practice.


In Ukraine, Sigh of Relief Over Vote
Ukraine uttered a not-so-quiet sigh of relief today after the Russian Congress of People's Deputies ended after failing to oust Boris N. Yeltsin, the Russian President.
Ukrainian television carried most of the drama live, and many politicians said they couldn't tear themselves away.
Ukraine's political leaders have been watching the Russian power struggle with some anxiety and have made little secret of their support for Mr.
Yeltsin.


The Fragile, Beleaguered Biotechs
These have been bleak days for the biotechnology industry.
President Clinton's public criticism on high drug prices has prompted fears that health-care reform will weaken the industry's profitability.
Two high-profile drugs have failed to perform as expected in clinical trials.
And Amgen Inc., the industry's largest, most profitable company, recently reported a slowdown in sales and earnings growth.


Canadian Club Shifts To Minneapolis Shop
Hiram Walker &amp; Sons in Detroit said yesterday that it had selected CME KHBB Advertising in Minneapolis to handle the creative portion of its Canadian Club whisky account in North America.
The account, with billings estimated at $5 million, was handled by EJL Advertising in Chicago for the last five years.


U.S. Agents Begin Inquiry On Plane That Crashed
A small twin-engine plane that plunged into an industrial complex here on Sunday afternoon, killing all six people aboard, encountered trouble before reaching its assigned altitude, officials said today.
What crippled the six-seat Piper Aztec almost immediately after leaving Teterboro Airport remained a mystery as investigators began looking for causes of the crash, including the possibility of clogged fuel lines, engine malfunction or overloading.


Abortion Clinics Seek Doctors but Find Few
Susan Hill is looking for a doctor to replace David Gunn at the Columbus, Ga., abortion clinic where he had worked until he was shot to death earlier this month.
She has been telephoning every family practitioner between Columbus and Atlanta, including a few who have retired.
So far, only one doctor has said he might be interested -- if he can convince his wife that he will not also be killed.
But that does not surprise Ms.
Hill, who oversees eight clinics, including the one in Columbus.


Theater in Review
Back to Bacharach and David  Club 53 New York Hilton Avenue of the Americas and 53d Street Music by Burt Bacharach and lyrics by Hal David; directed by Kathy Najimy; set by Peter Rogness; costumes by David Loveless; lighting by Maura Sheridan; production stage manager, Todd Gajdusek; musical staging by Javier Velasco; assistant director, Scott Alan Evans.
Presented by Daryl Roth, Hal Luftig, Alan D. Perry, Jim David and Ms.
Najimy.
WITH: Melinda Gilb, Steve Gunderson, Sue Mosher and Lillias White.
Three decades ago, Burt Bacharach and Hal David began creating a series of hits for Dionne Warwick that fused the worlds of Cole Porter and Motown in songs so supercharged they threatened to jump out of their skins.
And in "Back to Bacharach and David," Steve Gunderson, a gifted performer and arranger, has stitched about 30 of these songs into a spirited musical tribute that has the added charm of not taking itself too seriously.


Giants Want Taylor for a Year; He Wants More
The Giants and Lawrence Taylor took their first step toward a reunion yesterday and, after the 90-minute negotiating session, one thing was clear: the team wants the 34-year-old linebacker for one more season but Taylor is not satisfied with a contract of that length.
The meeting was between General Manager George Young of the Giants and Steve Rosner, Taylor's agent, and was their first this off season, as Taylor recovers from the Achilles' tendon injury that ended his 1992 season on Nov. 8.


Advertising; Some Advice for Bartenders On Miller's New Clear Brew
An open letter to bartenders:
By now, you have probably read that the Miller Brewing Company is introducing a clear beer this week.
And by now, all those head-scratching questions about what makes a beer clear and why on earth a customer would want one are probably growing bothersome.


Court Supports Editor on Rights to Dead Sea Text
In a verdict that could have significant implications for future research on the Dead Sea Scrolls, a Jerusalem court ruled today that an Israeli professor had a copyright on his reconstruction of one of the most important of the ancient Jewish manuscripts.
The District Court awarded Dr.
Elisha Qimron of Ben Gurion University in Beersheba $44,000 in damages for infringement of copyright by the publisher of a book that included, without permission or credit, his deciphering of one of the 2,000-year-old scrolls.
Dr.
Qimron had sought $200,000.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Monday about Colors, a magazine published by Benetton, the clothing company, described the models on the cover of the spring/summer issue incorrectly.
They are a black woman and a white man.


New Wireless Phone System Introduced
It costs a lot more than your average telephone as much as $2,500 to install -- but Southwestern Bell and Panasonic introduced a new wireless telephone system today that works like a cordless phone in an office building and a cellular phone out on the street.
Called Freedom Link, the new system marks the first commercial product that comes close to letting a person use the same pocket-sized telephone regardless of location.


Maybe Maytag Should Give Away Cash?
In the United States, top executives lose their jobs when their companies sell too little.
In Britain, it can happen when their companies sell too much.
Three senior executives of the Maytag Corporation in Europe lost their jobs yesterday after a poorly thought-out promotion offering free travel in exchange for appliance purchases attracted too many takers and forced the company to take a surprise pretax charge against earnings of $48.8 million.


Corrections
A Critic's Notebook article on Saturday about the news media misstated the ownership history of The New York Post in some copies.
Robert Maxwell never owned it.


Officer Indicted in Killing
A parole officer who is accused of shooting and killing his estranged wife and wounding two bystanders in Brooklyn Family Court was arraigned yesterday on murder and other charges.
The four-count indictment returned by a grand jury accuses the officer, Max Almonor, of murder, assault and reckless endangerment in the March 12 shooting in a crowded fifth-floor room at the courthouse.
Mr.
Almonor, 52, entered a plea of not guilty before Justice Nicholas Coffinas of State Supreme Court and was remanded back to prison.


Sensing the Spirit In All Things, Seen and Unseen
LAURA ESQUIVEL glided through the throng near the front door of Spago smelling a little of sandalwood incense.
She wasn't even wearing her favorite evening dress, the white satin robe that had billowed around her ankles on similar evenings in Manhattan the previous fall.
She was wearing a skirt and cashmere sweater and the bemused, faintly bewildered look of an innocent abroad.
Still, the Armani sea parted for Ms.
Esquivel, the 42-year-old Mexican novelist and screenwriter.
No one knew that her movie "Like Water for Chocolate" had opened that night in Los Angeles.
The crowd moved because even in demure attire, Ms.
Esquivel looks like the high priestess in a particularly baroque deck of tarot cards.
Hollywood wasn't about to stand in her way.


3 Seen in Legal Circles As Solid, Tough and Fair; Zachary W. Carter
If Zachary W. Carter becomes the United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York, he will be heading the Justice Department office where he began his career in 1975 as an assistant United States attorney, fresh out of New York University Law School.
Yesterday in the Federal courthouse in Brooklyn, where the United States Attorney for the Eastern District is based -- and where Mr.
Carter has been a magistrate judge for the last two years -- defense lawyers used words like "fair" and "balanced" in describing Mr.
Carter.


The Blame for Empire's Mess
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield has run up huge losses, provided poor service to some large corporate clients, spent millions on perquisites for its top officials and handed lucrative contracts to directors and other insiders.
That's an astonishingly bad record, yet Empire has proceeded with seeming impunity.
Placing blame can be a dizzying exercise.
Empire, which is required to offer health insurance to any applicant, blames its high costs on unfair competition by commercial insurers who are allowed to siphon away its healthy customers.
The commercial insurers blame mismanagement by Empire and loose supervision by the New York Superintendent of Insurance, Salvatore Curiale.
Mr.
Curiale says he's not allowed to control Empire's management and, besides, Empire's downfall is due to the poor economy.


Fewer Killer Dresses at the Oscars
DRESSES were reserved for women at this year's Academy Awards.
After enduring weeks of speculation about what he might wear to Monday night's ceremony, Jaye Davidson, nominated as best supporting actor for his role in "The Crying Game," appeared in a plain black dinner jacket, no shirt, with his hair pulled in a chignon. (The camera showed him only seated, disappointing television viewers curious about the full effect of his ensemble.) The decidedly androgynous outfit took drag a step further.
Call it the men's look for women, but on a man.


Public &amp; Private; But Not Both
No one who sat in the New Jersey courtroom in which an appellate panel heard arguments on her case last month could have been surprised when the conviction of Margaret Kelly Michaels was overturned.
The words "retrial" and "reversal" rang in the big bright room like the sound of a gavel striking the bench.
It was a bad sign for the prosecutors, who won the case against Ms.
Michaels in 1988 after a nine-month trial.
When it was over, a jury had found the defendant guilty of spending nap time at the Wee Care Day Nursery in Maplewood performing sex acts on the kids in her care, licking peanut butter off little bodies and organizing naked games.


Cash Refunds For Big Delays By Derailment
Hoping to convince riders that it is serious about improving service, the Long Island Rail Road said yesterday that it would give cash refunds to commuters who were seriously delayed by a freight-train derailment earlier this month.
Although the railroad has given refunds in the past for halts in service caused by a storm or a strike, officials say it is the first time that they will compensate riders in cash for a delay.


INSIDE
Wachtler Agrees to Jail Time
After on-again, off-again negotiations, lawyers now say Sol Wachtler, the former Chief Judge, will plead guilty today to a threat to kidnap and serve about a year in prison.
Page B5.
When Law and Science Clash
The Supreme Court grappled with the question of how a judge decides when a scientific theory is sound enough to be admitted as evidence.
Page A19.
Italian Scandal Widens
Italy's Finance Minister resigned, the sixth member of the Cabinet named in June to be implicated in a corruption scandal.
Page A3.
Among the First Pink Slips
I.B.M.'s decision to impose its first layoffs hit home yesterday for 4,000 workers in East Fishkill.
Page B1.
What Are They Even Called?
Like the defunct empire they study, American Sovietologists are in disarray.
Education, page B8.


Lawyer and Cult Leader Meet for 2d Straight Day
Federal agents allowed a well-known Houston lawyer to meet today with the leader of the Branch Davidian cult, David Koresh, the second day of talks with his legal counsel in the monthlong standoff.
Speaking to reporters between morning and afternoon meetings at the compound, the lawyer, Dick DeGuerin, would say only that he was "very hopeful" of resolving the situation.
"My client wants everybody to be safe," Mr.
DeGuerin said.
"And so do I."


CLINTON BACKS OFF FROM POLICY SHIFT ON FEDERAL LANDS
Bowing to warnings from Western senators that they might oppose his economic program, President Clinton has backed away from proposing a major change in the way Federal land is managed, Administration officials said today.
Coming a month after the White House suggested drastic changes in policies that have encouraged development in the West for more than a century, the turnabout was a significant defeat for environmentalists.


Puck's Seder At Spago: As Traditional As Gefilte Fish With Cayenne
THE horseradish was being ground by hand.
The haroseth was marinating.
The eggs had already been roasted in the pizza oven.
On a sunny morning in April 1992, Wolfgang Puck was up to his elbows in Passover gefilte fish at Spago, his celebrity-hangout restaurant off Sunset Boulevard.


Israel Closes Off Occupied Areas After Violence
With Israel reeling from its worst wave of Arab violence in years, including the shooting deaths of two policemen this morning, the Government indefinitely closed the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip today.
The Israelis also relaxed the rules under which their soldiers may fire at armed Palestinians.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin went on national television tonight to urge that Israelis stand firm in "an all-out war against terrorism." But he also acknowledged what everyone here already knew, that the country was "in the midst of a difficult period" of lethal attacks, with no end in sight.


India Cancels Dam Loan From World Bank
The Indian Government today canceled much of a $450 million World Bank loan for a vast irrigation and hydroelectric project, because it cannot meet the bank's environmental and resettlement standards.
Bimal Jalan, India's representative on the bank's board, told his colleagues today that his country would not seek the remaining $170 million that had been authorized for the project, but not yet allocated, for the $3 billion project on the Narmada River, in the drought-prone northwest part of the country.


Reviews/Fashion; Klein's CK Line Looks Hipness Right in the Eye
THE heads of major department stores and the top fashion editors and critics lined up at the shrine of the secondary line this week: Calvin Klein's CK show, and Donna Karan's DKNY presentation.
And well they might, since they are already hailing the collections as the saviors of retailing.
But that was where the similarity between the two shows ended.


Segregating Gays Takes A Step Backward
To the Editor:
President Clinton says he wouldn't rule out segregating American military troops by sexual orientation (front page, March 23).
Does that mean our armed forces might be organized on principles other than military considerations?
Does it mean returning to segregation in the military only a few decades after it was abolished for black troops?


Suspected Early Hiding Place Of AIDS Virus Is Confirmed
SCIENTISTS have confirmed their suspicion that the virus that causes AIDS hides in a patient's lymph nodes and similar tissue during an infection, and they say the knowledge could lead to a totally new approach in attacking the virus during its long latency period, when it may be most vulnerable.
The virus lies concealed for a decade or so, quietly seeding the destruction of the immune system, the researchers found.
The finding resoundingly solves a mystery of AIDS: where does the virus secrete itself during the decade or so after an initial infection when patients feel well and little virus can be detected in their blood?


New Heathcote Pact
Coach JUD HEATHCOTE of Michigan State will get a one-year contract extension, and his top assistant, TOM IZZO, will succeed him when he retires, under a plan announced yesterday.
JOEL FERGUSON, the chairman of the trustees, said the school's board of trustees will approve the plan.
"It's not a problem," he said.
"It's a done deal." (AP)


A New Orleans Monument to Strife Stirs Up More
The long battle of words over an obelisk in downtown New Orleans has escalated: The monument, a symbol of white supremacy that commemorates a bloody post-Civil War fight, is itself now under attack.
In the weeks since it was restored to its pedestal after three years in storage, the monument has mysteriously lost a support column and been wrapped three times in sheets.


Richard Diebenkorn, Lyrical Painter, Dies at 71
Richard Diebenkorn, one of the premier American painters of the postwar era, whose deeply lyrical abstractions evoked the shimmering light and wide-open spaces of California, where he spent virtually his entire life, died yesterday at his home in Berkeley.
He was 70.
The cause was respiratory failure after a long illness, said his dealer, Lawrence Rubin of M. Knoedler &amp; Company in Manhattan.


Cuts in Intelligence Budget Stay on Schedule
To the Editor:
In "Spooked Over Intelligence Cuts" (editorial, March 18), you state that I told the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence that I "could absorb a $1 billion cut in next year's budget but not much more -- a snub of Mr. Clinton's campaign pledge to find $7.5 billion in cuts over five years."


Reviews/Fashion; Clothes for Pageantry, Divas and Recyclers
FASHION is always a spectator sport: the models are celebrities, some editors are celebrities -- as are a few buyers -- and a rock star or two can be counted on to sneak into the audience.
But Betsy Johnson and Kalinka have perfected the art of fashion show as burlesque entertainment, and this season the staging didn't upstage the clothes.
Bawdy Betsy Johnson held a family Christmas pageant on her runway -- for a family that shares a penchant for nose rings instead of a surname.
In a Christmas pageant, when there aren't enough girls for the roles, the boys wear dresses.
So it was in Ms.
Johnson's campy sendup on Monday, which felt like a medieval play performed by a troupe of Woodstock holdouts.
Men and women dressed the same, and usually the men looked fresher in the outfits than the women did.


Christopher Signals a Tougher U.S. Line Toward Iran
In a sign that the Clinton Administration may take a more confrontational approach toward Iran than the Bush Administration, Secretary of State Warren Christopher branded the Teheran Government an "international outlaw" today because of what he called its support for international terrorism and its determination to develop nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction.
In other tough talk against Washington's Middle Eastern adversaries, Mr.
Christopher threatened Libya with an global oil embargo because of its refusal to hand over for trial two officials accused of carrying out the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jet.
And he insisted that the Clinton Administration was not softening its stance against Iraq's President, Saddam Hussein, by moving away from the Bush Administration's linkage of the trade embargo with the Iraqi leader's removal from power.


In Lower Manhattan, Orchids, Orchids and More Orchids


Fighter Wakes Up From Coma And Says He Feels Normal
Sergei Artemiev, the 24-year-old Russian-born lightweight contender, opened his eyes yesterday for the first time since being knocked unconscious in a bout in Atlantic City nine days ago.
"How do you feel?" his 23-year-old wife, Belina, asked in Russian at his bedside in the Atlantic City Medical Center.


Sunbeam in New Fight With Former Chairman
Majority shareholders of the Sunbeam-Oster Company and its ousted chairman rekindled their dispute yesterday, with the company saying Paul B. Kazarian had been removed from Sunbeam's board of directors and Mr.
Kazarian filing suit to reinstate himself as chairman of the company.
If the company prevails, Mr.
Kazarian will lose any position of influence he may have held since his dismissal in January as Sunbeam's chairman, chief executive and president.
The upheaval at the consumer products company has fueled one of the most intriguing corporate dramas of the year.


Nets Cry Foul and Get Petrovic on List
It has been a strange season for the Nets, and the latest maneuvering between the Nets and the league is no exception.
Guard Drazen Petrovic was put on the team's injured list today after the National Basketball Association granted the Nets a special hardship waiver, allowing them to have four players on the injured list.
Teams are normally allowed only three players on the list at one time.


Detecting Disastrous Air Leaks in Orbit
Air leaking from a tire or basketball can be troublesome.
But that could be disastrous for a space vehicle, particularly the proposed space station Freedom, which is to remain in orbit for years after it is launched later this decade.
So researchers at the Battelle Company's Pacific Northwest Laboratory are developing a system intended to help astronauts quickly detect leaks, which could then be plugged before much precious air is lost to the vacuum of space.


Review/Television; The Night Oscar Paid Some Attention to Women
When last seen at the end of the Academy Awards telecast on Monday night on ABC, Oscar was still looking sleek and undraped, despite the show's persistent efforts to put him in a dress.
Dedicating itself noisily to the Year of the Woman, this year's show missed no opportunity to emphasize Hollywood's feminine side, no matter how misconceived that opportunity might be.
There was, for instance, a quickie tribute to "93 winners or nominees written or co-written by women." But as luminaries were seen entering the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion, the background music was "Thank Heaven for Little Girls."
The show was determined to honor women as sanctimoniously as possible, provided it could retain the usual quota of dancing girls. (A writhing-cheesecake presentation of the Oscar-winning song from "Aladdin" suggested that the film's teen-age lovers had wandered into a bordello.) And the prevailing tone of condescension was established early on.
"Women have always made vital contributions to movies," intoned the academy's president, Robert Rehme, who pointed out that this year 36 women were nominated in 12 categories.
"That's not equality yet, but it's progress," he insisted as the audience offered weak applause.


Farrow's Lawyer Takes Aim at Doctor's Judgment
The Woody Allen-Mia Farrow custody trial entered the phase of linguistic trench warfare yesterday.
For most of a long, long day, Gerald Walpin, a lawyer for Ms.
Farrow, fought for square inches of territory, seeking to portray Dr.
Susan Coates, a clinical psychologist who treated Satchel Farrow, as a sloppy record keeper who was, as he put it, "mesmerized" by Mr.
Allen and gullible in accepting his version of Ms.
Farrow's behavior.
That was the text.
The subtext was language, as the vocabularies of the law became entangled with the strange dialect of psychotherapy, and Biblical notions of good and evil became bogged down in the mud of the social sciences.


Dow Advances by 2.17 in Moderate Trading
Investors continued yesterday to abandon their cyclical favorites of recent months for the consumer growth stocks that have fared so poorly this year.
Yesterday's turn toward companies that can resist a weak economy came after a disappointing report on consumer confidence.


Teller Machines Inspire a New Kiosk Business
Federal Express, the company that has thrived by relentlessly computerizing an idea older than the Pony Express, is now turning to automated bank teller machines for inspiration.
The new machines, which Federal Express plans to begin introducing in several big cities later this spring, would allow anybody with a credit card or prearranged account number to drop off an overnight letter or small package at a self-service kiosk.


Wine Talk
BARON ERIC DE ROTHSCHILD remarked recently that people seem to spend more time talking about Bordeaux wine than drinking it.
One suspects he was referring to connoisseurs, the people who buy wines like his Chateau Lafite-Rothschild.
Some collectors drink their wines, of course, but many others hold it to sell at a profit.
Others simply enjoy owning the wine and showing it off.
They say: "This stuff is worth $2,000 a case. I can't afford to drink it."


Michigan Couple Is Ordered to Return Girl, 2, to Biological Parents
In a wrenching battle over the custody of a 2-year-old girl, the Michigan Court of Appeals today concurred with the Iowa courts and ordered the Michigan couple who raised the child from infancy to return her to her biological parents in Iowa.
The court, in a 3-to-0 decision, ruledon the question of jurisdiction, not on the details of the case.
The court said Michigan lacked jurisdiction to decide what was in the best interest of the child and said the Michigan couple, Jan and Roberta DeBoer, had no legal claim to the child they set out to adopt as a newborn.


Krabbe's Ban Reduced
The drug-related suspension for KATRIN KRABBE, the former world sprint champion, was cut from four years to one yesterday by German track officials.
But a spokesman for the German track federation said she would not be able to run in this summer's world championships.
The German track federation, in reducing Krabbe's ban, said she could compete after Aug. 13, the same day the biennial track and field championships begin in Stuttgart.


Eating Well
SHOCK and dismay greeted a Louis Harris survey report this month that found that fewer Americans were eating as well or exercising as much as they did in the 1980's.
Combine these findings with recent articles that said that food companies have been disappointed in their sales of low-fat, no-fat and "light" foods; that sales of bacon have increased, and that manufacturers are introducing more and more high-fat products and some have concluded that eating healthy is just one more fad destined to take its place beside the Hula-Hoop, bouffant hair and oat bran muffins.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.  Record Loss for Senators
Ottawa tied a National Hockey League record by losing, 6-4, to the Pittsburgh Penguins for the Senators' 37th straight road loss.
The expansion Senators, who have yet to win on the road, have actually lost 39 games away from home, but the N.H.L. doesn't count their two neutral-site games as road games.
The expansion Capitals set the consecutive-loss road record in 1974-75, losing 39 road games over all in an 8-67-5 season.
Larry Murphy and Ron Francis each scored two goals and Mario Lemieux added another as Pittsburgh won its 11th consecutive game. (AP) TENNIS Garrison-Jackson Loses


Shrink Bosnia to Save It
The Vance-Owen plan for peace in the former Yugoslavia is already a failure.
The Bosnian Muslims dislike it and have accepted it grudgingly.
The Serbians thumb their noses at it: their response is expressed in the horrors they are inflicting in Srebrenica and the rest of eastern Bosnia.
Only the Croatians have endorsed the plan with any enthusiasm.
Yet the need for peace is more urgent than ever.
Without it, the murder of Bosnia's Muslims will continue and the war will likely spread back to Croatia and onward to Kosovo.
This carries with it the threat of escalation beyond Yugoslavia's borders.


Italian Scandal Widens; Another Minister Quits Under Cloud
Italy's Finance Minister resigned today after magistrates probing the country's widening bribery and corruption scandal told him that he was under investigation on suspicion of receiving stolen goods.
Of the 24 ministers named to the Cabinet by Prime Minister Giuliano Amato when he came to power last June, six have now been implicated in the scandal.


No Headline
"No moment can better fulfill the aspirations of African-Americans than appointments to be judges and U.S. Attorneys, particularly in terms of fulfilling civil rights laws." -- JUDGE ZACHARY W. CARTER, nominated to become United States Attorney in Brooklyn.  [ A1:4. ]


Teaching Mr. Murdoch
It worked.
The staff of The New York Post wouldn't give in to the wacky self-aggrandizement of Abraham Hirschfeld and the divisiveness of Wilbert Tatum.
They borrowed computers, dominated the talk shows, broke all the rules, and their strivings paid off -- up to a point.
The noisemaking, attention-getting Post people created the climate for Rupert Murdoch's return.
If he proceeds with his purchase of The Post he may save it as a daily journal, but there should be no illusions that he is a healthy influence on American journalism.
Mr.
Murdoch's fans portray him as a brash, take-no-prisoners guy who has influenced papers around the country.
They also point to him as the father of tabloid television.


Theaters Reporting Losses
The nation's nonprofit professional theaters suffered substantial losses last season in government and corporate financing, as well as a decline in subscription audiences and cutbacks in staff, theater budgets and touring productions, according to a new study of the 1991-92 season.
The survey of 182 theater organizations was conducted by the Theater Communications Group, a Manhattan-based national service organization for nonprofit professional theaters.


3 Seen in Legal Circles As Solid, Tough and Fair; Mary Jo White
Those who know Mary Jo White professionally describe a solid, smart and tough lawyer whom they consider a superb candidate for United States Attorney.
Those who know her personally say all of the above and quickly add that she is anything but a legal grind.
"Many lawyers are narrow, she's not," James C. Goodale, a friend and former law partner of Ms.
White's, said yesterday, citing her desire to be in the stands at Yankee Stadium as much as to be in a law library.


Neighbors Differ on How to Chasten North Korea
More than two weeks after North Korea touched off one of Asia's most menacing nuclear challenges, its neighbors -- South Korea, Japan and China -- still disagree sharply about how to respond.
Concern is growing that a misstep could renew hostilities in one of the most heavily armed parts of the world.


Corrections
A dance review on Saturday about "Songs of Mahler," performed by Dance Theater of Harlem at the New York State Theater, misidentified the choreographer in some copies.
He is John Taras, not Michael Smuin.


Wachtler Agrees to Deal That Will Mean Jail Time
Sol Wachtler will plead guilty to a threat to kidnap the daughter of a former lover under an agreement with the Government reached yesterday, lawyers on both sides say.
Under the plea bargain, an extortion charge would be dropped and the former New York State Chief Judge would have to spend about a year in jail -- considerably less than he would have to serve if convicted under the original indictment.
Mr.
Wachtler was indicted last month on extortion and other charges resulting from his harassment of his former lover, Joy Silverman, a 45-year-old Republican fund-raiser from Manhattan, and her daughter.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Rupert Murdoch's return to The New York Post referred incorrectly to the paper's City Hall bureau chief.
He is David Seifman.


Among the First to Fall at I.B.M.; Thousands in Hudson Valley Told They Are Out of Work
When the beige phone rang early this morning at Anna Cassell's work station at the I.B.M. plant here, she asked a co-worker to answer because she was too scared to do it herself.
Just as Ms.
Cassell had feared, the voice on the line belonged to her manager, calling her into his office to say that she had been laid off after eight years of service to the computer maker, most recently in the testing, packaging and shipping departments.
Soon after, she was walking toward her car as a light mist fell, clutching a clear plastic bag filled with items from her locker.


Review/Recital; The Bringing Together Of Poet and Composer
In the best moments of her recital on Sunday afternoon at Alice Tully Hall, Renee Fleming illuminated that undefinable space between a song's text and its music where emotional connections are made that transcend both elements.
This kind of communication has to do only partly with vocal quality and technique, although it undoubtedly helps to begin with an attractive sound and to know how to use it.
The magic, though, is in discovering the chemistry between the poet and the composer and then adding the personal resonance that makes the singer seem an indispensable part of the amalgam.
Miss Fleming achieved that in several of the songs she offered.
In Brahms's "Lerchengesang," her smooth, slightly dark, gracefully weighted tone was ideal for the mystical imagery of Carl Candidus's text, and there was artfulness and subtlety in the way she shaped the lines, particularly ascending figures that tapered to a sweetly produced pianissimo.


Survivor Fights on for Human Rights
LIU QING talks pleasantly about the weather and smiles at the games children play as he commutes from his home in Rego Park.
He takes in the noise and color of this city with delight and only when you ask him will he talk about the four and a half years during which he was forced to sit without moving on an eight-inch-high stool for most of his waking hours in Weinan No. 2 Prison in Shaanxi Province in China.
But when you ask, it's clear he has not forgotten the details.
All together Mr.
Liu served 11 years for having advocated democratic change in what was known as China's Democracy Wall movement in 1979.
After the first six, which included beatings and isolation, he was placed on the stool, beaten if he moved a muscle.


Violent Campaign Ends as Jamaicans Choose a Leader


Campus Journal; Making History With 25,000 Students
Presidents, diplomats and generals come and go.
But for 45 years one constant in the field of American history has been the teaching of Sidney Fine at the University of Michigan.
By the university's estimate, Professor Fine, now 72, has taught 25,000 students since Thomas E. Dewey's loss to Harry S. Truman.
That works out to more than 278 a semester.
And while some professors at Michigan are more physically imposing, or more theatrical or more lenient when it comes to grades, none have a bigger following.


Review/Film; Two Oedipuses, One Clad in Guilt, The Other in Clay
There are two Oedipuses in the newly released film of Igor Stravinsky's opera "Oedipus Rex." One plays the traditional role, singing words adapted from Sophocles, words chronicling the downfall of the man who has given psychiatry its most potent myth.
The other is a Butoh dancer, Min Tanaka.
He is seemingly clad in layers of clay, wearing a stiff earthen mask, miming the doomed ruler's every gesture or enacting his history in formalized gestures.
He is a lifesize puppet, a mirror of Oedipus, the Theban king who is himself a sort of puppet, forced into a tragic snare set by the gods.
But as the horrifying truth of Oedipus's past comes to light, the clay shell around Mr.
Tanaka is shed, leaving a vulnerable, nearly naked man: the only human figure free of elaborate costume and cosmetic trappings in the entire film.
He who has been so blind to himself blinds himself.
We see shredded strips of blood-red ribbon hanging on his face.
Groping, with a blank stare, he stumbles under the scaffolding and ramps that compose the somber stage set, until he is walking knee-deep in a pool of dark water, surrounded by ghostly figures.
The chanting of the chorus has come to an end.
We watch the water dripping from above, then hear the sound of cleansing, pouring rain.
The king's almost primitive self-sacrifice has made him human; Thebes's plague is brought to an end.


Executive Shifts At Two Agencies
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi and D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles have announced changes involving top management.
At Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, Nadeen Peterson, a vice chairman and executive creative director at the New York office, has been promoted to the new position of worldwide creative director.
And Harvey Hoffenberg, who had a title identical to Ms.
Peterson's, has been promoted to the new position of chief creative officer at the New York office.


Pleading Poverty, an Insurer Finds High Life Is a Handicap
As Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield struggles with staggering financial losses -- more than $250 million in the last two years -- officials of the nonprofit health insurer maintain a decades-old tradition of high corporate living that belies the company's dire financial situation.
The tone is set at the top.
Albert A. Cardone, Empire's chairman and chief executive, always travels first class, has a chauffeur-driven Lincoln Town Car and had a cellular telephone installed, at Empire's expense, in his boat near his vacation home in Florida.
His salary has climbed to $600,000 from the $375,000 he was paid in 1987, when he became chairman.


Yield Slide Slows for C.D.'s And Bank Money Accounts
The average yields that banks are offering on money market accounts and certificates of deposit for the week beginning today are down from the previous reporting period.
But the rates are falling at a slower rate than in previous weeks.
Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Bank Rate Monitor, says domestic and international factors are behind the continuing slide in deposit rates.


Book Notes
The Stuff of Legend
Michael Collins is, by many accounts, a gifted young writer whose stories about Ireland paint a vivid and wretched picture of his native country.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Mar. 26
Mar. 19
Mar. 27
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
6.7
6.7
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
2.8
Gasoline stocks
231.1
233.0
222.0
Distillate stocks
98.7
101.5
97.8
Crude imports, daily
7.0
5.4
5.1
Product imports, daily
2.3
1.6
2.1
Crude stocks
339.0
330.9
342.6
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
86.5
86.7
86.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


A Nation of Watchers Forgets How to Play
DO people really have less free time than they once did, or do they just feel that way because they try to cram so much into their lives?
Well-respected research seems to point in contradictory directions.
But one aspect of time use that gets less attention is whether people find satisfaction in their leisure time, whether it's 1 hour a day or 10.


Irish Debate How to End Strife in the North
Two days after a large demonstration here in favor of peace in Northern Ireland and against the violence of the Irish Republican Army, the mood in this country has returned to one of quarrels among political leaders over how to end the civil strife in the north that has killed more than 3,000 people since 1969.
Today, the Dublin Government confirmed that it opposed a proposal by a prominent Northern Ireland official, John Hume, to put a peace settlement to a referendum in the predominantly Roman Catholic Irish Republic and in the British province in the north, where Protestants are the majority.


Study Sees Rising Distress For Landlords
The number of privately owned rental apartment buildings in New York City showing signs of financial distress has risen sharply in the last five years, an indication that a new wave of abandonment may be around the corner, a study has concluded.
The study, by the Community Service Society of New York and the Rockefeller Brothers Fund, estimates that 140,000 rental units -- one out of six rental buildings in the city -- is either behind in taxes, or mortgage payments or both.


Sports of The Times; You Can Go Poof With Woof
WOOFING can backfire.
A few years ago in a tight game in the final minute of the West Regional of the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament, Paris McCurdy of Ball State stepped to the free-throw line.
Greg Anthony of Nevada-Las Vegas, hoping to throw him off his game, sauntered behind him and said quietly, "You're gonna shoot another one of those bricks, man." McCurdy said, "We'll see." Anthony said, "Your mama can shoot better free throws than you." McCurdy said, "Ain't got no mama."
A strange look came over Anthony's face and he walked away silently.
A little smile appeared on McCurdy's face -- for, in fact, he did have a mother.
He also sank both free throws.
He later said that the discussion with Anthony relaxed him, having the opposite effect than Anthony had intended.
Ball State lost the game, 69-67, but it wasn't because of McCurdy's foul shooting -- he hit 4 for 4 in the game -- and it presumably wasn't because of Anthony's mouth.


Budget Politics Exposed in Fight for Supercollider
While posing for television cameras as tightfisted accountants, lawmakers are fighting behind the scenes to protect one expensive program or another as Congress votes on President Clinton's plans for cutting the Federal deficit.
Like land mines half hidden in the sand, these programs could block the progress of Mr.
Clinton's economic plan.
Removing them means grappling with complex combinations of local and political interests.


Still Wet, but Flooding Threat Recedes


Freshman May Be Answer To Maine's Title Question
When Paul Kariya came to Maine last summer as a freshman hockey player from North Vancouver, British Columbia, he understood perfectly why he was there.
The goal for the hockey zealots of Maine was a national championship, one that has eluded the Black Bears since the team became a Division I power in 1987.
That crown had become a crusade for the driving, ambitious coach, Shawn Walsh.


What's Washing Up on Coasts Can Hurt
To the Editor:
In the summer of 1988, when the sea spewed syringes and sewage onto our nation's shores, ocean dumping was halted.
"Sea Dumping Ban: Good Politics, but Not Necessarily Good Policy" (front page, March 22) reports debate on the cost-effectiveness of such measures.
Meanwhile, our coasts face assaults from industrial pollutants, fertilizers, eroding soil, acid rain and sewage, plus pesticides and other chemicals, posing enormous long-term health threats.


Knicks Drag a Bit But Perk Up For Victory
It took one half for the Knicks to overcome fatigue and jet lag.
Once they did, they easily overcame the Sacramento Kings.
Taking control with a 15-1 run in the fourth quarter, New York waltzed to a 109-87 victory last night at Madison Square Garden.


Appalled by Attacks on The Amsterdam News
To the Editor:
Like many other members of the African-American community, I am appalled and outraged by "The Post Bites Back" (editorial, March 17), which states that in the March 16 edition of The New York Post, Wilbert A. Tatum "was rightly upbraided for race-baiting and anti-Semitism at the once proud Amsterdam News."


Appalled by Attacks on The Amsterdam News; For Jewish Causes
To the Editor:
Wilbert A. Tatum is married to a Jewish woman, his daughter was bas mitzvahed, and he was recently invited to a meeting with Shimon Peres.
His tiny Amsterdam News probably has more Jewish writers than The Post has black writers.
He paid his own way to Germany to protest President Reagan's reconciliation with the dead Nazis at Bitburg, and he has a reputation for aiding Soviet and other Jews.
Mr.
Tatum, in a demonstration of grace under fire, answered his critics with, "I have probably stood on the firing line for Jews and Jewish causes more than most Jews." WILLIAM LOREN KATZ New York, March 23, 1993


Health Articles by Fax
Beginning today, The New York Times has announced, readers can order copies of articles that appeared in the Personal Health column for delivery by fax or mail.
The charge is $3.95 per article.
Articles about computer-related subjects were already available.
Articles can be ordered by telephone 24 hours a day, using a touch-tone phone.
To order articles by mail, or to get a list of articles available through the service, the phone number is (800) 551-0159.
To order faxed articles, the number is (900) 737-4446.


Cheaney Is Honored
CALBERT CHEANEY, the Big Ten and Indiana career leading scorer, received the Eastman Award yesterday as the top player in the country.
Cheaney was selected by the National Association of Basketball Coaches.
He will receive the award during a dinner April 21 in New York.


METRO DIGEST
EMPIRE'S IN-HOUSE LARGESS BELIES CRISIS As Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield struggles with staggering financial losses -- more than $250 million in the last two years -- officials of the nonprofit health insurer maintain a decades-old tradition of high corporate living that belies the company's dire financial situation.
A1.
Files that disclose Empire's lobbying efforts leave out a significant name: Norman Adler.
B6.


Robertson Case Award
New York's highest court yesterday awarded $7.5 million to a former ballerina who was paralyzed in a 1983 car accident with ANDRE ROBERTSON, the former Yankee shortstop.
The 5-0 decision by the Court of Appeals upheld lower court verdicts on behalf of SHENIKWA DAWN NOWLIN, 33.
The courts said both the city and Robertson were responsible for the wreck, which left Nowlin a paraplegic and ruined Robertson's baseball career.


F.B.I. Agents Seize Blast Suspect's Printer
Federal investigators seized a computer printer yesterday from the office of a chemical engineer who the authorities say is tied to a letter claiming responsibility for the World Trade Center bombing, the suspect's lawyer said.
But the lawyer, Leonard Wein glass, said the printer taken from the New Jersey office of his client, Nidal A. Ayyad, was of a type "which obviously did not print this letter."


Reviews/Fashion; For Evening Wear, Various Degrees of Retro
THE era of the ball gown faded with the 80's.
Evening wear for the 90's is simpler, more discreet, more like daytime styles in dressy fabrics.
Three shows early this week served up such clothes, each in a totally different way.
Norma Kamali was inspired by the Victorian, Edwardian and Flapper eras.
Mark Eisen took a trip back to the 70's.
But the most successful show -- because it was the most modern -- was from the team of Mark Badgley and James Mischka.


Real Estate; In Los Angeles, older office buildings are making a comeback.
OLDER office buildings are often at a disadvantage in this city, where many companies seem to believe that the newer a building is the better.
Yet a group of renovated buildings in the Miracle Mile district is countering that conventional wisdom by attracting corporate tenants at rents on a par with newer buildings.
The largest lease signed in recent months involved the Screen Actors Guild, which will soon move from Hollywood to 80,000 square feet in the Museum Square building on Miracle Mile, which is the stretch of Wilshire Boulevard immediately east of Beverly Hills.


Review/Music; Song Cycle of Rilke Poems
Worthy sentiments went into Geoffrey Menin's song cycle "Ich lebe mein Leben" and into its presentation on Thursday evening for the benefit of the AIDS Outreach Program of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine and for Classical Action: Performing Arts Against AIDS.
But the music quickly reduces sentiment to sentimentality.
Mr.
Menin is a partner in the law firm of Levine Thall &amp; Plotkin and a trained pianist as well as a composer.
"Ich lebe mein Leben" ("I Live My Life") sets eight poems by Rainer Maria Rilke in the original German in various styles, from unaccompanied folklike to hymnlike.
The idiom is squarely tonal, a smooth and sophisticated pop sound that aspires to something loftier but levels off at new age.


House Rejects Big Cuts In Committee Spending
Rejecting Republican demands for a deep reduction in staff, the Democratic-controlled House voted today to cut spending on its committees this year by only 5 percent below the 1992 level.
Virtually all the savings, which require no further approval, will come from the abolition of four small "select" committees, panels that hold hearings and otherwise review policy but do no legislating.


Pleading Poverty, an Insurer Finds High Life Is a Handicap
As Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield struggles with staggering financial losses -- more than $250 million in the last two years -- officials of the nonprofit health insurer maintain a decades-old tradition of high corporate living that belies the company's dire financial situation.
The tone is set at the top.
Albert A. Cardone, Empire's chairman and chief executive, always travels first class, has a chauffeur-driven Lincoln Town Car and had a cellular telephone installed, at Empire's expense, in his boat near his vacation home in Florida.
His salary has climbed to $600,000 from the $375,000 he was paid in 1987, when he became chairman.


Egg Board Review
The American Egg Board said on Monday that it had selected six contenders to participate in the review for its $3 million account, which has been handled by CME KHBB Advertising in Chicago, for the last 16 years.
Louis B. Raffel, American Egg Board's president in Park Ridge, Ill., confirmed a report of the review this week in Adweek.
He identified the contenders vying for the account as the incumbent and five other agencies: Chicago-based Ayer Inc. and Cramer-Kresselt; New York-based Grey Advertising and Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor, and Davis Ball &amp; Colombatto, in Los Angeles.
Mr.
Raffel said presentations are scheduled for mid-May and a decision is expected by July.


Ritz-Carlton's Keys to Good Service
Shortly after 8 A.M., when many Atlantans are just leaving for work, 23 new employees of the Ritz-Carlton in the city's Buckhead section are getting the hotel chain's philosophy drummed into them.
"You serve, but you are not servants," says Rebecca Powell, the training manager, who conducts most of the two-day orientation for newcomers that is held each week.
"You are ladies and gentlemen serving ladies and gentlemen."


Crews Drunk At the Wheel, Inquiry Says
Tim Crews was legally drunk when the boat he was driving rammed a pier after dark, killing him and another Cleveland Indians pitcher, an investigation of the accident revealed yesterday.
Col.
Bob Edwards, law enforcement director for the Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission, said in a report of the investigation that tests indicated that Crews had a blood-alcohol content of 0.14 percent.
Under Florida law, the operator of a boat is legally drunk when his blood alcohol content reaches 0.10 percent.


Soviet Turmoil Upends Scholars of Old Reality
Like the now-defunct empire it sought to understand, the field once known as Sovietology is undergoing a painful transition.
Once heavily subsidized and often first among equals in the American academic world, it is now a discipline in turmoil.
The world some professors thought they understood has become increasingly unpredictable.
The institutions they devoted their lives to decoding have vanished.


A.T.&amp; T. AWARDED POLISH TELECOMMUNICATIONS CONTRACT
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company, continuing to build its market presence in an Eastern Europe long dominated by West European companies, said yesterday that it had won a $100 million contract for telecommunications equipment from the Polish telephone company, Telekomunickacja Polska.
A.T.&amp; T. beat out companies like Siemens of Germany and Alcatel of France.
The contract is for 200,000 digital lines as well as optical transmission systems, network management systems and fiber cable equipment for the city of Gdansk.


Study Says Prescription Prices Are Falling
A sharp increase in discounting by drug makers is driving down prescription drug prices, according to a study of the pharmaceuticals industry announced yesterday by the Boston Consulting Group, a management consulting firm.
The study said the industrywide average discount from manufacturers' list prices had quadrupled to 16 percent last year, compared with 4 percent in 1987.


Jets Are in Quandary Over 2 Defensive Ends
It seems unlikely that Reggie White, the Eagles' defensive end and premier free agent, will make a decision before tomorrow on which team he wants to play for.
That will force the Jets, one of his ardent suitors, to make a decision on whether to keep defensive end Marvin Washington.
Last week Washington agreed to a three-year, $3 million offer with the Seattle Seahawks.
The Jets must match that offer by tomorrow or lose Washington.


New French Cabinet Named, Including New and Old Faces
A day after his appointment, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur named his Cabinet tonight, tapping fresh faces and experienced politicians from the conservative coalition that swept into office in parliamentary elections on Sunday.
Mr.
Balladur, a soft-spoken former Economy Minister who must now "cohabit" with the Socialist President, Francois Mitterrand, gave the key post of Foreign Minister to Alain Juppe, the 47-year-old secretary general of the neo-Gaullist Rally for the Republic.


Review/Film Festival; Night Passing for Day
The setting is the former Soviet Socialist Republic of Georgia, a place where, according to Aleko Tsabadze's "Night Dance," the sun never shines.
One can tell the difference between day and night because night is somewhat darker.
The only warmth in the landscape is the kind that burns: the blast furnace of a steel mill not working at full capacity.
Vacant lots are garbage dumps.
Houses are dank.
People wear long overcoats and walk with their heads down.
Men need shaves.
Every woman's face is pinched.
A little girl sits on a small pot, constipated.
This is the devastated world of "Night Dance," which expresses its outrage about life in one corner of the old Soviet Union through poetic evocation.
"Night Dance" is so strong and unremitting that it becomes an extension of that world, which is probably just what the film maker intended.


U.S. Aided and Abetted Salvador Abuses; Dare Call It Treason
To the Editor:
"How U.S. Actions Helped Hide Salvador Human Rights Abuses" (front page, March 21) quotes the response of Elliott Abrams, Under Secretary of State for Latin American Affairs in the relevant period, to the United Nations report: "This is an allegation that the entire top rank of the Foreign Service is filled with liars. It is a reprehensible McCarthyite charge."


Absent Clifford Is a Big Presence In B.C.C.I. Trial
The state bribery and fraud trial involving the defunct Bank of Credit and Commerce International began yesterday in a small crowded courtroom in Manhattan and opening statements by prosecution and defense lawyers made it clear that Clark M. Clifford, the former Defense Secretary and adviser to Presidents, would be prosecuted, in effect, in absentia.
Mr.
Clifford is in a hospital in Washington recovering from heart bypass surgery and was deemed too sick to stand trial.
But his co-defendant and law partner, Robert A. Altman, faced the jury as the two-year-old scandal involving the internationally political and influential bank finally reached a courtroom.
Great Financial Fraud
B.C.C.I., with offices in 70 countries, was controlled by Middle Eastern interests, though it was chartered in the banking havens of Luxembourg and the Cayman Islands -- beyond the reach of any central bank.
It was shut down in 1991 after regulators around the world accused it of stealing billions of dollars from depositors and funneling the money to bank insiders.
Its activities are said to be among the greatest financial frauds in history.


After 5 Years in Prison, Day-Care Worker Is Free on Bail
Margaret Kelly Michaels, the former day-care teacher whose conviction in the sexual abuse of 19 children was overturned on appeal, was freed today on bail after five years in prison.
In a packed courtroom here, Judge Joseph A. Falcone of State Superior Court set bail at $75,000.
Assistant Essex County Prosecutor Glenn Goldberg had requested $250,000.


New Torture Charged Against Indonesia
To the Editor:
"Indonesia, Deservedly Rebuked" (Topics of The Times, March 17) commends the Clinton Administration's policy change on the situation in the former Portuguese colony of East Timor.
The Administration, unlike its predecessor, supported a resolution at the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva expressing "deep concern" over human rights abuses in East Timor.


Padres Trade Jackson To Jays for 2 Outfielders
The San Diego Padres traded outfielder DARRIN JACKSON to the Toronto Blue Jays yesterday for outfielders DEREK BELL and STONEY BRIGGS .
The Padres also sent an undisclosed amount of cash to Toronto.
Jackson, 29, hit .249 with 17 home runs and a career-high 70 runs batted in last season.
He is expected to start in left field for Toronto.


Ban Lifted on Speaking Fees for U.S. Workers
A Federal appeals court ruled today that employees in the executive branch of Government may accept payment for writing articles and giving speeches unrelated to their work, and it struck down a ban on such payments as a violation of the First Amendment.
The court said the ban, included in a 1989 ethics law, imposed excessive limits on the free-speech rights of such employees.
Judge Stephen F. Williams of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit said the ban was "unduly overinclusive" because it applied to speaking or writing about topics unrelated to an employee's job.


Peter Agostini, Sculptor, 80, Dies; Ranged From Pop to Traditional
Peter Agostini, a figurative sculptor whose works were widely exhibited, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old.
His daughter Diane Agostini Whelan said he died of a heart ailment combined with diabetes.


Coleman Adds a Literal Punch to Nets
Nothing like a few Derrick Coleman haymakers to break up what had been a lethargic, sleepy game between the Nets and Philadelphia 76ers.
The 10,611 fans at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight were awakened from their naps this time not from a Coleman monster dunk, but from a Coleman left hook.
In a battle of undermanned teams, the Nets were 91-77 winners over the 76ers, who played without guard Jeff Hornacek (irritation in his left knee).
New Jersey was without the injured Drazen Petrovic and later Coleman, who along with Armon Gilliam of the Sixers, was ejected in the third quarter for fighting.
The game might have been the main event, but the night's card also included Coleman versus Gilliam.


Former Celtic Indicted
MARCUS WEBB, who was released by the Boston Celtics hours before being arrested on an aggravated rape charge March 18, was indicted on two counts of rape yesterday.
The indictment by a Middlesex grand jury was in connection with an alleged incident on March 4 involving a woman at Webb's apartment in suburban Waltham, the Middlesex District Attorney's office said.


Haiti's Ruling Elite Reach 'Decisive Moment'
As expectations rise for a solution to this country's political crisis, so is the anxiety among Haiti's small but powerful elite.
From the swank restaurants that hug the mountainsides around the capital to the air-conditioned mansions of the rich, the swagger of nearly 200 years of dominance is giving way to recrimination, introspection and vows of defiance in the face of renewed determination by the international community to restore Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Islanders in 4th Place After Defeating Flyers
First things first: The Islanders are a fourth-place team.
They gained at least a temporary hold on the final playoff berth in the Patrick Division with a 2-1 victory over the Philadelphia Flyers tonight at Nassau Coliseum.
If this doesn't seem significant, consider the context.
The Coliseum fans did.
"Fifth-place Rangers!" they chanted in the final seconds of a tense and well-played game.
"Fifth-place Rangers!"


Still Big Blue
Remember all those stories a few months ago about how, any day soon, Microsoft and Intel would be worth more than I.B.M.?
It still might happen, but it hasn't yet.
I.B.M. has bounced off its lows, keeping its market value several billion dollars higher than Microsoft's or Intel's, which linger below their highs.


3 Seen in Legal Circles As Solid, Tough and Fair; Patrick Henry NeMoyer
Patrick Henry NeMoyer is described by his political friends -- and even his opponents -- as a hard-working lawyer and a pragmatic intellectual.
Since 1988, Mr.
NeMoyer, 40, has served as the Erie County Attorney, supervising 50 employees, including 20 lawyers, who handle all civil litigation for the county.


New York City Yields at 18-Year Low
New York City sold $758 million worth of bonds yesterday, with yields at the lowest level since the eve of the city's fiscal crisis 18 years ago.
The bonds will be used to refinance about $664 million of old, higher-interest-rate bonds.
The city is taking advantage of the sharp decline in interest rates since the Presidential election, which has brought long-term rates to their lowest levels since the 1970's.
The new bond issue is expected to help the city save about $100 million in interest costs in the fiscal years 1993 to 2000.


A Woman and a Black Proposed As U.S. Attorneys in New York
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan today recommended the appointment of the first woman and first black to be United States Attorneys in New York, and both candidates said they would put a greater emphasis than their predecessors on prosecuting civil rights cases.
Mr.
Moynihan said he would propose that President Bill Clinton nominate Mary Jo White, a seasoned prosecutor, to be the United States Attorney in Manhattan and Zachary W. Carter, a Federal magistrate and former criminal judge, to be the United States Attorney in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Moynihan also announced that he would recommend Patrick H. NeMoyer, the Erie County Attorney, to be the next United States Attorney in Buffalo.


Peter B. Mumford; Stage Manager, 48
Peter B. Mumford, a production stage manager for Broadway and Off Broadway shows, died on Sunday at Tisch Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 48 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was lymphoma and AIDS, his family said.


CHRONICLE
A tale of two careers: About a year and a half ago, the chairman of the genetics department at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons went to JONATHAN R. COLE, the university's provost, to announce that an exhaustive search for a world-class geneticist had produced the perfect candidate.
She was VIRGINIA E. PAPAIOANNOU, associate professor of pathology at the Tufts University School of Medicine in Boston.
There was only one hurdle to her appointment, Dr.
ARGIRIS EFSTRATIADIS, chairman of genetics at the College of Physicians and Surgeons, told Dr.
Cole.
Dr.
Papaioannou had a husband, a historian, who would need a position, too.


CHRONICLE
Another couple who forged what must be considered a highly successful professional partnership -- Dr.
WILLIAM H. MASTERS and VIRGINIA E. JOHNSON -- have ended their marriage but will continue to work together.
The pioneer researchers in the physiology of sex were granted a divorce earlier this month by Associate Judge Joseph A. Goeke 3d of the Circuit Court of St.
Louis County in Clayton, Mo.


Predominantly Gay Synagogue Won't March Without Banner
The trustees of a predominantly gay and lesbian synagogue who want to march in the annual Salute to Israel parade rejected a proposal yesterday that would have allowed them entry to the parade, but required them to march without any banner.
The dispute over the May 9 parade became public a week ago, even as both sides tried to avoid the wrenching debate that arose when a gay group tried to join the St.
Patrick's Day Parade.


Murdoch Reserves Option Of Changing Mind on Post
As they approach what may be tough negotiations with creditors and unions, lawyers for Rupert Murdoch said yesterday that he could still change his mind about repurchasing the bankrupt New York Post if he found it financially untenable.
"It is going to be a question of what is the cost of us getting The Post out of Chapter 11 and of operating it in the future," said Arthur Siskind, general counsel of Mr.
Murdoch's giant communications company, the News Corporation.
"There's nothing certain. The waiver is not certain. The deal with the union is not certain. If we did not think everything was achievable, we would not have gotten into this position, but we have a lot of work ahead of us in the next 60 days."


Big Role for Wildcats' Shortest Player
Kentucky Coach Rick Pitino likes to discover ways to build self-esteem in his players and then challenge them to use it to reach new heights.
It is one reason the Wildcats are in their 10th Final Four -- their first since 1984 -- and have beaten four tournament opponents by an average margin of 31 points.
Travis Ford, Kentucky's 5-foot-9-inch junior guard, was one of Pitino's special projects this season.


Macy's Meets Its Monthly Fiscal Goal
R.
H.Macy &amp; Company said yesterday that it met its monthly financial projections for the first time in 17 months in February.
The retailer, which is operating under bankruptcy protection, reported negative cash flow -- or earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization -- of $12.5 million, about $330,000 less than it had expected to lose during the month.
The company recently revised its cash flow projections for the fiscal year that ends in July to $207 million from the $244 million it estimated in November.


Corrections
An article on March 12 about bingo in New Jersey misidentified a Roman Catholic priest and the group with which he is affiliated.
The Rev.
Anthony Patrizio is superior of the brothers and priests at the headquarters of the order of the Missionaries of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary in Linwood.


Pay-Toilet Measure Is on Cuomo's Desk
The long, long wait for public pay toilets in New York City moved a step closer to an end as the State Senate approved legislation on Monday to allow New York City to install the toilets.
The Assembly adopted a similar bill last week, so the measure now goes to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo for his decision.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
On my way to work, late, I hopped into a cab.
Displayed on the back of the front seat were the words "May Peace Prevail on Earth." Before I was even settled, the driver turned around and asked, "May I tell you a wonderful story?" Looking at the sign and fearing some religious treatise, I said, "No, I'm in a bad mood." Silence.


Cairo Journal; Fury of Islam Dims Expatriate Sparkle on the Nile
Despite its congestion and pollution, heaps of garbage and bureaucratic ineptitude, Cairo offers many foreigners what their home countries do not: entrance into the upper echelons of society, legions of servants and the glow that the elite derive from privilege.
But the cocoon spun around most expatriates in Egypt is crumbling.
And the self-assuredness of the Europeans and the Americans, who socialize at hotels and clubs beyond the means of most Egyptians, has given way to fear.


Allen and Farrow Mute as Others Debate Their Judgment and Actions
It was like a scene out of one of Woody Allen's own movies: a judge, a lawyer and a psychologist offering their views in a Manhattan courtroom on such thorny questions as where to draw the line between bad judgment and evil, on such complex issues as personal accountability and morality and forgiveness.
And just about the only people who were without any lines were the director and the woman who used to be his favorite actress, Mia Farrow.
They sat mutely in the center of the courtroom yesterday, listening as the people all around them debated their actions and wrestled with how to explain them, as if they were all characters in an Allen film like "Crimes and Misdemeanors" that also dealt with questions of right and wrong.


Wickman and Militello Named Starters
Decisions, decisions.
When it comes to giving an answer about who will be the team's second baseman or the final two pitchers in the starting rotation or the fifth outfielder, the Yankees have been incredibly indecisive this spring.
Today, the Yankees finally made a critical decision, one that has haunted them for months, by designating Bob Wickman and Sam Militello as their fourth and fifth starters, which left Scott Kamieniecki exasperated and uncertain about his status.


Food Notes
Foraging in the Wild
On Sunday at 2 P.M. in Prospect Park in Brooklyn, Urban Park Rangers will lead a tour identifying edible wild plants, especially those with tender young shoots just emerging from the ground and at their tastiest in coming weeks.
The rangers will also explain the plants' uses.


Review/Television; On Public Defenders And Those Defended
"Rough Justice," tonight's offering from "48 Hours," begins as a report on public defenders, a substantial subject considering that three of every four people charged with a crime in the United States are defended by a lawyer paid for by taxes; it's a $1.5 billion annual business.
But soon the program is diverted, as television-magazine shows so often are, by a gory murder case.
The most pertinent material comes early, when the camera follows public defenders in Broward County, Fla., as they bustle from client to client, trying to reach some sort of plea bargain with the prosecutor to avoid the risk and expense of a trial.
The clients are not always grateful (one man complains as he is led away to jail that he did better when he paid for a lawyer), and the job is not a big money maker: $45,000 a year in Broward County.
But the work has its satisfactions for lawyers, like being in court every day and, as one says, affecting the fates of real people instead of corporate bottom lines.


William J. Calise; Lawyer, 88
William J. Calise, a New York lawyer for 60 years and a neighborhood advocate on the Lower East Side, died on Saturday at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation in Cleveland.
He was 88.
He lived in Hudson, Ohio, and had previously resided in Point Lookout, L.I.


Court Ruling Over Dividends Pains Albany
The United States Supreme Court handed New York State a sizable financial headache today by ruling for Delaware in a long-running dispute between the two states over unclaimed stock dividends.
Coming in the final hours of the state's fiscal year, the ruling complicated the last-minute budget negotiations in Albany.
Among the complications was the uncertainty about the size of the problem, which appeared to be in the hundreds of millions of dollars.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Consumers' spirits -- and spending -- dampened in March, weighed down by the prospect of higher taxes.
The Conference Board's confidence index fell a sharp six points.  [ Page D1. ]
The state B.C.C.I. trial began, with one of the defendants, Clark M. Clifford, being prosecuted in absentia.  [ A1. ]


Personal Health
ANN'S mother was getting desperate.
The 3-year-old girl, an easygoing, happy child who usually slept soundly through the night, was waking up several times during the night and had become whiny and irritable during the day, complaining often that her "bottom" and her "tummy" hurt.
Although fully toilet-trained, she was now holding back and refusing to sit on her potty.
While at first no explanation could be found for Ann's symptoms, a test finally showed that she had an out-of-control case of pinworms, an intestinal parasite that is far more common than most people realize.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  ISRAEL HARDENS ITS STAND  Israel sealed off the West Bank and Gaza Strip indefinitely, and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin urged Israelis to stand firm in "an all-out war against terrorism." Two Israeli policemen were killed overnight in the worst violence in years.
A1  NEW BARRIER TO ARMS REDUCTION  The political unrest in Russia has stalled efforts to reduce nuclear arsenals in the United States and the former Soviet Union.
In Ukraine, new fears of Russian nationalism have encouraged a vocal group of legislators who advocate keeping some weapons.
A1


Former Day-Care Worker Is Freed on Bail After 5 Years in Jail


Reds' Morris Injured
Cincinnati Reds first baseman HAL MORRIS separated his left shoulder yesterday after charging the mound to fight Cleveland pitcher JOSE MESA in an exhibition game in Winter Haven, Fla., and will miss four to six weeks.


Consumer Confidence Off Sharply
The prospect of higher taxes and deeper spending cuts under President Clinton's economic plan seems to have dampened consumers' spirits -- and spending -- in March.
The index of consumer confidence released yesterday by the Conference Board, a business research group, fell a surprisingly sharp six points in March, to 62.6, following an eight-point decline in February.


Oscar Broadcast Scores High Rating
The Academy Awards show on Monday night scored the highest Nielsen rating for that special in 10 years.
The show, broadcast on ABC, had a 31.2 rating, up from 29.8 last year. (Each rating point represents 931,000 homes.)


U.S. Aided and Abetted Salvador Abuses
To the Editor:
Thank you for "Truth, Lies and El Salvador" (editorial, March 16) and for front-page coverage on the findings of the United Nations-sponsored Truth Commission.


U.S. Aided and Abetted Salvador Abuses; Response to an Inquiry
To the Editor:
Your March 21 report on the United Nations-sponsored commission's investigation of human rights violations in El Salvador contains a serious error, on your part or the commission's.
You report that I testified to Congress that the four nuns killed by Salvadoran National Guardsmen "might have run a roadblock." This implies a judgment on my part at total variance with my testimony.


Ukraine and Arms Accords: Kiev Reluctant to Say 'I Do'
The political unrest in Russia has stalled efforts to substantially reduce nuclear arsenals in the United States and the former Soviet Union.
In Ukraine, new fears of Russian nationalism have encouraged an increasingly vocal group of legislators who advocate keeping some nuclear weapons.
President Leonid Kravchuk had promised last year that Ukraine would ratify not only the 1991 Soviet-American agreement reducing nuclear warheads, but also the non-proliferation treaty of 1970, which would oblige it to give up all nuclear weapons.
Treaties Need One Another
The breakup of the Soviet Union left nuclear weapons in four republics: Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan.
All but Ukraine have ratified the July 1991 treaty, which called for one-third cuts in the nuclear warheads on Soviet and American ballistic missiles, and Ukrainian legislators, who are debating the treaty, are hesitant about giving up the weapons they inherited from the Soviet Union.


Leopold Labedz, 73, Authority on Kremlin
Leopold Labedz, a Kremlinologist who lived in London, died at his home there on March 22.
He was 73.
He had a massive heart attack, said Lionel Bloch, his solicitor and friend in London.


Banks Act On Owner Of Orioles
Eli S. Jacobs, the financially troubled financier and owner of the Baltimore Orioles baseball team, has been pushed into bankruptcy court by a group of banks that say he owes them more than $100 million.
The petition, known as involuntary bankruptcy, was filed Monday in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York by attorneys at Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz on behalf of the Bank of New York, Union Bank of Switzerland, Chemical Bank, Barclays Bank, Bank of America, the IBJ Schroder Bank and Trust Company and the Wells Fargo Bank.


Golden Gopher Has His Sights on Basket
He has done little else besides eat, sleep and practice since he arrived in New York, on Saturday, but Voshon Lenard has already accomplished a lot for the University of Minnesota.
And tonight the sophomore guard hopes to help the Golden Gophers accomplish one more thing, a victory over Georgetown in the National Invitation Tournament final.
"Well, we watched some films and we walked around for a couple of hours," said Lenard of his schedule.


Caution Urged on Toddlers With Toothpaste
PARENTS are often advised to supervise toothbrushing by young children to be sure their teeth are properly cleaned.
But now there is another reason for parental vigilance: the tendency of some toddlers to use, and perhaps swallow, more toothpaste than is medically advisable.
The problem arises, according to a study published in Pediatric Dentistry, when children use fluoridated toothpaste specially flavored to appeal to children.
They may accumulate too much fluoride in their bodies, especially if they also drink fluoridated water.
The excess fluoride can cause mottling of the enamel of their permanent teeth.


Review/Film; 3 Shorts, All Long On a Sense of Absurdity
"Two Mikes Don't Make a Wright" is the title of the program of three short films opening today at the Film Forum, two of which, Michael Moore's "Pets or Meat: Return to Flint" and Mike Leigh's "Sense of History," were reviewed when they were shown at the New York Film Festival in September.
The third film is the 29-minute "The Appointments of Dennis Jennings," starring Steven Wright and written by him and Mike Armstrong, which won a 1989 Oscar as best live-action short.
It's very much like one of Mr.
Wright's stand-up monologues in which, with expressionless face and toneless voice, the comic looks at life's betrayals through the eyes of someone suffering from serious paranoia.


Amid Trouble, Washington Schools Survive and Sometimes Even Excel
When Bill and Hillary Clinton decided to send their daughter, Chelsea, to a private school in Washington instead of a public one, many people accused them of hypocrisy.
But few challenged the general perception of the District of Columbia public schools as bleak and dangerous places, all but bereft of academic quality and learning.
There is considerable evidence, however, that the image is false -- that while the public schools here are hardly free of problems, they are doing far better than many other urban school systems by a variety of measures, including standardized test scores and crime and dropout rates.
And while some schools are troubled, others are pockets of excellence and genuine pride.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLEN GROUP INC., Melville, L.I., signed a definitive agreement to sell its Allen Test products division and its wholly owned leasing subsidiary, Allen Group Leasing, to SPX Corp of Muskegon, Mich.


Bronx Mother of 4, Caught in Crossfire, Is Struck and Killed
A 43-year-old woman was shot to death yesterday on a street in the Bronx that neighbors say is known for gang activity.
She was caught in what police described as an exchange of gunfire between rival street gangs.
The woman, Rose Maria Dunbar, a nurse's aide who lived at 3454 Fenton Avenue, was shopping on nearby Boston Road shortly before noon when she was caught in the crossfire, the police said.


Accounts
*
Aetna Health Plans, Middletown, Conn., said it had placed in review its estimated $15 million account, now at the Richards Group, Dallas.
Mal Crawford, an executive vice president at Ernst-Van Praag Inc., New York, the consultant hired to conduct the review, said the incumbent and Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York, which already handles the Aetna corporate account, have been asked to participate.
In four weeks the review is expected to narrow and a final decision is expected by June 28.


Executive Changes
GOODRICH &amp; SHERWOOD CO., New York, a human resources consulting firm, named Charles D. Wright senior vice president.
M&amp;I DATA SERVICES, Milwaukee, a unit of Marshall &amp; Ilsley Corp., named Joseph L. Delgadillo president and chief operating officer.
James W. Eyster was named executive vice president.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Placed Doug Jennings, first baseman, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Placed Matt Young, pitcher, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
3.34
4.07
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.89
2.96
4.03
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
3.04
4.15
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.67
5.69
7.19
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.91
6.89
7.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.85
7.84
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.09
6.05
6.76
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Books of The Times; Refracting an Author Through Reality and Fiction
The Author's Dimension Selected Essays By Christa Wolf Edited by Alexander Stephan.
Translated by Jan Van Heurck. 336 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $27.50.
What Remains and Other Stories By Christa Wolf Translated by Heike Schwarzbauer and Rick Takvorian. 295 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.
Some years before the wall dividing the two Germanies was dismantled, an appointment was made for this writer to visit Christa Wolf in East Berlin.
At the last moment, the appointment, which had been made by Ms.
Wolf's publisher, was canceled.
The reason given was that talking with a Western journalist might cause Ms.
Wolf harm; like other authors in East Germany, she was under surveillance by the police.


2 Serbs to Be Shot for Killings and Rapes
A military court today imposed sentences of death by firing squad on two Serbians found guilty of a rampage of killing and rape while serving in the Serbian nationalist army in Bosnia.
One of the defendants, Borislav Herak, a 22-year-old high school dropout whose confession to 35 killings and 16 rapes was the centerpiece of the trial, seemed unshaken as the death sentence was pronounced for each of the three counts against him.
He was found guilty of committing genocide against Muslims for the killings he acknowledged having committed, and of killing Muslim civilians and Muslims who were captured soldiers.


Quinoa, Almost as Quick as Saying It
THIS menu requires four pots -- one more than my usual limit -- but it is so speedy that you will have time to clean up while the dishes cook.
Instead of rice, quinoa is used as a base for the lentils and chili-flavored sauce.
Quinoa (pronounced keh-NO-ah or, sometimes, KEEN-wah) is an ancient grain that cooks as quickly as rice but has a slightly crunchy, nutlike taste and texture.
Natural-food stores sell it.


Bridge
For four decades Norman Kay of Narberth, Pa., has been winning national titles.
His rate of success has slowed down a little, but the family name is still in the news.
At the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals in Kansas City, Mo., last week, his wife, Judy, had a remarkable string of successes in secondary events.
Playing with Barbara Brier of Miami, she began the tournament by winning the Stratified Women's Pairs, Flight A. The next day they finished second in the Senior Pairs, Flight A. On the following day they seemed headed for a near miss in the Senior Swiss Teams, Flight A, but two teams that were slightly ahead going into the last round obligingly deadlocked to produce a three-way tie.


COURT HEARS CASE ON SCIENCE RULES
The Supreme Court wrestled today with the question of how judges should decide when a scientific theory or process is sound enough to be admitted as evidence.
The hourlong argument itself served to demonstrate how baffled and frustrated judges can feel when they find themselves at the intersection of law and science.
"How are we supposed to know?" Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist exclaimed at one point to the lawyer for a pharmaceutical company that was disputing any link between Bendectin, a drug it once made, and birth defects in the offspring of women who took the drug while pregnant.


The N.A.A.C.P. Facing a Battle Over Its Future
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the nation's oldest and largest civil rights organization, is in transition.
And no one is quite sure where it is going.
Where the N.A.A.C.P. has come from is far clearer: it is finishing a particularly difficult period under the leadership of the Rev.
Benjamin L. Hooks, who retires next week after 15 years as executive director.


MEXICO'S LEADER SHAKES UP PARTY
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari replaced the head of Mexico's long-ruling party today as part of a Cabinet shuffle that demoted officials who had been under attack in Mexico and the United States.
The president of the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party, Genaro Borrego Estrada, stepped down at a session of the party's national assembly in this state capital in central Mexico after 10 months in which he had sought to weaken the strength of the party's old guard.


Tanana No Puzzle Except to Mets
It was a 27-pitch exercise in mortality on the mound.
There was a single on the second pitch of the game, another single an instant later, a walk, a Darryl Strawberry single to right that scored two runs, a monster sacrifice fly, another r.b.i. single, a diving grab of a rope to the left-field corner to mercifully end it.


Theater in Review
The Prince of Madness  La Mama E.T.C. 74A East Fourth Street East Village Through Sunday  Written and created by Dario D'Ambrosi; set and costumes by Carmela Spiteri; lighting by Marcello Iazetti; collaboration, Edi Samland and Loredana Commonara; photographer, Piero Marsili Libelli.
La Mama E.T.C. presents Teatro Patologico.
WITH: Cristina Colombo, Dario D'Ambrosi, Emilio De Marchi and Remo Remotti.
The humor is macabre, the dialogue and action explosively funny, and the story labyrinthine and cruel in Dario D'Ambrosi's new performance piece, "The Prince of Madness." This Italian actor and playwright, who is known as the founder of a movement aptly called pathological theater, comes closer here than in his previous works to his goal: drawing the audience into the mental world of the mad.


60-Minute Gourmet
HAVING grown up in France, I did not know anything about hamburgers until later in life.
I think my first taste of a hamburger came after I arrived to cook at the 1939 World's Fair in New York City.
But that cultural deprivation did not mean I was unfamiliar with ground-meat dishes in countless variations.
In Burgundy, we had all sorts of ground-meat pies and loaves, some of them combining beef and veal.


Big Payoff Awaits New Chief If He Turns I.B.M. Around
I.B.M. will pay Louis V. Gerstner Jr., its new chief executive, a base salary of $2 million this year, a one-time compensation of $5 million for leaving his job at RJR Nabisco and incentive bonuses and stock options that can eventually add millions more.
While it is lucrative, the Gerstner pay package, which the company announced yesterday, does not strike most compensation experts and shareholder advocates as exorbitant, given the challenge he faces at the International Business Machines Corporation, the world's biggest computer company.
And they note that the big payoff for Mr.
Gerstner will come only if he can increase the value of the company's shares in the next few years.
He has been granted options to buy 500,000 I.B.M. shares.


Leetch to Undergo Surgery
Defenseman Brian Leetch will undergo surgery on his broken right ankle today because the fracture is not healing properly, the Rangers said yesterday.
After a second examination by the team physician, Dr.
Barton Nisonson, it was determined that a metal plate and screws be placed in Leetch's ankle.
Leetch broke the ankle in the early morning of March 20 when he slipped on some ice in front of his Manhattan apartment building.


Market Place; Daimler-Benz paves the way for other German companies.
NOW that Daimler-Benz A.G. has decided to break ranks with other German companies and publish financial results in accordance with American accounting rules, others may follow.
Gerhard Liener, the chief financial officer of Daimler-Benz, yesterday described the discussions that led his company, the maker or Mercedes-Benz automobiles, to decide that a listing on the New York Stock Exchange was worth the trouble of meeting the rules.
And he said he believed Deutsche Bank, a large owner of Daimler-Benz shares, might choose the same course.


Wal-Mart Calls Target Ads Unfair
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. has assailed a new advertising campaign by a competitor, Target Stores,calling it grossly unfair and exploitative of Wal-Mart's late founder, Sam Walton.
"In an industry where spirited but fair competition is the norm, the strident tones and unfounded allegations of the Target ads are well beyond the boundaries of fairness and decency," said David Glass, Wal-Mart's chief executive and president.


Lawmakers Are Impatient to Start Pentagon Cuts
In Congress's first formal response to the Administration's proposed $263 billion military spending plan, lawmakers reacted coolly today to what the Pentagon concedes is a "holding budget."
Les Aspin, in his first appearance as Defense Secretary before the House Armed Services Committee he formerly headed, seemed almost apologetic at times in proposing a military budget for the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1.
It would postpone decisions on canceling costly weapons programs until the Pentagon completes a comprehensive "bottom-up" review this summer.


The Oscars' Neglect
Why does the Motion Picture Academy continue to neglect documentary films?
Year after year, documentary film makers produce critically acclaimed works that then get snubbed for films that no one has heard of, let alone seen.
The big studios would be up in arms if this happened with feature films.
Yet an award can do even more for a documentary film maker, operating on the edges of recognition and solvency, than for producers of big-studio features.


Doctors' Pay Underestimated But Resented Just the Same
Americans believe that doctors and health-care executives make far less than they actually do, according to a poll released today.
And people still think the salaries are too high.
Those in the poll were asked to estimate the income of doctors and executives in hospitals, drug companies and insurance companies.


Japan Assailed on Trade
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, finished his first overseas trip today with a strong criticism of Japan for not playing enough of a role in world trade talks.
Mr.
Kantor made a similar criticism of Japan in Washington a month ago.
But the strong tone today came in particular contrast to Mr.
Kantor's more conciliatory approach to trans-Atlantic trade problems in two days of talks here.


Influential Lobbyist as Adviser: A Tale of Did He or Didn't He?
Files at the New York State Commission on Lobbying outline the story of one of the most pitched lobbying campaigns that Albany has seen in years: Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield's epic struggle to change state law to eliminate what it viewed as unfair competition from rich commercial insurers.
"That was a war," said Empire's chairman, Albert Cardone.


Thomas Jordan, 90; Was Once Powerful In the Cotton Market
Thomas L. Jordan, who was once considered the leading individual cotton trader in the world, died Thursday at his home in the Garden District here.
He was 90.
His family said he had died of complications after hip replacement surgery.


Comebacks Announced
JAYNE TORVILL, 35, and CHRISTOPHER DEAN, 24, widely considered the world's best ice dancing pair, said yesterday that they were returning to amateur competition in a bid for a second Olympic gold medal.
The two skaters announced their intention to compete in the 1994 Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway, at a news conference yesterday at the Royal Albert Hall in London.


Review/Theater; Lanford Wilson's Comment on the U.S. in the 90's
Everyone knows America's Vietnam nightmare has finally been laid to rest, buried both by the heroic military victory of Operation Desert Storm and by the Presidential victory of an antiwar protester of the Vietnam era.
So why would an American playwright be so rude, let alone unfashionable, as to disinter the rotten corpse again right now?
Lanford Wilson has his reasons, and they may not be the ones you expect, in "Redwood Curtain," his first play since "Burn This" five seasons ago and his most powerful since "Talley's Folly" in 1979.
This work, a Circle Repertory Company production at the Brooks Atkinson Theater on Broadway, is set mostly among the towering redwoods in Northern California where untold thousands of Vietnam veterans have disappeared into a feral, ghostly existence, their only contact with civilization an occasional visit to town for an odd job or a meal scarfed from a garbage can.
But Mr.
Wilson has not written another melodrama in which a crazed Vietnam vet refights the war.


Klein's CK Line: Hipness In a Full Attack


U.S. Rejects British-French Bosnia Peace Step
The Clinton Administration has rejected a plan by Britain and France for a new Security Council resolution giving the international community's full support to the Bosnian peace plan of the two Balkan mediators, former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen, diplomats said today.
Britain, France and Spain, the three Council members from the European Community, want the Security Council to give its unqualified endorsement to the peace plan, which the Croats and Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina have both now accepted, and then threaten the Serbs with a variety of new economic sanctions unless they sign the accord within 15 days.


Change Sought in Rescue of S.&amp; L.'s
The Clinton Administration began to feel the political heat generated by the savings and loan rescue operation today when Roger C. Altman, Deputy Secretary of the Treasury, faced sharp Congressional questioning.
And that was just from Democrats.
Republicans, who are expected to provide almost no support for renewed spending by the Resolution Trust Corporation, were not invited to the closed-door caucus.


